no scientific research was conducted . further , navy officials told us that they do not separate their data by gender , so comparisons of male and female performance against the standards are not available . other problems included unreliable information due to unit underreporting , results not separated to identify other key characteristics such as rank , or data on recent years not being available due to system changes . as a result of these problems , we were unable to determine and compare fitness and body fat failure rates over time , separation rates due to repeated failures of the fitness standards , and other such key information . the service data that is available indicates that women consistently fail the fitness standards at higher rates than men . for example , data indicates that army women failed the cardiovascular and muscular endurance standards at a 13-percent rate in 1995 , while men failed at an 11-percent rate . air force data indicates that in 1997 , women in that service failed in 9 percent of the cases , while men failed in 4 percent of the cases . based on 1997 data , marine corps women failed at a rate of 1.1 percent , while male marines failed at a rate of 0.8 percent . available data on the results of the body fat test was consistent with this trend . for example , army data for 1997 showed that female army personnel failed in 6 percent of the cases , while army men failed in about 5 percent of the cases . only the army had more significant differences that were in favor of men . of the army's 30 promotion boards or examinations , 25 ( 83 percent ) resulted in men and women being selected at similar rates . for the remaining five , one was in favor of enlisted men , two were in favor of male officers , and two were in favor of enlisted women . this can cause resentment among male troops . a key factor cited by both men and women is the dod policy excluding women from assignments involving direct ground combat . our recent report on this policy found that over 190,000 positions across the four services are closed to women because they involve direct ground combat or collocate with units involved in direct ground combat . although the ground combat exclusion policy bars women from direct ground combat and would , therefore , seem inherently inequitable to men because it exposes them to hazardous duty , a 1997 rand study found that army and marine corps men strongly support the ground combat exclusion policy . navy officers and enlisted men were less supportive of this policy . while over 75 percent of army and marine corps male officers and 57 percent of enlisted men were satisfied with the combat exclusion policy only 48 percent of the male navy officers were satisfied with the policy . when the same question was asked of servicewomen , less than 22 percent of those who were surveyed agreed that women should continue to be excluded from direct ground combat . branch of service was not a factor in the women's response .