( fig . 3.2 shows the annual schedule for the two formats. ) at the beginning of each quarterly cycle , a full jmrr is held to get input from the dod components on their readiness status and deficiencies . the assessment process leading up to the full jmrr begins when the joint staff readiness division issues planning guidance describing the scenario to be assessed . some of these limitations are inherent in the system . for instance , the upgrades will not address the system's inability to forecast impending changes in readiness . the upgrades also will not affect the subjectivity of sorts ratings . commanders may still raise or lower the unit's overall readiness rating based on their professional judgment . also , the upgrades will not ( 1 ) require uniform service interpretations of sorts reporting requirements or ( 2 ) require more precise reporting of resource availability . the joint staff is implementing a phased approach for improving the overall readiness assessment system , including sorts . the improvements are described in a “business” plan that was developed by the joint staff in response to the quadrennial defense review . the plan had not been approved at the time we conducted our review . the first phase of the plan is to improve the sorts database , which involves mostly technical matters such as software problems affecting data input , retention , and access . according to officials , these sorts improvements were identified by a users review panel that meets annually with sorts users at the joint staff , the combatant commands , the services , and the combat support agencies . one of the joint staff's main objectives during this phase is to ensure data is synchronized across the multiple sorts databases . as stated earlier , this issue has been identified in prior reports as a system limitation . in addition , the database is being modified to retain only the most current remarks of a unit commander . before this change , the database retained remarks from prior reports , commingling past and current remarks , which made analysis of sorts reports more difficult . the commands assess their readiness in eight functional areas — joint personnel ; intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ; special operations ; mobility ; logistics and sustainment ; infrastructure ; command , control , communications , and computers ; and joint headquarters capability . a rating scale is used to rank the readiness of each functional area . separate ratings are assessed for current readiness , projected readiness , and readiness to meet the demands of each conflict or threat in the scenario . the scale runs from c - 1 ( most ready ) to c - 4 ( least ready ) . jmrr officials at the combatant commands told us that the eight functional areas cover the key areas of joint readiness that need to be assessed . the outcome of the jmrr is a list of deficiencies that fall under the eight functional areas . readiness concerns that are rated by the combatant commands or the combat support agencies as c - 3 or below are considered to be jmrr deficiencies .