detecting liquid explosives . faa is developing two different electromagnetic systems for screening bottles and other containers , likely to sell for $25,000 and $125,000 per device . a development issue is processing speed . these devices may be available within 2 years . although a number of commercially available trace devices could be used on passengers if deemed necessary , passengers might find their physical intrusiveness unacceptable . in june 1996 , the national research council , for example , reported that there may be a number of health , legal , operational , privacy , and convenience concerns about passenger screening devices . accordingly , faa and the department of defense ( dod ) are developing devices that passengers may find more acceptable . faa estimates that it would cost $1.9 billion to provide about 3,000 of these devices to screen passengers . a number of trace devices in development will detect residue or vapor from explosives on passengers' hands . two devices screen either documents or tokens that have been handled by passengers . these devices should be available in 1997 or 1998 and sell for approximately $65,000 to $85,000 each . five devices under development use a walk - through screening checkpoint similar to the current metal detectors . three will use trace technology to detect particles and vapor from explosives on passengers' clothing or in the air surrounding their bodies . ranging in expected selling prices from approximately $170,000 to $300,000 , one of these devices will be tested at an airport as early as this month , and another device may undergo airport testing next year . two other devices , based on electromagnetic technology , are in development . rather than detecting particles or vapor , these devices will provide images of items concealed under passengers' clothing . prices are expected to be approximately $100,000 to $200,000 . cargo and mail continue to represent vulnerabilities in the system . screening cargo and mail at airports is difficult because individual packages or pieces of mail are usually batched into larger shipments that are more difficult to screen . although not yet commercially available , two different systems for detecting explosives in large containers are being developed by faa and dod . each system draws vapor and particle samples and uses trace technology to analyze them . one system is scheduled for testing in 1997 . in addition , faa is considering for further development three nuclear - based technologies , originally planned for checked - bag screening , for use on cargo and mail . these technologies use large , heavy apparatus to generate gamma rays or neutrons to penetrate larger items . however , they require shielding for safety reasons . these technologies are not as far along in the development process as many other devices . they are still in the laboratory development stage rather than the prototype development stage . if fully developed , these devices could cost as much as $2 million to $5 million each . to reduce the effects of an in - flight explosion , faa is conducting research on , among other things , blast - resistant containers .