we did not independently verify these weights . we calculated vroc utilizing accepted factors and methodologies provided by engineers from the army's aviation research , development , and engineering center . we also used data from these officials illustrating how various factors , such as weight , altitude , temperature , and flight duration , affect helicopter performance under different mission scenarios . in addition , we received information from these officials on power requirements , velocities , and fuel consumption rates that supported our calculations of vroc . we discussed our methodology with army engineering officials , and they agreed that it would provide a basis for evaluating the impact of weight increases on vroc . we conducted our work at the program office for aviation , the apache attack helicopter project management office , and the office of the executive director for aviation research , development , and engineering center at the army's aviation and missile command , huntsville , alabama ; the joint chiefs of staff , washington , d.c. ; the office of the assistant secretary of the army for research , development , and acquisition , washington , d.c. ; the u.s. army office of the deputy chief of staff for operations and plans , washington , d.c. ; and the army's training and doctrine command , fort rucker , alabama . in addition , we interviewed officials at the boeing company and defense contract management command in mesa , arizona . we conducted our review from january to june 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as you know , the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight not later than 60 days after the date of this report . a written statement must also be submitted to the senate and house committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members , senate and house committees on appropriations , senate committee on armed services , house committee on national security , senate committee on governmental affairs , and the house committee on government reform and oversight ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the secretary of the army . we will also provide copies to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report were robert j. stolba , charles burgess , nora landgraf , william t. woods , and margaret l. armen . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's ( dod ) letter dated july 28 , 1998 . we are not persuaded by dod's assertion that the key performance parameters for vroc and missile load should be evaluated independently .