additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the ac - 130u is also refuelable . defensive systems include a countermeasures dispensing system that releases chaff and flares to counter radar - guided and infrared - guided anti - aircraft missiles . we have reworded our recommendation to reflect that agreement . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix i . to assess the basis for afsoc's strategy for acquiring and upgrading electronic warfare equipment and determine the extent to which it would address deficiencies and maximize commonality , we analyzed afsoc acquisition plans and studies and reviewed classified test reports and threat documentation . we also discussed afsoc's current electronic warfare systems and aircraft and afsoc's planned electronic warfare upgrades and system acquisition with officials at ussocom , macdill air force base , florida ; afsoc , hurlburt field , florida ; and air force headquarters , washington , d.c. additionally , we discussed afsoc electronic warfare system supportability with officials responsible for the systems at ussocom ; afsoc ; and warner robins air logistics center , georgia , and reviewed logistics records for pertinent systems . we accepted logistics records provided by afsoc as accurate without further validation . to identify alternative sources of funding to implement afsoc's strategy , we examined legislation establishing and affecting ussocom and memoranda of agreement between ussocom and the air force regarding research , development , acquisition , and sustainment programs . we discussed relevant memoranda of agreement with ussocom , afsoc , and air force officials . furthermore , we reviewed planning documents and discussed the planned air force c - 130 avionics modernization program with air force officials at air force headquarters and the air mobility command , scott air force base , illinois . we conducted our work from october 1997 through july 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees ; the secretaries of defense and the air force ; the assistant secretary of defense , office of special operations and low - intensity conflict ; the commander , u.s. special operations command ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this assignment were tana davis , charles ward , and john warren . the air force special operations command ( afsoc ) uses specially modified and equipped variants of the c - 130 hercules aircraft to conduct and support special operations missions worldwide . following are descriptions of the c - 130 models . mission: the ac - 130h is a gunship with primary missions of close - air support , air interdiction , and armed reconnaissance . additional missions include perimeter and point defense , escort , landing , drop and extraction zone support , forward air control , limited command and control , and combat search and rescue .