dod concurred with this recommendation . officials from the deputy chief of staff for operations and plans stated that the 3,914 spaces were transferred from institutional to operational forces , but most of the spaces did not come from the phase i redesign initiatives . two initiatives , which account for 2,850 , or 73 percent , of the 3,914 active army spaces , will not produce the projected number of spaces . for example , the senior reserve officer's training corps initiative was expected to transfer 2,100 positions . however , rand currently estimates the initiative will yield between 800 and 1,050 spaces because the army decided not to contract out all 2,100 spaces and is testing a combination of active , reserve , and contract personnel . additionally , the transfer of positions is also based on reducing attrition.the army assumed reduced attrition would free 750 training and recruiting institutional positions . if personnel stay in the army , then it would not need to recruit and train replacements . however , the training and doctrine command currently projects an increase in initial entry training requirements from fiscal years 1998 to 1999 rather than a decrease . army headquarters officials acknowledged that they could not explain how the 750 spaces were calculated , and command officials said that it was not involved in deriving the 750 spaces . even though the deputy chief of staff for operations and plans is the executive agent for redesign assessments , there is no single office that systematically manages and monitors redesign results . therefore , at any given time , the office of operations and plans does not know the status of specific initiatives , dollar savings , implementation costs , or progress in reducing institutional positions . in addition , any differences in projected costs and savings have not been reconciled between the army program analysis and evaluation and the army offices responsible for specific initiatives . the assistant secretary of the army for financial management and comptroller is responsible for quarterly army performance reviews . these reviews are for the secretary of the army , army chief of staff , and function chiefs to discuss problem areas . however , the office of the assistant secretary states that institutional redesign initiatives are monitored and discussed only if their implementation or savings become jeopardized . a financial management and comptroller written statement explains that none of the redesign initiatives have been designated as topics to be monitored during the quarterly reviews , including the senior reserve officer's training corps , which accounts for one - half the projected position transfers and $336 million in unaccounted for implementation costs . a financial management and comptroller official told us that some quarterly reviews were canceled and never rescheduled and that monitoring institutional redesign results would require an investment of too many resources . pamphlet 100xx discusses the need to achieve efficiencies in performing institutional functions . for example , the pamphlet states that it is necessary to demonstrate that cost savings and / or operational efficiencies will result from implementing redesign initiatives .