such reports will be available to commerce . those who observe unauthorized use of the equipment must report these discrepancies immediately to commerce . no parts produced by this equipment that are on the u.s. commodity control list for national security or nuclear nonproliferation reasons can be exported by catic to libya , cuba , or north korea ( country groups s or z ) . we did not attempt to meet with catic officials . what was the process for approving the licenses and how did the process address the risks associated with this export ? were export control license conditions violated and , if so , what was the u.s. government's response ? commerce is responsible for licensing exports of u.s. dual - use items — items with both military and commercial applications — and helps enforce controls over them . depending on the item involved and the country of destination , an exporter may be required to submit a license application to commerce to obtain government approval for the export . the u.s. government controls the export of sophisticated machine tools for national security and nuclear nonproliferation reasons . commerce , in consultation with other agencies such as the department of defense ( dod ) , reviews license applications and makes licensing decisions . complex or sensitive export cases can be escalated to interagency export licensing review committees for discussion and resolution . commerce's office of export enforcement , along with the u.s. customs service , is responsible for ensuring adherence to license provisions by investigating suspected export control violations and pursuing criminal and administrative sanctions . mcdonnell douglas and catic entered into an agreement in 1992 to co - produce 40 md - 80 and md - 90 aircraft in china for the country's domestic “trunk” routes . a contract revision signed in november 1994 reduced the number of aircraft to be built in china to 20 and called for the direct purchase of 20 u.s. - built aircraft . the four chinese factories involved in the trunkliner program include the shanghai aviation industrial corporation , xian aircraft company , chengdu aircraft company , and shenyang aircraft company . the shanghai facility is responsible for final assembly of the aircraft . all of these factories are under the direction of aviation industries corporation of china ( avic ) and catic . catic is the principal purchasing arm of china's military as well as many commercial aviation entities . in may 1994 , mcdonnell douglas submitted license applications for exporting machine tools to china . the machine tools were to be wholly dedicated to the production of 40 trunkliner aircraft and related work . under the trunkliner program , the chinese factories were responsible for fabricating and assembling about 75 percent of the airframe structure and the tools were required to produce parts to support the planned 10 aircraft per year production rate . the machine tools were to be exported to the catic machining center . at the time the license applications were being considered , the machining center did not yet exist . mcdonnell douglas informed the u.s. government that the machining center would be located in beijing and construction would begin in october 1994 . aircraft parts production would start 14 months later .