( app . i provides further background information on the reserve components. ) 5-6 mos . 6+ mos . air force officials told us that flexibility in rotating volunteers can help meet the requirements for long missions . they believe that most active component commanders have come to understand the need for this flexibility and are willing to provide it . for example , the air national guard provides fighter support to operation provide comfort for a 3-month period each year . the guard assigns three units 1 month each , and the units schedule their volunteers to cover their assigned period . army and special operations officials said short rotations are often not feasible for their missions . for instance , a special operations official said it takes time for civil affairs and psychological operations personnel to win the support of host - country civilians as well as their own active component commanders . short rotations would not allow time for effective interactions to develop . army officials also said that the air force has the advantage of being able to fly their personnel easily into and out of the theater of operations . it takes a more intense logistical effort to move army personnel and their equipment , they said . large units are more difficult to obtain on a voluntary basis than individuals or small units because each unit member must consent to volunteer for a mission . this has not been a major problem in the air force and the navy , which tend to deploy volunteers as individuals or as part of small units . the army has attempted to deploy units of 50 volunteers and more , but has found that forming these size units requires “intensive , more complex work - arounds.” army officials were particularly dissatisfied with the formation of an army reserve postal company that deployed to somalia in 1992 . although they initially had hoped to draw all 49 members from a single reserve unit , they ultimately had to find volunteers from several postal units to fill all the slots . in addition , the army national guard had hoped to draw from a single division to fill about 400 positions in the battalion that deployed to the sinai . however , many of the guard personnel who initially volunteered dropped out , and the guard had to find replacements from other units . the army national guard has experimented with a volunteer program , called project standard bearer , to designate units that would be available to support a humanitarian mission . under this program , unit members agree to volunteer for a 45-day period when needed . the program was first used when 3 military police companies averaging about 135 members each backfilled for active forces deployed to haiti . there were mixed opinions on the success of this effort . army reserve officials oppose taking volunteers out of their home units to create a new unit because they are concerned that the readiness of home units will suffer . if individuals are required , they should come from the pool of reservists who are not assigned to units , these officials said , and if entire units are required , the president should use psrc authority .