only one . met the users' criteria . the remaining five are reported using narrative results.” 13 . dod discusses only the weight growth of funded activities , leaving open the question of whether there are future , but currently unfunded , improvements planned that will add weight growth . air force officials told us that the airborne warning and control system had experienced weight growth over the life of its program . that growth was attributed to the system's being given added tasks over time . we believe it reasonable to expect that the joint stars program experience might track that of the airborne warning and control systems program , that is , be given added tasks and face weight growth as a result . also , regarding joint stars room for growth , dod previously advised us that joint stars currently has about 455,000 cubic inches of space available . we must note that this equates to a volume of under 7 feet cubed and that in commenting on the system's space limitation , dot&e stated “there is little room available for additional people or operator workstations.” 14 . as we stated in the body of our report , how easily these software changes are incorporated remains to be seen . we requested and dod provided additional information on this point . dod's subsequent response indicates that this dod comment was in error . in its subsequent response , dod stated that the follow - on test and evaluation was accelerated “to reflect desire for earlier to evaluate fixes to deficiencies.” we believe this statement reflects a recognition of increased program risk . the acquisition decision memorandum approving joint stars production clearly indicates that the skantze study mentioned was not completed at that time . this is inaccurate . as we stated in the body of our report , the program could have continued under low - rate initial production ( lrip ) until operational effectiveness and suitability for combat were demonstrated and plans to address identified deficiencies and reduce program costs were completed . in its report on the joint stars multi - service operational test and evaluation , afotec stated that “joint stars software is immature and significantly impedes the system's reliability and effectiveness.” we do not believe that , given the software intensive nature of the system , this statement supports a conclusion that the system could be judged operationally effective . we must note that follow - on operational test and evaluation of the system was planned before the full - rate production decision . the full - rate production decision called for acceleration of that testing and for that testing to address deficiencies identified in the earlier tests . joint stars could have continued under lrip pending a demonstration of operational effectiveness and suitability . this speaks to the number of aircraft missions planned and the number for which an aircraft was provided . it does not address the quality or quantity of the support provided during those missions . furthermore , dod's comment refers to the same — operation that is reported on in both the air force and dot&e reports and in this report . u.s. - based contractor support was utilized during the first operation joint endeavor deployment .