( app . iii lists dnsc's sales activities , including the bids accepted and bids rejected. ) dnsc plans to continue to closely monitor prices when accepting bids to ensure that the market is not unduly disrupted . dnsc's actions , we believe , demonstrate that it is paying attention to the market and is committed to avoiding an undue disruption . some of these discussions were with aza members . the consensus was that some zinc consumers adjust their purchases of different grades of zinc according to changing market factors . some producers adjust their production of different grades according to supply and demand for each grade . according to the participants , the impact of market events , such as an increased supply because of stockpile sales , could affect not only the market of the particular grade sold , but also the overall market because a significant decline in the price of one grade would be expected to depress the prices of other grades . pricing data we reviewed show that prices of different grades tend to follow similar patterns . although some zinc consumers may not purchase materials sold from the stockpile , we do not believe that the stock piling act requires the government to limit its review of the usual markets to only those consumers likely to buy zinc from the stockpile . according to dnsc , a company may not buy stockpile zinc for a number of reasons . for example , even if a company could use the grade of zinc being sold , the material may not be available in sufficient quantity or quality , or at low enough prices , to justify changing suppliers . even though such a company may not buy zinc from the stockpile , that company could be affected by the increase in supply resulting from stockpile sales . the government recognizes that sales from the stockpile can affect some participants in the market more than others . stockpile sales increase supplies that can drive down prices and cause a particular producer or processor to lose business . the stockpile is in effect an additional zinc producer . one major u.s. zinc producer , for example , produces only one grade of zinc , which is one of those dnsc has offered for sale . this producer stated that it had lost sales because of the stockpile sales . however , the market impact committee stated that the loss of business by one producer , in and of itself , does not necessarily unduly disrupt the overall market . some customers taking advantage of lower prices from a new supplier is a normal commercial activity . one factor that may limit the impact of stockpile sales on u.s. zinc producers is the international character of the zinc market . zinc is an internationally traded commodity . in 1994 , the latest year for which data were available , u.s. zinc consumption ( all grades ) was about 17 percent of the world's consumption , and the united states had to rely on imports for about 67 percent of the 1.2 million tons of slab zinc consumed . efforts shall be made .