( see app . state has responded to recommendations contained in the house committee on government operations' report by initiating some specific actions designed to improve its management over embassy operations . these actions , although steps in the right direction , do not go far enough to ensure that each embassy is improving its operations . we and the state's oig continue to find deficiencies in ( 1 ) controlling personal property ; ( 2 ) training for u.s. and foreign service national personnel ; ( 3 ) contracting and procurement practices ; ( 4 ) poor controls over cashiering functions ; ( 5 ) medical insurance reimbursements ; and ( 6 ) senior - level oversight of operations . the department of state's comments are presented in their entirety in appendix ii along with our evaluation of them . we interviewed state department officials in washington , d.c. , who are responsible for embassy management oversight , to assess actions taken by state to improve the management of its overseas operations . we analyzed documentation related to embassy management improvements provided by functional managers and documented continuing management deficiencies from state oig reports . ( see app . iii for a listing of related gao and oig reports. ) in addition , we observed good embassy practices that could be used at other embassies . we selected these embassies based on ( 1 ) state oig reports that identified good management practices at these posts and ( 2 ) the recommendations of post management officers responsible for embassy oversight . overall , we reviewed operations at u.s. embassies in venezuela , tunisia , france , portugal , turkey , philippines , and bangladesh . we performed our work from april 1994 to november 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4128 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi . state's primary means for linking foreign policy objectives and resources is the program planning process . in a november 1994 cable to all diplomatic and consular posts , the under secretary for management informed the chiefs of mission that the link between resources and the mission program planning process was missing ; consequently , budget reductions were enacted without thought to the future . the under secretary instructed mission management to develop a mission program plan that reflects mission priorities in both policy and management areas , actively involves all mission elements in its preparation , and serves as an instrument for continuous management improvement . 7.completion of the risk assessment questionnaire annually by the posts would optimize the use of this document , which has been endorsed by the state department as an excellent management tool . state guidance to embassies for preparing the mission program plans ( mpp ) for fiscal years 1995 through 1999 attempts to build on previous planning efforts and encourages posts to embrace mpp as a management creed of continuous improvement to support the department's goal of building an efficient organization .