iii ) . the annual savings are primarily due to reduced military personnel requirements , in such areas as command , staff , administrative , and maintenance . the salary costs associated with reduced military personnel requirements account for about 70 percent of the total savings , of which over 90 percent is enlisted pay . also , larger squadrons allow maintenance specialty shops to be used more efficiently , requiring little or no change in staffing . this alternative consolidates fighters at one fewer base than currently planned by the air force . the number of aircraft at two composite wings would be changed . one squadron at base 4 and one squadron at base 6 would have 30 aircraft each . one squadron substitution would be required between the air force's active and reserve components . also aircraft would be exchanged between theaters . two different aircraft blocks were mixed at one wing , which is comparable to the air force's plan . this alternative would result in annual costs savings of $115 million . table i.4 compares the air force's planned basing with alternative four . the objective of this review was to evaluate the cost - effectiveness of operating the fighter forces in smaller squadron sizes and the implications this might have on the secretary of defense's efforts to reduce defense infrastructure . our review focused on the air force's active component fighter aircraft with a primary focus on the c and d model of f - 15s and f - 16s . to evaluate the benefits resulting from reduced squadron sizes , we interviewed officials in various air force headquarters offices such as the force programming division ; the combat forces division of the directorate of forces ; the combat forces of the directorate of programs and evaluation ; and the air operations group . we also interviewed air combat command ( acc ) officials , including officials from various staff functions , the 33rd fighter wing , 1st fighter wing , and the 20th fighter wing . additionally , we interviewed officials from the u.s. central command air forces headquarters . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense and air force and interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3504 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . we developed and refined four alternatives that demonstrate that the air force could organize its fighter aircraft more cost - effectively . underpinning our analysis were principles that the air force cited as important . these factors included keeping the continental united states ( conus ) / overseas basing mix relatively constant ; avoiding mixing aircraft with different modernization upgrades ( blocks ) , mission characteristics , and engines ; balancing capability throughout theaters ; and assessing receiving base capacity . while these principles are plausible , our options vary the extent that these principles were used to gain greater economies . moreover , the air force has not rigidly adhered to these principles . for example , different engines are contained in the f - 15 wing at eglin air force base .