ii ) . dod also agreed that internal controls should be reviewed by the services and strengthened as necessary . by march 31 , 1995 , dod expects to issue a memorandum to the military services directing that closer scrutiny be paid to hand tool accountability and that regulations , policies , and procedures governing hand tool purchases be strengthened . the memorandum also will direct that each military service secretary advise their inspector general and internal audit staffs to incorporate control of hand tools in periodic inspections at installations and operating units . the audits identified problems with the controls over hand tools . routine inspections and surveys by command level management and inspector general staff also generally do not include an evaluation of tool procedures and controls . for example , an inspector general representative of the air force's air combat command told us that the inspector general's policy is not to perform compliance type inspections and reviews and that the staff did not have any knowledge of the adequacy of hand tool controls . we did find that the marine corps' field supply and maintenance analysis office performs periodic inspections at units , which include tool controls . the inspections disclosed deficiencies in these controls during the past 3 years relating to the lack of inventory records , absence of physical inventories , and accumulation of excess tools . we recommend that the secretary of defense take the following actions to ensure that hand tool purchases and inventories are adequately controlled: require that the military services and major commands provide guidance to installations and operating units specifying the needed internal controls over hand tools . these controls should include requirements for prior authorization of tool purchases and maintenance of accurate inventory records that reflect tool receipts , issues , and quantities on hand . require that inspector general and internal audit staffs incorporate controls over hand tools into the periodic inspections that are performed at installations and operating units . the specifics of our scope and methodology appear in appendix i . dod buys hand tools for a wide range of maintenance and repair activities that include maintaining everything from facilities and vehicles to aircraft and ships . dod buys tools either from gsa or by local purchase . dod regulations state that use of established supply sources , such as gsa , should be maximized . if the supply system cannot be used , local purchases may be considered if they are in the best interest of the government in terms of the combination of quality , timeliness , and cost . dod aircraft maintenance units use silhouetted tool boxes and displays , which contain shadow drawings of the tools , to control tools at the user level and prevent foreign object damage to aircraft resulting from tools left in or on an aircraft during maintenance . generally , the tool box or kit has a foam insert in each drawer that is cut and shaped to the size of the tools to facilitate the physical inventories taken at the time a mechanic checks out and returns the tool box to the tool room ( see fig .