about 13 percent were in use . ( see fig . these figures represent the vehicles managed by the air force's contractor in oman and bahrain but do not represent all vehicles in the gulf region . the air force's largest storage area in the persian gulf region is in thumrait , oman . at thumrait , the air force stores over 1,700 of the vehicles depicted in figure 3.3 . over 40 percent of these vehicles were not mission capable as of july 1998 . officials estimated that it would take 2 to 3 years to repair the vehicles if there are no further deployments . most vehicles are stored outside because the site does not have covered storage facilities . this exposes vehicles to the extreme heat and blowing sand of the omani desert . during our visit , we found numerous vehicles with heat - related damage , including damaged windshields and blown tires . figure 3.4 shows an example of damage caused by lack of storage facilities combined with extreme desert conditions . even if the vehicles were mission capable , the storage site is several hours from the nearest port , and it would likely take weeks to move the vehicles from thumrait to operating locations throughout the region . this may defeat the basic purpose of the program , which is to locate this equipment where it can be drawn quickly when needed . when vehicles are stored in centralized storage locations like thumrait and not at the locations where they will be used , a plan for moving the vehicles quickly to their operating locations is needed . the air force , however , has not developed plans for moving the vehicles it has in theater to their planned operating locations . moving these assets to their final operating locations is likely to be chaotic and prolonged , even with a plan , according to air force managers . thumrait is located in a remote area of oman that presents considerable challenges to moving vehicles to their eventual operating locations . the site is about 4 hours from the nearest port by mountainous roads . during the 3- to 4-month monsoon season , this road can be nearly impassable , and transporting vehicles could take even longer . in the event of a major conflict , quickly moving over 1,700 vehicles from this site would pose a significant challenge and is a concern to air force officials . vehicles stored in other locations in the gulf are also in poor condition . in an open storage location near prince sultan air base in saudi arabia , the air force has stored about 840 vehicles for several years without conducting maintenance , sheltering them from the elements , or establishing accountability . many of the vehicles were left at this location in 1995 and are in poor condition , according to air force officials . in mid - 1998 , the air force estimated that about 600 of these vehicles could be salvaged . the air force is currently working to have these vehicles repaired and moved into storage at other locations in the region . the cost or time required to repair these vehicles has not been fully determined .