the commission was more pointed in its conclusions . it reported in may 1995 that dod may have greater quantities of strike aircraft and other deep attack weapons than it needs and noted that the total capability is increasing . the commission attributed the increase to the addition of conventional bombers , growing inventories of improved precision - guided munitions , and plans to buy stealth aircraft . because of these concerns , the commission recommended the prompt initiation of a dod - wide cost - effectiveness study focused on finding the appropriate combination and quantities of deep attack capabilities currently fielded and under development by all services . this effort , entitled “the deep attack weapons mix study,” is now under way at the direction of the secretary of defense . dod agreed that the services appear to have an abundant interdiction capability but said that these capabilities must be viewed in terms of flexibility , multimission capability , and availability . we agree that these are considerations in assessing the sufficiency of assets in relation to expected requirements . however , independent analyses and dod's own statements suggest that it also believes that aggregate capabilities could be excess to requirements . for example , the most recent program assessment by the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff concluded that procurement plans included more than tactical aircraft resources could pay for and therefore recommended that the services identify programs that could be slowed or terminated . taken together , we believe that the conclusions of both external experts and statements by dod suggest that there may be cost - saving alternatives to planned modernization programs . dod also noted that we had overstated available interdiction assets by adding together all the possible weapons that a single aircraft might employ . we acknowledge that a single aircraft can deliver only the munitions it carries on a single sortie . however , the services would not expect to attack all targets at the same time . given the likelihood of multiple sorties by many aircraft , we do not believe that our analysis overstates the services' capabilities . finally , dod said that today's interdiction forces exceed those used during the persian gulf war because that war represented a single major regional contingency , whereas current assets are geared for two such contingencies . we do not agree with this line of reasoning in that the interdiction assets available at the time of the gulf war were those planned to counter the former soviet union in a possible global war — a much more demanding scenario than the current two mrc strategy . given questions about future defense spending levels , the diminished threat to u.s. security , and the services' statements that they have ample interdiction capability , some modernization proposals may not be sound investments . some of these investments offer limited or unknown additional capability to the current abundant interdiction assets . for example , the air force's planned upgrade to the b - 1b bomber and the navy's f / a - 18e / f procurement appear to add more redundancy at a high cost .