i , fig . i.2 , for top country markets ) . with regard to the map brand - name program , a total of 475 companies and cooperatives received assistance in fiscal year 1997 . i.1 in app . i for map appropriations since fiscal year 1986. ) during fiscal year 1997 , fas provided map funds directly to 65 participating organizations consisting of 54 nonprofit agricultural trade associations , 5 nonprofit state regional groups , 2 state agencies , and 4 agricultural cooperatives . ( see app . i , table i.1 , for a list of fiscal year 1997 map participating organizations and their budgets ) . map funds can be used to support both generic promotions and brand - name promotions . in fiscal year 1997 , about 76 percent of map's budget supported generic promotions , with the remaining funds supporting brand - name promotions . generic promotions are undertaken by nonprofit trade associations , state regional groups , and state agencies to increase demand for a specific commodity with no emphasis on a particular brand , for example , u.s. peas and lentils , catfish , and cotton . brand - name promotions , on the other hand , are conducted by companies and cooperatives to establish consumer loyalty for their brand - name products . trade associations and others using map funds to support generic promotions must contribute at least 10 percent of the promotion cost ; entities using map funds to support brand - name promotions must make a minimum 50 percent contribution . in order to receive map funds , participating organizations must submit , and fas must approve , marketing plans specifically describing the manner in which map assistance will be expended . under these plans , the map funds may be spent by participating organizations themselves ( direct ) and / or redistributed to entities that have applied to participating organizations for map assistance ( indirect ) . in fiscal year 1997 , there were 453 individual companies and 20 cooperatives that indirectly received assistance for brand - name promotions . these companies and cooperatives applied for map funds through 19 participating organizations . eligible map expenses include production and distribution of advertising and promotional materials ( for example , posters , recipes , and brochures ) ; in - store and food service promotions ; product demonstrations ; and fees for participation in exhibits . funds used to support generic promotions may only be spent on the generic aspects of a campaign rather than on any promotional material or advertising that specifies a single company or brand . map supported generic and brand - name promotions in 100 countries during fiscal year 1997 ; 10 country markets accounted for 65 percent of the funds ( see app . the amount of map funds awarded to each ranged from $1,500 to $2.6 million ; however , almost half of the awards were in amounts less than $25,000 ( see app . i , table i.2 , for size of fiscal year 1997 map awards ) . fas' strategic plan 1997-2002 contains estimates of the economic impact of fas foreign market promotion programs , including map .