as shown in table ii . 3 , the current scenario does not require any of the units to change annual training sites , but scenarios 1 through 3 require that up to three of the units change training sites . on the basis of the units' authorized equipment , we determined the amount of equipment for each of the nine items that would be needed if the units training at the same location pooled and shared their equipment . we assumed that the entire unit ( i.e. , brigade or division ) went to annual training during a 2-week period ; 90 percent of a unit's authorized personnel would be assigned ; 70 percent of assigned personnel would actually attend annual training with the unit ; and the unit would need an additional quantity of 5 percent to allow for equipment replacement in case some equipment broke down during the 2-week annual training period . we used the 90-percent figure for the amount of authorized personnel assigned based on discussions with guard officials , statistics on assigned strength , and the fact that guard units normally do not have 100 percent of their authorized strength . the 70-percent figure for annual training attendance is based on actual attendance statistics , a rand study , and discussions with guard officials . the 5-percent additional quantity is based on discussions with guard maintenance officials . because some unit - shared equipment would be turned in to mates in a nonmission - capable ( nmc ) status at the end of the 2-week annual training period , we determined the amount of extra equipment that would be needed to have sufficient quantities of equipment on hand for the next unit to use for training . because of the guard's lack of historical information on the quantity of nmc equipment that is turned in to mates , we asked mates officials to provide us with an estimate . the average estimate for several equipment items from two mates ranged from 12 to 16 percent . the average estimate from four mates ranged from 21 to 36 percent . on the basis of these estimates , we chose to use rates of 15 and 30 percent . we also considered the capability of mates personnel to repair this equipment in time for the next unit to use it for annual training . lacking information on the capability of mates to repair equipment , we assumed for each of the nine items used in our analysis that the mates could repair no more than 10 of the items in a 2-week period . we did not consider the impact of mates maintenance personnel having to spend time issuing and receiving equipment from units that were training at the mates rather than spending this time repairing equipment . in addition , we analyzed the effect on the maintenance quantity of units having consecutive training and a 2-week period between training .