prescreening . this procedure requires an employee to ask an applicant a few questions and to quickly determine whether the applicant is clearly eligible to receive a visa or whether the applicant must be interviewed by an officer . noncashier fee collection . this process allows applicants to pay the machine - readable visa fee at a bank or other financial institution . the applicant then presents the fee payment receipt when processing the application , thus eliminating the need for a cashier at the post to handle the fee transaction . travel agency / corporate referral program . this practice allows posts to designate selected travel agencies and large companies to perform some initial processing of nonimmigrant visa applicants who meet certain criteria . agencies and companies are trained to ensure that applicants' documents are in order and are frequently asked to enter pertinent data on the application form . in some cases , agencies and companies forward information to the post electronically , usually via computer diskette . other practices identified include public information campaigns urging applicants to apply well in advance of their intended travel dates and the use of color - coded boxes to simplify the return of passports on particular days . some of the practices identified are easy to implement , such as color coding ; others are more complex , such as establishing noncashier fee collection systems . the willingness and ability to implement these practices varies by post . according to consular officials , state is currently in the process of identifying posts that are already employing these practices . it is important to note that , while some of these practices can aid in better managing consular work loads , the use of such tools does not guarantee a reduction in visa - processing times . in some cases , these techniques may actually contribute to backlogs , depending on how they are managed . one of the most controversial tools in this respect is the appointment system . according to some consular officials , posts inevitably schedule fewer appointments per day than the number of applicants , causing backlogs and public relations problems . consular management must deal with increased phone calls and requests for emergency processing when the wait for an appointment becomes unreasonably long . all nine of the surveyed posts that had peak - season backlogs in fiscal year 1997 , including the consulate in sao paulo , used appointment systems . on the other hand , some high - volume posts that did not use appointment systems managed to keep the total turnaround time for processing visas under 7 business days , even in periods of very high demand . for example , in rio de janeiro , the total turnaround time for processing “walk - in” nonimmigrant visa applications was 2 days during peak and nonpeak seasons . the post in mexico city issued visas the same day that applicants walked in , whether in peak or nonpeak seasons ; however , a post official told us that applicants often have to wait for several hours in line .