we are therefore retaining this recommendation . 3.there is no question that army doctrine and manuals are clear about who has responsibility for patient decontamination . however , both medical and tactical units we visited that were involved in implementing these tasks were often unaware of the doctrine and , consequently , usually had not either planned or trained to perform these functions . we concur that military service training documents and standards require commanders to ensure that units and individuals are trained to defend and survive in a contaminated environment . however , there appears to be a difference between the policy and guidance established and the extent to which it has been effectively applied . for example , while the last two forscom commanders have issued nbc defense training guidance requiring commanders to ensure that units are fully trained to sustain operations and defend against battlefield nbc hazards , the various dod readiness and evaluation mechanisms we reviewed continue to indicate that many units are in fact not trained to dod standards for chemical and biological defense . our report also shows that army unit commanders have not met forscom requirements for unit on - hand stocks for critical nbc equipment , and that forscom has not provided either the funds or the supervisory oversight needed to ensure compliance . benjamin douglas joseph f. lenart , jr . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . this situation had not been corrected at the time of our review . although dod has taken actions to improve chemical and biological defense since the gulf war , dod's emphasis has not been sufficient to resolve many serious lingering problems . our measurement of key indicators — dod funding , staffing , mission priority , and monitoring — showed that chemical and biological defense tends to be relegated a lower level of priority than other threat areas . historically , dod has allocated less than 1 percent of its total budget to chemical and biological defense . annual funding for this area has decreased by over 30 percent in constant dollars , from approximately $750 million in fiscal year 1992 to $504 million in fiscal year 1995 .