some of these may include some participation by other agencies . for example , since 1991 , the state department has participated in the u.s. marine corps' special operations capable exercise program ( i.e. , socex ) to help train marine expeditionary units in noncombatant evacuation operations . the fbi is expanding its counterterrorism programs . in addition to hiring additional agents , in january 1996 , the fbi restructured its approach to deal with terrorism . three sections in fbi's national security division manage counterterrorism programs: one focused on foreign threats , another focused on domestic threats in the united states , and another focused on computer investigations and infrastructure protection . such cases are not coordinated through the nsc mechanism . our objectives were to review u.s. efforts to combat terrorism by specifically looking at programs and activities to ( 1 ) prevent and deter terrorism ; ( 2 ) respond to terrorist threats or incidents ; and ( 3 ) manage the consequences of a terrorist act , especially involving weapons of mass destruction . in reviewing these activities , we used pdd - 39 to scope our effort . we obtained information through documentation and interviews of officials at the departments of state , treasury , justice , defense , energy , transportation , and health and human services ; the cia ; environmental protection agency ; and fema . we also identified interagency coordination processes and groups intended to facilitate information sharing and enhance operational links . to ascertain the interagency coordinating mechanisms and their scopes , we met with nsc , the department of state , fbi , and intelligence community officials . we also discussed the coordinating mechanisms with participating agency officials . we met with former government officials from the counterterrorism community and attended congressional briefings , conferences , and symposiums on terrorism issues . we did not evaluate the effectiveness of the programs or activities discussed in this report . we performed a separate review of dod's force protection efforts and have reported separately on these matters . we also did not include in our scope issues pertaining to information security . some of the information we obtained was classified and could not be incorporated in this report . we used this information , however , to help corroborate unclassified data we obtained and our analyses . we did not independently verify agencies' statistical data . we performed our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards between october 1996 and july 1997 . moreover , the fbi manages standing joint terrorism task forces to facilitate an exchange of intelligence and coordinate activities across the law enforcement community within a specific geographic area . conceived in the 1980s , these task forces are currently located in 13 metropolitan areas throughout the country and are staffed by federal , state , and local law enforcement officers . the intelligence community disseminates threat warnings through various channels . cia's counterterrorist center has created a new threat warning group in the community counterterrorism board . this group analyzes threat reports , coordinates them with the intelligence community , and distributes them to senior u.s. policymakers .