no sensitivity analysis done . ( continued ) assumed bottom - up review force structure would be in place for 1997 and 2001-2005 scenarios . assumed entire force would participate in the mrcs , except for the 15 national guard enhanced brigades because circumstances not considered adverse enough for their use . force participation consistent with the dpg . combatant commands describe importance of enhanced brigades as a strategic reserve force . modeling was not adjusted to account for redeployment of forces from peace operations . ( see separate entry on peace operations. ) used the 1996-2001 future years defense program for 1997 and 2001 scenarios . dod stated service projections were used for the 2005 scenario . no sensitivity analysis done to test impact if enhancements not available as planned . dod officials denied us access to 2005 weapon system and weapon quantities . assumed rapid decision - making by national command authorities . timeliness of national decision - making identified as important . we summarized their comments below . we also incorporated their comments in the report where appropriate . dod disagreed with our finding that key assumptions used in nimble dancer were generally favorable and that dod generally did not perform sensitivity analyses to test the impact of using more adverse assumptions . dod stated that it based game scenarios and assumptions on the may 1994 dpg to provide a common reference point for game participants . dod noted that it conducted considerable analyses and war game discussions on the assumptions to assess their impact on u.s. ability to fight and win two mrcs . these analyses and discussions , according to dod , provided various insights , including potential risks associated with more adverse assumptions and the importance of timely national decision - making , and helped support recommendations for continuing programmed force enhancements . in its comments , dod summarized the extent of analysis conducted on certain game assumptions . we recognize that nimble dancer involved analyses and discussions of key assumptions , enabling game participants to gain insight into various aspects of the two - mrc requirement . based on additional information provided by dod , we modified the text to reflect the extent of dod's analyses on the sensitivity of certain assumptions and our assessment of these analyses . we continue to believe that certain game assumptions were favorable because they set conditions that were mostly advantageous to u.s. forces , thereby minimizing risk . based on dod's public comments that the game involved rigorous and robust analyses , we expected that dod performed considerable and varied sensitivity analyses to test the sensitivity of scenario assumptions . we agree that dod examined the impact of adverse circumstances for some assumptions . however , we found that in some cases the scope of analysis was limited , such as focusing on individual mrcs rather than a two - mrc situation or covering only part of the nimble dancer time frame . dod partially concurred with our finding that certain critical issues were not fully examined . dod acknowledged that some issues were not analyzed exhaustively and were deferred to follow - on studies ; however , it noted that considerable analysis was conducted during nimble dancer .