additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the units projected most of these reductions in their leased space . figure 7 shows the actual and projected reductions in total square footage . despite the past and planned reductions in space occupied , most of the units projected larger square foot usage than in 1976 and 1980 . table 6 compares the changes in the size of the business units' facilities . three business units expected to use more square footage in the futurethan occupied in 1976 ; four units expected to use more space than they occupied in 1980 . according to defense contract management command records , defense contractors have significantly reduced the size of their facilities through such actions as vacating and selling buildings and terminating leases . we compiled and compared information on the declines and buildups in defense expenditures since the end of world war ii . we also conducted literature searches and examined various reports , assessments , and other documents to determine how defense contractors throughout the industry have been affected by reduced defense spending . the business units provided us with data on their sales , employment levels , capital expenditures , ir&d / b&p , and facilities for 1976 through the latest projected year . we focused our work on these five elements because we believed they were most representative of the impact of reduced defense spending on defense contractor business units . for three of the business units , we were unable to obtain data as early as 1976 and therefore used the earliest data available . we accepted the data provided by the business units and did not attempt to validate the data . in some cases , the organization of the business units have changed since 1976 , and the units had to compile or estimate data to reflect their organization since that time . figure 4 shows the actual and projected reductions . peak to latest projected year the six business units' forecasts show that they plan to spend an average of 54 percent less for ir&d / b&p than they spent during the mid - to - late 1980s . however , as shown in table 4 , two of the business units projected future expenditures for ir&d / b&p to be more than they spent in 1976 . two other business units forecasted their future expenditures to be more than they spent in 1980 . several studies showed a correlation between the level of defense expenditures and the amounts contractors spend on ir&d . one study , for example , stated that the level of defense procurement directly affects ir&d activities , which are supported to a large extent by overhead charges in production contracts . the report stated that when large production runs were the rule , many companies willingly invested their own funds in ir&d because they could reasonably expect to recover their investment . another report predicted that , with fewer defense procurements , ir&d payments would decrease and companies might not be willing to risk conducting their own ir&d .