this was accomplished by a number of actions . in accordance with dod initiatives , the navy first established a leadtime reduction goal of 25 percent . the navy then had the inventory control points reduce the leadtimes shown in their databases by 25 percent for each item managed . finally , the navy took aggressive action over the next 4 years to shorten required delivery dates in contract solicitations and negotiations . from 1990 to 1994 , the army's average acquisition leadtime decreased by 21 days , or about 3 percent . unlike the navy , the army did not establish a leadtime reduction goal , nor did it take action to obtain leadtime reductions through contract solicitations and negotiations . instead , the army emphasized another of dod's initiatives to reduce leadtime by using more flexible procurement methods such as multiyear procurements and indefinite quantity type contracts . according to army officials , quantities for follow - on years can be easily added to multiyear and indefinite quantity type contracts , which will reduce administrative leadtime to a matter of days instead of months . also , delays in starting up production are minimized . as an example of the impact of these types of contracts , in 1993 the army reported that a 3-year vehicle roadwheel purchase by the tank - automotive command reduced acquisition leadtime by 13 months ( 7 months' administrative and 6 months' production ) resulting in a savings of about $19 million . similarly , by using an indefinite quantity type contract to purchase sprockets , this command reduced acquisition leadtime by 15 months and saved about $5 million . from 1990 to 1994 , the air force's average acquisition leadtime increased by 6 days , or about 1 percent . the air force did not implement dod's 1990 leadtime reduction initiatives because it felt that no action was needed to reduce leadtime based on a comparison with the leadtimes of the navy . the air force delayed implementation of the initiatives pending an evaluation of the navy's reported success in achieving a 25-percent decrease in production leadtime without degrading mission support . in its evaluation , the air force compared aviation data due to the similarity of parts . on the basis of this evaluation , which was completed in december 1993 , the air force concluded that its production leadtimes for both repairable and consumable aviation parts were lower than the navy's leadtimes , even after the 25-percent reduction . the air force , therefore , concluded that no action was needed to reduce production leadtime . we analyzed and compared leadtime data for the air force and the navy as shown on their latest available inventory stratification reports of march 31 , 1993 , and september 30 , 1993 , respectively . we found that the air force's production leadtime was lower for consumable parts , but considerably higher for repairable parts . the air force's average production leadtime for repairable parts of 596 days was 176 days , or about 42 percent , higher than the navy's leadtime of 420 days .