additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . this proposal is then audited by dcaa and negotiated with the contractor . one contract that contained a reopener clause , a $49 million foreign military sales award , has been repriced . that contract , awarded in april 1995 , was modified in september 1997 to include $1.8 million in recouped restructuring savings , or about 4 percent of the total contract price . according to the contracting officer and price analyst , an administrative burden was associated with reopening the contract , but these officials did not believe that the burden was unreasonable or excessive , particularly in light of the return . the officials also said that the interpretation of the reopener clause language was never in dispute ; the contractor knew that it had to provide a repricing proposal that was auditable and separated restructuring savings from any other changes to the contract . more recently , contracting officers appear to be recognizing the benefits of reopener clauses , and their use seems to be increasing . however , the use of these clauses is still limited . unless dod takes steps to include reopener clauses in its noncompetitive fixed - price contracts for companies forming business combinations , it risks losing further substantial savings resulting from contractor restructuring . with recent business combinations , contracting officers appear to be using reopener clauses more often than in the past . for example , reopener clauses for savings were not included in any dod awards made to one business segment while it was undergoing restructuring during 1994 and early 1995 . however , that business segment subsequently identified 14 contracts awarded by dod that included reopener clauses for savings . these reopener clauses related to additional acquisitions after the initial business combination . in addition , a navy contract awarded to that contractor in september 1997 included a reopener clause for savings in connection with a restructuring project remaining from the initial combination . some dod buying commands have also expressed more interest in reopener clauses . at one navy command , a proposed reopener clause was disseminated to staff from the office of the assistant secretary of the navy . contracting officers at that command said that the use of reopener clauses for savings is being stressed by the head of contracts and , as a result , reopener clauses have begun to appear in awards . one contracting officer cited the increasing number of mergers as part of the reason for this increased interest . other buying offices have also acknowledged that reopener clauses can be a useful tool to protect the government's interest . while some dod buyers have shown more interest in the use of reopener clauses for savings , some new business combinations emphatically oppose their use . in addition , we obtained and reviewed all restructuring - related price adjustment clauses included in contracts with the business segments in our review , as identified by dod analysts and contractor officials .