additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we also compared the services' modeling techniques with each other . we intended to compare each service's input values ( rates ) for such factors as wounded - in - action , conflict intensities , conflict durations , and disease and non - battle injuries with similar rates depicted in the cinc war plans and with the updated casualty rates being developed subsequent to the 733 study . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . however , before we started this phase , dod decided to develop , as part of the 733 update , a single dod - wide model for determining medical staffing requirements . this report reflects the status of our work to date . specifically , it addresses the service models' results , their methodologies , and their inclusion of active duty and reserve medical personnel . in a separate report , we will examine dod's updated wartime medical requirements study and , to the extent needed , address any remaining issues associated with the service models . we are sending copies of this report to other interested congressional committees ; the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant , u.s. marine corps ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also send copies to others on request . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-5140 . the allocation between active and reserve components is made by analyzing when casualties are projected to occur during the conflicts and comparing that requirement to information on how soon active and reserve medical units can arrive in the theater . if high numbers of casualties in a theater are anticipated to occur early in a conflict , more active duty medical personnel will likely be required to provide medical care because active duty medical units generally can deploy more quickly than reserve units . conversely , if high numbers of casualties do not occur until later in the conflict , the need for active duty medical personnel diminishes and more requirements can be met by reserve forces . dod's current study of medical requirements will examine the appropriateness of the mix between active duty and reserve medical forces . the outcome of this study will have important ramifications for sizing the medical components of each service and the number of medical personnel to remain on active duty status . if , for example , the study assumes that medical forces will be needed sooner than assumed in the 733 study , most , if not all , of the reductions in active duty medical personnel estimated in the original study could be nullified .