however , this is not what dod currently plans . similarly , at the time of the analysis no decision had been made on where cataloging operations would be centralized . since that time dod has decided to centralize in battle creek and cost estimates for renovating work space can be firmed up , as can estimates of the number of personnel who will be displaced , moved , and trained . system development costs have not yet been estimated . the team leader for dla's cataloging and transition office believes that the $139 million estimate in the business case analysis is excessive but has not offered an alternative estimate . as a first step dla hired a contractor to review the former pctss development effort and to determine what is usable and what must be redone . dod officials also stated that whatever the development costs are , they would be offset by the costs that would have been incurred in maintaining the myriad of existing systems . however , dod could not provide us with data to support this position . further , we believe that to fully assess costs dod would need to evaluate the expected life - cycle costs of the two approaches . without a full assessment of costs and savings , dod cannot fully determine the extent to which savings will exceed costs and the amount of time that would be needed for savings to offset the costs associated with this consolidation effort . although dod has not yet developed a standardized cataloging process or determined how it will meet its needs for a standardized cataloging system , it has decided to relocate catalogers to battle creek , and reduce the number of catalogers to be relocated to a level envisioned after the processes and systems are standardized . according to the business case analysis , centralizing catalogers under one command will increase the likelihood of catalogers adopting to the new processes and procedures . however , dod's prior experiences in consolidating cataloging operations show that consolidating entails risks that if not adequately addressed can significantly degrade cataloging services . a dla official told us they are preparing plans that address these risks . however , at the conclusion of our review the plans had not been completed . senior officials at the two dla and two military service cataloging sites we visited expressed concerns about consolidating cataloging operations without a clearly defined business process to guide the consolidation . according to these officials , many cataloging processes are integrated with other processes , and separating them without a clear understanding of how a new process will work could affect customers and create additional costs and inefficiencies . for example , navy officials report that cataloging data maintenance is generally done by a weapon system equipment specialist , item manager , or other noncataloging person in conjunction with other provisioning , procurement , or logistics data management actions . table 2 presents the results of the analysis . the intent behind the plan called for in our recommendation is not the business plan dod refers to in its comments .