dod agreed with our recommendation . based on our review of other missions , such reviews are needed for other key mission areas as well . we do not discount these potential threats . however , dod's projections of the ability of potential adversaries to employ such systems , known weaknesses of future threat systems , the acquisition of advanced standoff weapons for u.s. aircraft , and planned improvements to existing u.s. forces , when taken together , suggest that this threat is manageable . furthermore , in subsequent discussions , dod clarified that it did not intend for its comment to suggest that u.s. electronic warfare systems could not defeat future threats but that dod prefers to continue to maintain a variety of capabilities , including additional stealth aircraft , to meet its objectives . the volume of arms transfers has fallen significantly in recent years and is not expected to reach its former levels any time soon . the principal nations selling and buying arms are the united states and its allies . since potential adversaries depend on foreign technology to improve their capabilities , changes in the arms market could have a substantial effect on their ability to modernize their forces . the value of the cross - border transfer of conventional arms fell by more than two - thirds from 1987 to 1994 — from almost $79 billion to $22 billion in 1994 dollars worldwide , according to the latest available data from the u.s. arms control and disarmament agency ( acda ) . the share of the international arms market held by the former soviet union , now shown as russia , and china has fallen from a combined 40 percent to about 10 percent over the same period . at the same time , the share of the arms market held by the united states and several close allies has grown from 43 percent to 79 percent of all transfers ( see fig . during the cold war , the soviet union was a primary supplier of arms to the third world , often providing weapons without charging for them . now russia generally requires payment , often in hard currency , for the weapons it transfers . the latest available acda data show worldwide soviet union / russian transfers fell from $23.1 billion in 1987 to $1.3 billion in 1994 . china also reduced its arms exports over that period . agreements for future deliveries also fell for russia and china from the levels of the 1980s . however , russia has increased the value of its agreements for future weapons deliveries since 1992 . while overall arms transfers have fallen , those who have been buying have shown a preference for american and western european equipment . buyers prefer proven high quality weapons that are accompanied by good logistics support . for the most recent 3-year period available , 1992 to 1994 , the arms market in terms of actual arms transfers has been dominated on the seller side by the united states and a few of its north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) allies , and on the buyer side by allies of the united states in europe , the middle east , and east asia .