the stcu has just begun monitoring its projects . although the department of energy has drafted an assurance plan for monitoring the ctr assistance provided to improve controls over nuclear materials in the four recipient countries , this effort was not fully discussed in dod's report . according to the report , energy conducted a joint mca&pp audit with dod during 1996 and planned to conduct additional joint audits ; however , the report did not explain that energy expects to assume sole responsibility for implementing audits of mca&pp projects . energy's assurance plan is intended to certify that the equipment , material , funding , contracts , training , and other services provided are accounted for and used for the purposes intended . assurances that mca&pp assistance is being used properly can be obtained through a variety of methods , including documentation , visits and visual observations , and contract monitoring . information obtained through such means can then be documented in an assurance report . according to the department of energy , project managers collect the necessary data , compile these reports , and provide the documentation to the management of energy's mca&pp task force . to date , energy has compiled about 200 assurance reports covering 50 projects . according to an energy official , such reports indicate that the ctr - provided assistance was being used for the purposes intended . as required , dod made a determination about whether ctr assistance was being used for the purposes intended . dod reported that as of december 1996 it was confident that ctr - provided assistance had been properly accounted for and used , in most instances , for the purposes intended . however , it reported three incidents in which assistance had been used improperly and the corrective measures taken . dod based its determination on a wide range of evidence obtained from audit and examination and technical support teams , program and contractor personnel , the intelligence community , and other government agencies involved in implementing ctr projects . dod acknowledged that the risk of diversion exists , but believes that the cooperative relationship that it has developed with the ctr - recipient country officials and its emphasis on the audit and examination process help to ensure the appropriate use of assistance . according to dod , it remains reasonably confident that any diversions of assistance would be discovered before u.s. interests were affected . because we could not validate dod's determination , we cannot comment on its veracity ; however , nothing came to our attention that would call into question the reasonableness of the determination . according to its report , dod plans to conduct 17 audit and examination activities during calendar year 1997 . although not required to do so , dod's report also includes a list of 17 planned audit activities for 1998 . both listings provide a monthly breakdown of how many audits and examinations dod will conduct per year . as of july 1997 , dod had conducted eight audits and examinations for 1997 . although not mentioned in dod's report , auditors from the european union have agreed to conduct the annual financial audit of the istc for 1997 .