( see app . ii for additional information regarding these two consolidation efforts and circumstances contributing to their lack of success. ) dod also said that it was implementing a policy directive to encourage first looking to interservice support for needed base operations , unless a better value is available from commercial sources . meanwhile , on an installation and regional basis , the services have continued varying efforts , on a more limited basis , to develop interservice support agreements where possible . many personnel voiced concern that these functions , after consolidation , appeared to be less responsive , less timely , and perhaps more costly than when each of the services were separately responsible for these functions . these views , regardless of their validity , affect consideration of related initiatives . also , many personnel were familiar with the failed san antonio real property maintenance and contracting programs and the consolidated housing program in hawaii and saw these as additional reasons for caution and skepticism . another broad concern that frequently surfaced in our discussions involving base support functions was resistance to change and commanders' concerns about losing direct control over their support assets , and their inability to influence servicing priorities that they deem important to supporting their military missions . we were told that if commanders perceive a problem , they want to have direct control over the activity rather than have to go through another service or activity . having one service provide large - scale base support to another service also raised concern about the receiving base losing its identity and appearing to be subsumed by the base providing support . we believe this suggests the need for stronger osd leadership to overcome such concerns where they related to parochial interests , rather than valid mission concerns . differences in traditions , cultures , practices , and standards among the services also were often cited as inhibiting greater emphasis on interservicing arrangements . forscom's goal is to test and evaluate these various initiatives and implement them beginning october 1 , 1996 . however , some initiatives are being tested and implemented at the same time throughout forscom . for example , an initiative to test the effect of consolidating warehouses at one location was found to be successful , and is now being expanded . another effort being implemented involves having a regional contract administration office for contracts over $500,000 . in this and other similar situations , we found service officials reluctant to identify specific cost savings from these projects . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report were barry w. holman , assistant director ; kevin b. perkins , evaluator - in - charge ; and robert r. poetta , evaluator . two of the most notable interservicing type efforts initiated in the 1970s and 1980s proved unsuccessful . they involved consolidated management of real property maintenance and contracting activities in the san antonio , texas , area , and consolidated family housing for military personnel in oahu , hawaii . base housing was often cited as an area having the potential for interservicing .