the remainder are in the army reserve . reserve units also have been used to reduce the high level of activity of some active forces . for example , the army uses reserve military police to relieve the high personnel tempo of active - duty military police units , and the air force uses reserve aircrews to relieve the high personnel tempo of its active - duty aircrews . augmentation from reserve forces and u.s. - based active forces was required because usareur did not possess all the personnel and capabilities the mission needs . according to usareur documents , prior to the first deployment to bosnia in december 1995 , the units chosen to deploy were staffed at 87 percent of required strength , whereas deployed forces were required to be at least at 92 percent of required strength . further , 8 to 10 percent of these units' personnel were not deployable for a variety of reasons . to bring these units to at least 92 percent of required strength , personnel had to be shifted from other usareur units and from u.s. army forces command ( forscom ) units , a process known as cross - leveling . throughout the bosnia mission , individuals have been needed to augment headquarters staffs at usareur , u.s. european command , the american contingent of various nato command elements such as the sfor headquarters in saravejo , and actual units . forscom provided 1,035 active component individual augmentees to support bosnia , while the army reserve personnel center and the u.s. army reserve command provided another 1,613 army reserve individual augmentees . the relatively small size of the u.s. portion of sfor has not always required deploying entire units . according to forscom and usareur officials , active units have employed split - based operations . split - based operations occur when only parts of units are deployed and the elements left behind must continue to perform their missions at the home station . for example , as of january 1998 , elements of the first armor division's headquarters , military intelligence , signal , artillery , and support command were deployed to bosnia , while the rest of the division , including its combat brigades , did not deploy . split - basing has been a strain on usareur units . for example , during sfor , usareur reported to the department of the army through its status of resources and training system , which is used to measure readiness , that split - basing had a negative impact on the readiness of several of its units because of reduced personnel , equipment levels , or a combination of both factors at home station . for reserve units , the army also has engaged in split - based operations . in many instances , the army extracted elements of existing units and formed them into what is known as derivative units . it has been staffing derivative units with individuals drawn from the original unit and other selected reserve units . according to its mobilization data , the army formed over 700 derivative units for the bosnia mission since december 1995 .