additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . exposure to the agents can result in death . in 1993 , the united states signed the u.n. - sponsored convention on the prohibition of the development , production , stockpiling and the use of chemical weapons and on their destruction , commonly referred to as the chemical weapons convention . the united states agreed to dispose of ( 1 ) binary chemical weapons , recovered chemical weapons , and former chemical weapon production facilities within 10 years and ( 2 ) miscellaneous chemical warfare materiel within 5 years of the date the convention becomes effective . if ratified by the u.s. senate , the convention becomes effective 180 days after the 65th nation ratifies the treaty , but not sooner than january 13 , 1995 . under the terms of the convention , chemical weapons buried prior to 1977 are exempt from disposal as long as they remain buried . in the united states , burial was a common disposal method for chemical warfare materiel until the late 1950s . should the united states choose to excavate the sites and remove the chemical weapons , the provisions of the convention would apply . dod officials estimate that the convention will enter into force in fiscal year 1996 . in the fiscal year 1993 national defense authorization act ( p.l . 102-484 ) , the congress directed the army to report on its plans for disposing of all nonstockpile chemical warfare materiel within the united states . in 1993 , the army issued a report describing the nonstockpile chemical materiel , potential disposal methods , transportation alternatives , and disposal cost and schedule estimates . the report concluded that it would cost the army $1.1 billion ( $930 million in direct project disposal costs and $170 million in programmatic costs ) to destroy , primarily by incineration , demolition , and neutralization , the nonstockpile chemical materiel required by the convention within the required time frames . programmatic costs are associated with more than one disposal project or program category . for example , the portion of management and personnel costs that support more than one project is considered programmatic costs . also , estimated costs to procure and test equipment to be used at more than one site are included in the programmatic cost estimate . the army also reported that it would cost $16.6 billion ( $12.04 billion in direct disposal costs and $4.56 billion in programmatic costs ) to recover and destroy , primarily by incineration and neutralization , buried chemical materiel within 40 years . these estimates are considered rough order of magnitude estimates , typically used when a program is not fully developed . according to program officials , the army plans to issue a supplement to its 1993 survey and analysis report , which will include revised cost and schedule estimates , in mid - 1995 . appendix ii describes the army's nonstockpile chemical warfare materiel .