dod chose to restructure the system . as a result of the 1991 gulf war experience , dod established a basis for increased milstar support to tactical forces by using a medium data rate ( mdr ) communications capability . currently , there are two milstar satellite designs — the ldr version , called milstar i , and a combined ldr and mdr version , called milstar ii . a total of six satellites are included in the program — two milstar i satellites were launched in 1994 and 1995 , and four milstar ii satellites are being fabricated and are scheduled to be launched in fiscal years 1999 through 2002 . as a follow - on effort , dod has initiated an advanced ehf satellite communications program to replace the milstar i and ii designs , with plans to launch the first advanced satellite in fiscal year 2006 . since program inception , dod has spent several billions of dollars to acquire the milstar i and ii satellites , a mission control capability , and a variety of user terminals . in total , dod has procured , or plans to procure , over 3,500 terminals . in addition , it is planning to spend several more billions of dollars for the advanced ehf satellite system . the milstar i system is expected to provide communication networks in support of designated strategic mission areas . for example , in regard to strategic ballistic missile threats to north america , the system is expected to ( 1 ) transmit missile warning data from sensor processing sites to command centers , ( 2 ) provide commanders a means of exchanging information about ballistic missile attack assessments , and ( 3 ) disseminate critical messages to forces on how to respond to missile attacks . however , a may 1998 draft operational test report , prepared by the air force operational test and evaluation center , concluded that although the milstar system was found to be effective for communications during normal operations , numerous deficiencies would require corrective action before the full nuclear wartime strategic capabilities could be realized . deficiencies in three areas were highlighted — ( 1 ) military commanders' voice conference network , ( 2 ) missile warning teletype network , and ( 3 ) emergency action message dissemination and force direction network . the deficiencies were associated with system connectivity — a critical operational issue that addresses the primary mission of milstar to provide minimum essential worldwide communications among all services at all levels of military conflict . the purpose of the operational test was to evaluate the effectiveness and suitability of the in - orbit milstar i satellite system . according to operational test officials , testing was hampered because , in some instances , the evaluation criteria were based on ambiguous operational requirements . dod has not yet completed efforts to validate updates to the milstar 1992 operational requirements . in addition , more recent testing revealed that peripheral equipment and software to be used with milstar has not been effectively controlled to ensure communications interoperability with other systems . dod regulations require such interoperability . continuous communication capabilities with deployed bomber forces are required if it became necessary to recall or redirect these forces .