ii ) . in addition , nasa and doe also provided technical and clarifying comments for this report , which we incorporated as appropriate . to obtain information about the processes used by nasa to assess the safety and environmental risks of the cassini mission , nasa's efforts and costs to develop non - nuclear power sources for deep space missions , and future space missions for which nuclear - fueled power sources will be used , we interviewed officials at nasa headquarters in washington , d.c. ; jpl in pasadena , california ; and doe's office of nuclear energy , science , and technology in germantown , maryland . we reviewed the primary u.s. legislation and regulations applicable to the use of nuclear materials in space and nasa , jpl , and doe documents pertaining to the safety and environmental assessment processes that were used for the cassini mission . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . the estimated health effect of this accident is the same as for an earth swingby accident . due to the spacecraft's high speed , nasa and doe projected that an accidental reentry during the earth swingby maneuver would generate temperatures high enough to damage the rtgs and release some plutonium dioxide . as a safety measure , jpl designed the earth swingby trajectory so that the spacecraft will miss earth by a wide margin unless the spacecraft's course is accidently altered . about 50 days before the swingby , cassini mission controllers will begin making incremental changes to the spacecraft's course , guiding it by earth at a distance of 718.6 miles . according to nasa and jpl officials , the cassini spacecraft and mission designs incorporate other precautions to minimize the possibility that an accident could cause the spacecraft to reenter during either the earth swingby maneuver or the interplanetary portion of its journey to saturn . nasa regulations require that , as part of the environmental analysis , alternative power sources be considered for missions planning to use nuclear power systems . jpl's engineering study of alternative power sources for the cassini mission concluded that rtgs were the only practical power source for the mission . the study stated that , because sunlight is so weak at saturn , solar arrays able to generate sufficient electrical power would have been too large and heavy for the titan iv / centaur to launch . the studies also noted that , even if the large arrays could have been launched to saturn on the cassini spacecraft , they would have made the spacecraft very difficult to maneuver and increased the mission's risk of failure due to the array's uncertain reliability over the length of the 12-year mission . figure 3 compares the relative sizes of solar arrays required to power the cassini spacecraft at various distances from the sun , including saturn .