( see app . i for an overview of radar coverage capability. ) jiatf - east acknowledged that reduced radar capability continues to limit operational successes today . according to jiatf - east , radar assets have not changed since our prior report and radar capabilities have further been exacerbated by a long term outage of the guantanamo bay radar because of no funding for operations and maintenance . ondcp in its written response ( see app . ii ) stated that it is in general agreement with this report . it provided clarification and information on ( 1 ) its future plans , ( 2 ) the importance of source country efforts in complementing those in the transit zone , ( 3 ) activities of the u.s. coast guard , ( 4 ) results from the bridgetown summit , and ( 5 ) the changes to the revised national interdiction command and control plan . ondcp recognized that current assets in the transit zone are inadequate to accomplish the strategy and identified recent initiatives to implement the strategy . these initiatives included a caribbean action plan , a short - term enhancement to transit zone interdiction , a 5-year asset plan for the transit zone , intelligence sharing efforts , and a deterrence study . these initiatives are expected to provide linkage between planning , development of performance measures , and assets required to implement the strategy . however , ondcp did not provide time frames for completing these initiatives . we obtained oral comments on a draft of this report from the department of state , dod , dea , the u.s. coast guard , the u.s. customs service , and the federal bureau of investigation . none of these agencies disagreed with our principal findings or our conclusions . however , several of these agencies indicated we had not provided enough information about u.s. counterdrug activities in the transit zone other than those directed by jiatf - east . in response to their concerns , we have expanded our discussion of these other activities , particularly those of the u.s. coast guard and the u.s. customs service , and have added data on overall drug seizures in the region . each of the commenting agencies suggested points of clarification and we have incorporated them into the report where appropriate . in addition , we modified the report to include some updated information provided by dod and the u.s. coast guard on operational capabilities in the transit zone . to determine the nature of drug - trafficking in the transit zone , we obtained reports from the u.s. coast guard , dea , the u.s. customs service , jiatf - east , ondcp , and interagency assessments on cocaine smuggling activities . we analyzed and compared the data from these reports with data from prior years to assess the degree of change in the cocaine flow to the united states and drug traffickers' methods , routes , and modes of transportation . we also obtained assessment briefings about the cocaine threat from dea headquarters in washington , d.c. ; the u.s. coast guard seventh district and u.s. customs service in miami , florida ; and jiatf - east in key west , florida .