the other three pilots are described below . the army's pilot at hunter army airfield , savannah , georgia , which was initiated in february 1996 , is a quality - of - life effort to improve the relocation process and to test commercial practices in a military environment . services provided by the contractor include point - to - point move management with a single point of contact for the member , assistance in buying / selling a residence , full replacement value for lost or damaged household goods , direct claims settlement with the servicemember , and visibility of the shipment for approximately 1,400 annual moves . the contract will end on september 30 , 1999 . in january 1999 , the military traffic management command ( mtmc ) , which manages the current personal property program , began a pilot involving 50 percent of the moves in north carolina , south carolina , and florida , which will total approximately 18,500 moves annually . key features of the pilot include the selection of carriers based on servicemember satisfaction and past performance rather than on price alone ; achieving stronger carrier commitment through long - term contracts ; offering full - value replacement protection and direct claims settlement to users . the pilot is planned to run for 3 years , ending september 2002 . dod announced on february 12 , 1999 , that it intended to begin the full service moving project as a fourth test . this pilot would be similar to the pilot at hunter army airfield , with modifications based on the army's lessons learned , and it would involve a larger number of moves ( approximately 45,000 annually ) . the pilot would be tested in the national capital ( washington , d.c. ) region , georgia , and north dakota . like the army pilot , it is intended to replace the existing program by using a contractor or contractors to provide both transportation and move management services . no official start date has been set for this pilot program . status of the navy pilot as of march 1999 , 223 servicemembers have participated in the pilot . in its second year of operation , the pilot has been expanded from one to four shipment sites . program results thus far show ( 1 ) participation has been relatively low compared to the other pilots that are under way or planned , ( 2 ) servicemembers are satisfied arranging their own move , according to limited survey data , and ( 3 ) workload would increase for personal property officials because this option adds an alternative to the current program . as of march 26 , 1999 , a total of 223 members have participated in the pilot and 132 moves have been completed . participation has been low , in part , because of the pilot's short duration and eligibility restrictions . although the puget sound office began to offer this option in january 1998 , the other three sites did not offer it until late july 1998 , and then only for navy military members moving to one of six destinations . the pilot's eligibility restrictions exclude civilians and members of the other services .