app. ) shall not apply to such councils . ( h ) construction of provision. — nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing — ( 1 ) the use of the armed forces for civilian law enforcement purposes or for response to natural or manmade disasters ; or ( 2 ) the use of department of defense personnel or resources for any program , project , or activity that is prohibited by law . 104-106 , div . a , title v , § 572 ( a ) , feb. 10 , 1996 , 110 stat . the following provides specific information on each of the six projects we used for case studies . operation alaskan road , requested by the metlakatla indian community , is a multiyear engineering project sponsored by the pacific command and coordinated by the alaskan command . members of the missouri and alaska national guard were tasked to assist in the planning efforts . phase one of the project , conducted in fiscal year 1997 , involved over 850 members of the active forces of each of the military services . about 70 members of the army and air national guard and the army and marine corps reserves also participated . during fiscal year 1997 , the project was organized and planned and a base camp was constructed . the camp is to be used to house the military personnel who are expected to build a 14-mile road on annette island in alaska over the next 5 years . the road will connect the town of metlakatla with a remote section of the island that is much closer to the site of a proposed ferry terminal . the community believes that the proposed additional ferry access will allow more medical , educational , and commercial opportunities for the approximately 1,600 residents of metlakatla . in fiscal year 1997 , about 150 marines spent 57 days on the island constructing a 300-person base camp to be used in the future by u.s. military personnel constructing the road . the base camp consists of 38 buildings , including berthing barracks , a mess hall , and shower and restroom facilities . the marines invested over 63,000 hours of labor to construct the buildings , which are designed to last about 5 years . unit officials stated that this project provided their personnel with many training opportunities , such as ship - to - shore landing , horizontal engineering , and vertical construction . marine corps officials told us the alaskan deployment was good training for the engineer support company that participated . we found , however , that some individuals performed tasks unrelated to their military specialties , raising questions about whether the assistance provided was incidental to training . specifically , because the company did not have enough combat engineers to complete the project in the allotted time , 25 marines from a bulk fuel company , who were untrained in combat engineering skills , augmented the combat engineers . therefore , a significant amount of time ( about 2 months prior to deployment and more time on - site ) was spent teaching basic combat engineering skills to the bulk refuelers .