customers are management headquarters . a 1997 study plan for the agency indicated that 35 of its 40 studies had dod management headquarters as its customers , for example , osd , the joint staff , and the air staff . the air force redesignated the agency in 1991 . in 1984 , its predecessor — a direct reporting unit to the chief of staff of the air force — was created in an apparent response to mandated reductions in management headquarters personnel . according to an air force document , the unit was created to “draw down” the size of the air staff by 162 personnel , but it stated “there will be no changes in administrative , manpower , personnel , and budget support as currently provided” and “there will be no ‘real change' in the air staff status for the .” the air force's reclassification of these positions from management headquarters to nonmanagement headquarters became effective in september 1984 , the deadline for a congressional provision to reduce dod management headquarters by 5 percent . the air force medical operations agency has 73 personnel who are classified as medical services management , according to its unit manning document . the agency develops policies and programs to improve aerospace medicine , preventive medicine , and clinical health services for the air force . the agency's divisions perform many management headquarters or headquarters support functions included under medical services , a headquarters support function defined in dod directive 5100.73 . the agency's primary customers are the surgeon general of the air force ( to whom its director reports ) , the chief of staff of the air force , the air staff , and the office of the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs — all of which are headquarters officials or organizations . the air force created the agency in july 1992 by transferring a directorate from the surgeon general's office to the new agency . the 497th intelligence group , headquartered at bolling air force base , washington , d.c. , has 305 personnel . according to its master plan , its mission is “intelligence infrastructure and services ( security , weapons system support , automation , and information operations ) to defense community users worldwide.” the unit's history states that the group has a unique role of providing planning , policy implementation , and functional management support to the air staff and other dod customers in washington , d.c. , and around the world . our analysis shows that over 50 percent of the group's effort is for headquarters support functions , such as security , acquisition , and data automation support , as defined in dod directive 5100.73 ; therefore , under the directive , all of its personnel should have been reported on the air force's pb - 22 exhibit . most personnel are operation research analysts . operations analysis and cost analysis are headquarters support functions listed in dod directive 5100.73 . the center's customers include the assistant secretary of the navy ( research , development , and acquisition ) , the assistant secretary of the navy ( financial management and comptroller ) , opnav , and the navy's chief information officer , all management headquarters officials / organizations .