thel's components have been produced . however , initial testing of the laser has identified problems with the operation of chemical flow control valves and with the low - power laser that is to be used in tracking the short - range rockets . the initial tests of the laser revealed leaks in the specialized valves that control the flow of chemicals through the laser . these leaks must be corrected because they would detract from the performance of the laser . in addition , testing of the pointer tracker system disclosed a problem with the low - power laser that is to be used in tracking incoming short - range rockets . this laser is a commercial off - the - shelf item that is generally used in laboratory settings . it has been modified for use on the thel ; however , it is still undergoing tests to ensure it meets performance requirements . the valve leaks and the problems with the low - power laser in the pointer tracker system have caused a delay in the thel test schedule . originally , the thel system was scheduled to be a fully integrated system that would attempt to shoot - down a katyusha rocket at helstf in december 1998 . because of these unanticipated problems and administrative issues , the schedule has slipped by 7 months , to july 1999 . currently , u.s. forces do not have a validated mission requirement for the thel as it is being designed for israel . however , the army has prepared a draft mission needs statement for a reconfigured mobile laser weapon that could be used by u.s. forces to shoot down a variety of targets in theater environments . a thel official told us that the draft army mission needs statement is being incorporated into atlantic command's joint theater and missile defense mission needs statement , which includes the need for a mobile high - energy laser weapon . the thel would have to be radically modified for it to be more powerful and mobile and thus meet emerging u.s. theater defense requirements for a ground - based laser . while the thel system being developed for israel is designed to be transportable , it will not be mobile ; thel components must be transported by large trucks and placed on prepared concrete sites . according to laser experts at lawrence livermore national laboratory , a mobile , ground - based high - energy laser weapon for u.s. use would probably necessitate using a relatively small solid - state laser ( versus the much larger and heavier chemical laser being developed for the thel ) , the technology for which is relatively immature . the experts said that a generation of solid - state laser research and development would be needed to develop technology to the level necessary for use in a mobile thel - type system . a program official said that such a system would probably not be fielded until at least 2025 . in commenting on a draft of this report , dod stated that the army is investigating four solid - state laser concepts and the availability dates and concepts may be different than the assessment provided by lawrence livermore national laboratory officials .