this material has been deleted from the report . additional information concerning this matter has been added to the body of the report . dod response to our prior report on embedded computers has been recognized in the body of this report . we have not verified the dod response . the f - 22's engine has not been flight tested , but has experienced problems during ground tests . the f - 22's engine is expected to be the first to provide the ability to fly faster than the speed of sound for an extended period of time without the high fuel consumption characteristic of aircraft that use afterburners to achieve supersonic speeds . it is expected to provide high performance and high fuel efficiency at slower speeds as well . problems with performance of the f - 22's engine first surfaced after the initial engine ground tests began in december 1992 . the contractor is conducting a series of interim tests , with a goal of having a complete engine with a redesigned turbine and other changes qualified for flight by december 1996 if tests now planned for 1995 are successful . if not , f - 22 flight tests will be started with an engine that is not fully representative of the current approved configuration . an executive independent review team was formed to provide advice on engine development issues , including a turbine problem . the team stated that it did not consider the nature and number of engine problems to be excessive for a highly sophisticated engine at this stage of development . they also stated that the proposed solutions can only be proven by exposing authentic hardware to the full range of realistic testing . through november 1994 , the air force had identified engine problems that may cost as much as $479 million to remedy . the air force increased the target cost of the engine development contract by $218 million to design and test solutions to the engine problems . lrip aircraft are those to be procured during the period of concurrency . in 1990 , dod performed a statutorily required analysis of the concurrency in acquisition programs partly to define the appropriate measures for evaluating the degree of concurrency and associated risk in programs . the office of the secretary of defense defined a highly concurrent program as one that proceeds into lrip before significant iot&e is complete . using dod guidelines , concurrency in the f - 22 program is high because the f - 22 program is scheduled to proceed into lrip well before any iot&e is started . the f - 22 is to be the first supersonic , highly maneuverable fighter that uses low observable technologies to reduce radar , infrared , acoustic and optical signatures of the aircraft , making it difficult for an adversary to detect . an evaluation of the complete f - 22 radar signature using computer models and a scale version of the aircraft concluded that the aircraft's radar signature did not meet the air force's operational requirement .