2461 requirements should have been followed . we are currently studying these cases and expect to report on them in the near future . the costs and savings associated with defense reform initiatives incorporated in dod's 1999-2003 fydp include partial costs and savings from competitive sourcing and additional brac initiatives . while savings are expected from other initiatives , dod has not required the services to calculate the specific savings to be obtained from them . likewise , while personnel reductions are included in the fydp and some are expected to result from dris , dod has not required the components to link any personnel reductions with specific dri elements . also , questions exist about the precision of savings expected from brac and competitive sourcing . dod assumed there would be additional base closures ; however , the required legislative authorization has not been given . further , the brac savings estimate , should future rounds occur , has limitations in terms of projecting short - term savings that might be realized . competitive sourcing savings incorporated in the 1999-2003 fydp were determined using broad estimates based on prior competitive sourcing experience , but they were not linked to specific positions and functions currently under study or planned for study at specific locations . this report addresses the following questions: what savings in dod's fiscal years 1999-2003 future years defense program ( fydp ) were the result of the department's defense reform initiatives ( dri ) ? to what extent were the savings and personnel reductions from competitive sourcing in the 1999-2003 fydp based on ongoing or planned studies of functions specifically identified under office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 76 , and what percentage of the current costs of performing those functions were included from the projected savings from these studies ? did defense components outsource activities that included inherently governmental functions , without allowing civilian employees to compete under circular a - 76 procedures , or without following the study and notification requirements of 10 u.s.c . in may 1997 , dod completed a comprehensive review of national security threats , risks , and opportunities facing the united states to 2015 . this review , known as the quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) , was intended to examine america's defense needs and provide a blueprint for a strategy - based , balanced , and affordable defense program . the qdr noted that dod had reduced active duty personnel by 32 percent between 1989 and 1997 while reducing personnel performing infrastructure functions by only 28 percent . the report called for additional reductions in both military and civilian personnel . our july 1998 report on the 1999-2003 fydp noted that the services planned to reduce military and civilian personnel by 175,000 and save $3.7 billion by 2003 . our recent reviews of planned defense personnel reductions resulting from the qdr and the 1999-2003 fydp raised questions about dod's ability to achieve some of these reductions and savings . the changes in military strategy and capabilities enunciated in the qdr and other reports have often been referred to as a revolution in military affairs . however , the qdr also recognized that dod must undergo a similar revolution in its business affairs .