mclist program began . first broad agency announcement was released in commerce business daily . marine corps fielded saratoga suits . second broad agency announcement was released in commerce business daily . third broad agency announcement was released in commerce business daily . first mclist wear test was conducted at camp lejeune ( hot / humid climate testing ) . a company submitted an unsolicited proposal to the marine corps . second mclist wear test was conducted at camp pendleton ( hot / dry climate testing ) . deadline for submissions to army demonstration program . according to marine corps , no additional materials were accepted after this time . army wear test was conducted at camp pendleton . marine corps rejected the unsolicited proposal . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . jslist phase i testing began with 57 material combinations . jslist memorandum of agreement became effective . jslist phase ii testing began . phase ii testing was completed , and saratoga material was selected . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . the dates of the announcements are shown in table 1 . although these announcements did not specifically cite the mclist program or the army's exploratory development effort , points of contact were named so that industry representatives could obtain further information concerning dod's research and development efforts . participation in the jslist program was limited only to those materials submitted under the mclist or army's demonstrations ; new companies or materials were excluded from entering jslist . dod tested 57 material combinations , submitted by 13 companies , in the jslist program . however , reliance on informal communications — common in a research and development environment — resulted in some companies getting different information about deadlines for material submissions . outside of the research and development programs , a company submitted an unsolicited proposal to the marine corps for an improved chemical defense material . preplanned product improvement program was announced in commerce business daily . john a. carter william t. woods the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . dod provided industry adequate notice of the government's interest in improved chemical defense garment materials and sufficient opportunity to participate in the programs . these efforts involved foreign as well as domestic suppliers . officials from the army's natick research , development , and engineering center , which managed mclist for the marine corps , told us that they traveled worldwide to locate promising technologies . second , ongoing exploratory development projects at natick identified technologies that were subsequently included in the demonstration programs . marine corps officials told us that they directed certain new and promising materials from these projects into the mclist demonstration program .