this approach should enhance readiness . also , if existing state emergency management training structures were used , the training could be institutionalized statewide and ensure the training is sustained over the longer term . dod noted that conducting threat and risk assessments would negatively affect cities' readiness . however , as discussed in our april 1998 report , it would take only about 2 weeks per city to conduct a threat and risk assessment and determine a prudent and affordable level of response capability . dod further said that sufficient data is not available to conduct threat and risk assessments , there is no credible pre - attack predictor , and the fbi has not identified a specific wmd threat . as discussed in our april 1998 report , perfect intelligence data or pre - attack predictors are not needed to perform a sound qualitative threat and risk assessment , although threat information would be one factor to consider . our prior report showed that a multidisciplinary risk assessment team would use the best available intelligence information to generate valid scenarios to perform the risk assessment process . dod also stated that the threat and risk methodology described in the report is intended for point targets with controlled perimeters and internal traffic , not for area targets such as cities with virtually no control over entry , exit , or internal traffic . the model highlighted in our april 1998 report has diverse applications and is not limited to point defense applications . additionally , the president's commission on critical infrastructure protection recommended that threat and risk assessments be performed on such nonpoint targets as the telecommunications and banking and finance infrastructures . a rational , businesslike , collaborative assessment by city , state , and federal representatives can help determine the appropriate minimum requirements for preparedness , given the threats , risks , and vulnerabilities for that city . in our view , such assessments are conducive to preparedness and awareness . assessments can enhance preparedness by helping decisionmakers prioritize and target investments of federal and local resources . moreover , in nearly every city we visited , local officials told us they would welcome such an assessment because they currently have no sound basis for determining their requirements . dod stated that it does not recommend that congress amend the nunn - lugar - domenici legislation to provide greater flexibility for providing equipment to local jurisdictions as it intends to transfer the program lead to another agency — the department of justice — as soon as possible . as stated in our report , dod's equipment loan agreement terms have caused frustration and confusion among local officials . as a practical matter , because the loan agreement terms are not likely to be fully implemented , we question the benefits of using this type of instrument for providing equipment . regardless of which agency leads the program to completion , the program would benefit from a more practical , less confusing arrangement for providing equipment to local jurisdictions .