( see fig . in commenting on a draft of this report , the u.s. agency for international development pointed out that congress has also mandated a substantial role for the agency in identifying potential environmental and social problems associated with projects being prepared for consideration by the banks' boards of executive directors . the agency's written comments , reproduced in appendix iii , provide details on the legal provisions in question and the efforts that the agency has undertaken in response . the pelosi amendment sought to bring u.s. influence to bear in favor of effective implementation of such policies by barring u.s. executive directors from voting in favor of certain proposed actions . u.s. executive directors were called upon to refrain from supporting projects that would have significant impacts on the environment unless project sponsors had prepared ea reports and made the reports — or summaries thereof — available for review by affected groups and local ngos , as well as bank staff and executive directors , for at least 120 days before the executive directors vote on the proposed actions . it also required the secretary of the treasury , in his role as leader of the u.s. government's interagency process for reviewing proposed loans , to take public comments on environmental matters into consideration in determining the position that the united states should take on proposed loans . in november 1997 , congress amended the international financial institutions act to make clear that the secretary of the treasury should regard the pelosi amendment as applying to u.s. participation in the international finance corporation — a member of the world bank group that works exclusively with private sector partners — as well as to u.s. participation in the banks' lending programs for developing country governments . the amendment also instructed u.s. executive directors to “strongly encourage” systematic consultation with local communities on proposed loans . in response to a request from representatives nancy pelosi and barney frank , we reviewed the multilateral development banks' record in ensuring that meaningful public consultation takes place on the projects they support . our specific objectives were to describe the steps the banks have taken to ensure meaningful public consultation on the environmental implications of proposed projects and timely public access to project documents ; evaluate the quality of consultation that occurs on bank - supported projects and the documentation on the consultation that is provided to executive directors ; and determine the extent to which the banks provide broad , timely public access to project information on proposed projects , including environmental assessment reports . we also sought to identify factors that help to account for differences in the quality of the consultation practices employed in different types of projects . our study included the world bank , the inter - american and asian development banks , and the international finance corporation.together , these four institutions receive approximately 90 percent of the amounts that congress annually appropriates for the support of the multilateral development banks . as an agency of the united states , we have no direct authority to review the operations of the multilateral development banks .