v ) . dod noted that the army has already planned some actions to resolve issues we identified . for example , dod stated the army is closely scrutinizing its model inputs for taa 2005 , beginning with a rigorous review of all 3,000 allocation rules , and major studies to review fuel consumption factors and casualty rates . the army also plans to analyze the impact of multiple ootws on support requirements and agreed that the current assumption that all units involved in ootws will be immediately available for the war fight is flawed and overly optimistic . the army also plans to conduct other sensitivity analyses and excursions in taa 2005 , beyond those required by defense guidance . further , the army will rerun taa models with the required force to provide the force flow data needed to improve its analysis of risk . however , dod only partially concurred with our recommendation to consider other personnel resources in filling its support force requirements . the army plans to consider some types of army national guard division assets to fill support force shortfalls where the capabilities are nearly a match , such as aviation assets . osd used the 1995 dod war game nimble dancer to evaluate the reasonableness of the army toe requirements . by comparing the nimble dancer army force level requirement of 457,000 toe spaces to the taa 2003 army - generated war fight requirement of 672,000 toe spaces ( 195,000 combat and 477,000 support forces ) , osd identified a potential overstatement of 215,000 spaces . after adjusting for different assumptions used in taa 2003 and nimble dancer , osd concluded that the army taa 2003 requirements were high . while there may be insights to be gained by analyzing some aspects of the nimble dancer war game , we believe comparing the army's taa 2003 force requirements against the nimble dancer force is problematic . in nimble dancer , dod identified the availability of sufficient support forces as critical to the outcome of the conflict and determined that shortages could delay the start of the counterattack in the second mrc . however , as we noted in our june 1996 report on nimble dancer , dod did not model or analyze in detail the sufficiency of support forces during the war game . for purposes of its baseline modeling , dod assumed that support forces would accompany combat units when they deployed . game participants held discussions concerning the impact of support force shortfalls , but deferred further analysis to the army's taa 2003 . the 457,000 spaces osd used as a baseline for comparison to taa 2003 was a notional army force based on taa 2001 and its purpose was to assess mobility , not end strength , requirements . only the combat forces were played in the war game itself . given the limited consideration given to support forces in nimble dancer , we do not believe comparisons with army taa 2003 are meaningful . although osd asserts that army support requirements are high , it endorsed the concept of converting reserve positions from combat to support to fill the army's unmet requirements .