the other services did not . the air force , the army , and the navy reported on officers who had been separated involuntarily . but the army did not separately report officers who had been separated under other than honorable conditions or for bad conduct . the marine corps did not report any separation data for officers . the air force , the army , and the navy provided enlisted and officer assignment data by race and gender . the marine corps combined into one figure its data on selections to career - enhancing assignments for its o - 2 through o - 6 officers for each racial and gender category and did not provide any information on its enlisted members . the air force , the marine corps , and the navy reported discrimination or sexual harassment complaints by race and gender . the army did not identify complainants by race and gender . the army reported utilization of skills data by each racial category and for women . the air force reported skills data for blacks , hispanics , and women . the marine corps and the navy combined the racial categories into one figure for each skill reported and did not report on women . the air force and the army included officers in their reports on discipline . the marine corps and the navy did not . two important factors in analyzing the progression of minorities and women in the services are how competitive they are for promotions and whether they are leaving the services at disproportionate rates . these factors have been of concern in the officer ranks . in march 1994 , the secretary of defense directed that a study of the officer “pipeline” be conducted . this study is still underway but is addressing ways to improve the flow of minorities and women through the officer ranks . although dod's meoa guidance requires reporting on promotions and separations , it does not require the services to report racial and gender data for all promotions or voluntary separations . the guidance requires the services to report racial and gender data in their meoas for promotions that result from a centralized servicewide selection process . for enlisted members , this includes promotions to e - 7 , e - 8 , and e - 9 ; for officers , this includes promotions to o - 4 , o - 5 , and o - 6 . for the most part , promotions at the lower ranks are not routinely assessed . as of the end of june 1995 , dasd ( eo ) had not provided its 1993 meoa analyses to the services , and the 1994 meoas have not been completed by all the services . to identify possible disparities , we analyzed three meoa categories — accessions , assignments , and promotions — for fiscal years 1989 through 1993 . we compared each minority group — american indian , asian , black , and hispanic — to the dominant white group and compared females to males . the analytical approach we used is one of several methods for analyzing and identifying trends in equal opportunity data .