we disagree that the informal approach has been effective . the recurring deficiencies at the combat training centers indicate that the problems identified by the center for army lessons learned are not systematically resolved . even when the combined arms command has issued a plan to correct specific problems — such as the 1989 plan to correct fratricide - related problems — the command has no assurances that the plan has been implemented . according to officials at the center for army lessons learned , it took the gulf war to prompt the army into developing and implementing a revised fratricide action plan . moreover , the reliance on an informal approach to correct training and doctrine deficiencies is not compatible with the army's practice of periodically rotating military personnel assigned to tradoc . as a result of personnel turnover , we found that there was little institutional knowledge among tradoc officials on either the use made of lessons learned information or the progress made to minimize recurring deficiencies . for example , engineer school officials had little knowledge about specific actions taken to address deficiencies involving battlefield supply procedures and the construction of fortifications . moreover , it took these officials several days to locate a copy of the original action plan . we recommend that the secretary of the army direct the commander , tradoc , to establish a system for placing priorities on the problems identified at the combat training centers . a starting point for this effort may be the new priority issue list being formulated by the center for army lessons learned . we further recommend that the secretary of the army direct the commander , tradoc , to establish procedures for tracking the schools' use of lessons learned and for holding the schools accountable for resolving the identified problems . the department of defense agreed with our findings and recommendations . it said that while the lessons learned program had provided important information to the army , improvements could be made . in response to our recommendations , the department said that army headquarters will provide guidance to tradoc regarding the interpretation of and compliance with army regulation 11-33 . more specifically , it said that the guidance would direct tradoc to establish ( 1 ) a system to assign priorities to the problems identified at the combat training centers and ( 2 ) procedures for tracking lessons learned and assigning accountability for problem resolution . we believe that effective implementation of these initiatives should significantly improve the lessons learned program . to accomplish our objectives , we reviewed army regulations related to the lessons learned program , as well as directives from the tradoc headquarters . we also reviewed information on recurring deficiencies developed by the center for army lessons learned , priority issue lists of problem areas , plans for addressing deficiencies , and other pertinent documents . we interviewed army officials responsible for the management of the lessons learned program at the center for army lessons learned , the combined arms command , and tradoc . we also obtained the views of army officials who have oversight of the program .