this is exactly what dod has attempted to do . dod has historically borne a disproportionately large share of claims costs . increasing carrier liability would transfer a greater portion of the costs associated with damaged and lost household goods to the industry responsible for the problem . even under increased liability , dod would still be paying at least 20 percent of claims costs . the carrier industry further stated that carriers should be allowed to settle claims for loss and damage directly with servicemembers . they noted that it is common commercial practice for the carrier to settle claims directly with the shipper , and that dod claims settlement is too generous . making timely adjustments to transportation rates will be even more important to carriers under increased carrier liability . nearly all the carriers we visited said the statute needed to be shortened to a year or less . they told us that by contrast , claims on commercial shipments must be filed within 9 months of shipment delivery . dod claims officials generally acknowledged that claims requiring more than 1 year to file usually involved servicemember procrastination . we analyzed army and air force claims data for fiscal years 1988 through 1991 to determine the average amount of time required between shipment delivery and the filing of claims . we found that in each fiscal year , more than 60 percent of all claims filed were filed within 6 months of shipment delivery , and over 80 percent within 1 year of shipment delivery . for example , table 4.1 shows the amount of time in months between shipment delivery and claims filing for combined domestic and international household goods claims for the air force , army , and marine corps in fiscal year 1991 . dod officials told us that the 2-year statute of limitations encourages some servicemembers to take longer than necessary to file their claims . this tends to increase the already long gaps between the time household goods shipments occur and the time claims data for evaluating costs and carrier performance is available . claims processing and recovery by the military services often takes an additional 5 months or longer . both dod claims officials and carriers told us that long delays in filing household goods claims can result in claims settlement or recovery problems . unnecessary delays in filing claims also exacerbate carriers' problems in obtaining the claims recovery cost information they need to adjust their rates in a timely fashion . mtmc requires household goods carriers to bid on transportation rates for contracts to transport dod household goods shipments 6 months prior to the beginning of the 6-month period these rates will be in effect . increased carrier liability is resulting in increased carrier costs and consequently a greater need for timely adjustment of rates . as discussed in our 1989 report , delays in filing household goods claims increase government costs . late - filed claims are generally more difficult to process and consequently increase administrative costs . dod also cannot conduct recovery activities and reuse the funds thus obtained until servicemember claims are filed and processed .