mexico has made some efforts in counternarcotics . for example , mexican military personnel have increased their participation in combating illicit drugs and destroying illegal airfields . the mexican army has traditionally been involved in the manual eradication of illicit drug crops . during 1995 , the mexican government reported that more than 7,000 soldiers worked full time on drug eradication programs and , during peak growing seasons , the number of soldiers working on these programs grew to 11,000 . army personnel are assigned to remote growing areas for short - term ( 90-day ) tours during which they manually cut down , uproot , and burn opium poppy and marijuana plants and patrol rural areas to halt the transportation of these and other illicit drugs . according to the department of state , mexican personnel effectively eradicated 29,000 acres of marijuana and almost 21,000 acres of opium poppy during 1995 . as a further indication of increasing the role of the military , president zedillo directed the mexican air force to use its f - 5 fighter aircraft to assist the attorney general's office in air interdiction efforts in 1995 . however , assigning the aircraft to an interdiction mission may not have an immediate impact because , according to u.s. officials , deficiencies in the capabilities and maintenance of the f - 5s , as well as poorly trained pilots and mechanics , limit the effectiveness and possibilities of success of the mexican air force in this new mission . the department of state reports that pervasive corruption continues to seriously undermine counternarcotics efforts in mexico . in addition , the administrator of dea testified in march 1996 that mexican drug - trafficking organizations have become so wealthy and powerful that they can rival legitimate governments for influence and control . while drug - related corruption exists on both sides of the border , the department of justice believes that it is more prevalent in mexico than in the united states . after taking office in late 1994 , mexican president zedillo directed the mexican military — widely perceived to be the least corrupt government institution — to expand its involvement in attempting to stop narcotics - related corruption . following an investigation that revealed extensive corruption within the mexican federal judicial police forces in the state of chihuahua , a contingent of mexican army officers and a number of civilian personnel employed by the mexican military were reassigned to replace 60 judicial police personnel in december 1995 . according to mexican officials , the deployment of army personnel is not a short - term quick fix but , rather , a commitment to remain in chihuahua until rampant police corruption is brought under control . despite the efforts that president zedillo has undertaken since late 1994 , u.s. and mexican officials told us that corruption in mexico is still widespread within the government and the private sector . they added that corruption can be found within many government agencies , but it is especially prevalent within law enforcement organizations , including the mexican federal judicial police and other police forces .