we agreed with dod's position . these categories are described in appendix i . approximately 140,000 , or 36 percent , of the active air force personnel are currently categorized as mission forces and 241,000 , or 64 percent , are in infrastructure activities . the secretary of defense wants to reduce and streamline infrastructure to achieve savings to modernize the force . in april 1996 , we reported that operations and maintenance and the military personnel appropriations must be reduced if spending for infrastructure activities is to decline , since they account for 80 percent of infrastructure funding . in fiscal year 1996 , the air force spent about $28 billion of its $73 billion total budget on infrastructure activities . as shown in figure 1.1 , about 83 percent of the air force's direct infrastructure costs are funded by two appropriations — military personnel and operations and maintenance . one of the air force's major initiatives to generate savings for weapons modernization is to study the potential to contract out infrastructure functions . in deciding whether a function can be transferred to contractors , the air force compares the relative cost of using civilian employees and private contractors to perform the same function . dod data on cost comparisons completed between fiscal year 1978 and 1994 indicates that shifting work to contractors has reduced annual operating cost on average by 31 percent . our initial work on another assignment indicates that such savings may not be as high as estimated by dod , but that some savings do result . the air force uses a variety of methods to determine personnel requirements . these processes identify requirements as a function of workload or level of service based on assigned missions . the various methods include air force staffing standards for positions common throughout the air force such as security police ; command staffing standards for functions unique to a particular command such as pilot training ; a computer - generated model for aircraft maintenance positions ; and crew ratios for each type of aircraft in the inventory . the air force does not have total control over the allocation of its personnel . for example , legislation and dod directives establish ceilings on headquarters positions and mandate the number of positions that the air force must fill on the joint staff , and in unified commands and defense agencies . table 1.1 shows the processes the air force uses to develop the number of active military positions required and the number of positions mandated by the office of the secretary of defense ( osd ) and legislation . the requirements for some military positions are determined either by directives or legislation rather than by the air force . for example , the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1996 restricts the secretary of defense from reducing military medical personnel unless dod certifies that the number of people being reduced is excess to current and projected needs and does not increase the cost of services provided under the civilian health and medical program of the uniformed services . also , the goldwater - nichols defense reorganization act of 1986 gave the secretary of defense the authority to determine the number of joint officer positions .