iii ) . concerning our first recommendation , dod agreed that a code assignment sheet may be useful in assigning demilitarization codes and stated that it would work with the military services and the defense logistics agency to determine the feasibility of departmentwide use of the air force , or a similar , worksheet . in response to our second recommendation , dod agreed that , when properly coded by item managers , usable parts that do not have military technology and flight safety implications do not have to be destroyed . dod noted that challenge programs are available if parts are miscoded . these parts originally cost $94,400 . the oklahoma city drmo destroyed the parts because the air force had assigned a demilitarization code that required total destruction to protect military technology . according to the equipment specialist , the air force replaced the parts with a newer version . he said that the parts sent to the drmo , although usable , were no longer needed by the air force . after we pointed out that this was a commercial - type item , the equipment specialist said the assigned demilitarization code was incorrect because the part contained no military technology . he also said the destroyed parts were usable on commercial boeing 707 aircraft in the private sector . as a result , the drmo destroyed parts that the private sector could have purchased . the equipment specialist corrected the demilitarization code . on april 14 , 1997 , the corpus christi drmo destroyed 53 circuit card assemblies ( stock no . 5998013370963 ) used on the uh - 60 helicopter . the parts originally cost $54,392 . the drmo destroyed the parts because the army had assigned a demilitarization code to the parts requiring total destruction to protect military technology . after we questioned if military technology was involved with this part , the army equipment specialist said the assigned demilitarization code was incorrect because the part , although military unique , was nonsignificant and contained no military technology that needed to be protected . as a result , the drmo destroyed parts that the private sector could have purchased . the equipment specialist corrected the demilitarization code . during fiscal year 1996 , the san antonio air logistics center sent six usable support assemblies ( stock no . 2840011932157rw ) used on the c - 130 aircraft engine to the drmo because the parts were no longer needed . the parts originally cost $19,660 . the san antonio drmo destroyed the six parts because the navy had assigned a demilitarization code to the part requiring total destruction to protect military technology . after we pointed out that this was a commercial - type item , the navy equipment specialist said that the assigned demilitarization code was incorrect because the part contained no military technology . he said the destroyed parts were usable on commercial aircraft in the private sector . as a result , the drmo destroyed parts that the private sector could have purchased . the equipment specialist corrected the demilitarization code . the scope and methodology of our work are described in appendix i . the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 , as amended ( 40 u.s.c .