we disagree . the air force's and the navy's lack of supportable criteria has been the long - standing subject of numerous reports and recommendations by others and us for corrective action . based on those reports , the navy has identified the aircraft requirements process as a material weakness and established a time frame for corrective action . in light of new air force aircraft procurements potentially costing over $72 billion , we continue to believe the lack of valid backup aircraft criteria constitutes a material management weakness and reportable under fmfia . dod concurred with our conclusion that the procurement of f - 22 and f / a - 18e / f aircraft should be based on valid criteria . dod partially agreed with our conclusion that unneeded attrition aircraft should be placed in storage . dod , while citing navy policy to store unneeded aircraft to save costs , noted the air force contention that the incremental cost to maintain such aircraft with the active forces is relatively small and these aircraft would be available for emergencies or other temporary needs . however , according to dod , conclusive cost data is not yet available to support the air force's contention . in light of the navy's retention policy , the analysis discussed in this report that compare storage and reconstitution costs against operating costs , and the need to base backup aircraft requirements on quantifiable needs , we continue to believe unneeded aircraft should not be operated and maintained with funds intended to support the authorized forces . dod partially concurred with the recommendation that the secretary of the air force develop supportable and consistent criteria to justify backup aircraft inventories and future procurements , and did not concur with a similarly directed recommendation to report backup fighter / attack aircraft requirements criteria as a material management weakness under fmfia . further , dod partially concurred with the recommendation that the air force and the navy adjust backup aircraft inventories to conform to supportable and consistent criteria . considering the ( 1 ) lengthy history of reports concerning the need to strengthen the backup aircraft requirements determination criteria , ( 2 ) numerous recommendations to strengthen that process , ( 3 ) slow progress in that direction , and ( 4 ) planned procurements of costly f - 22 and f / a - 18e / f aircraft , we are retaining recommendations that identify the known weaknesses , and establish time frames for resolving those weaknesses through the fmfia mechanism . we analyzed directives and other pertinent documents and interviewed agency officials regarding backup aircraft procurement planning criteria , inventory management requirements , and force reduction goals . we documented past findings and recommendations regarding backup inventories and criteria . we documented changes to backup criteria and other actions taken as a result of prior recommendations . using the services' fiscal years 1995 and 1996 programming plans and other service provided aircraft inventory data , we documented and compared reductions in combat and backup aircraft inventories for fiscal years 1993 and 1994 and projected inventories for fiscal years 1995 and 1996 .