2358 to conduct research . other transactions , however , may be used only when other instruments are not appropriate . contracts , grants , cooperative agreements , and other transactions are among the tools dod has to support or acquire research . the instruments are not interchangeable , but rather are to be used according to the nature of the research and the type of government - recipient relationship desired . contracts are procurement instruments and , as such , are governed by the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) and dod procurement regulations . contracts are to be used when the principal purpose of the project is the acquisition of goods and services for the direct benefit of the federal government . in contrast , grants , cooperative agreements , and other transactions are assistance instruments used by dod when the principal purpose is to stimulate or support research and development efforts for more public purposes . assistance instruments are generally not subject to the far or dod procurement regulations , thereby providing dod a considerable degree of flexibility in negotiating terms and conditions with the recipients . between fiscal years 1990 and 1994 , dod cited the authority provided under 10 u.s.c . 2371 to enter into 72 agreements , of which 56 were categorized as other transactions and 16 as cooperative agreements . at time of award , the planned contributions by dod and recipients totaled about $1.5 billion . darpa has been the primary user of the authority , entering into all 56 agreements that were identified as other transactions . to determine the number of cooperative agreements and other transactions dod entered into using the authority of 10 u.s.c . 2371 , we reviewed the annual reports and notifications dod submitted to congress from fiscal years 1990 to 1993 . as the fiscal year 1994 report was not available during our review , we requested information from darpa and the services regarding their fiscal year 1994 usage . we included in our review only those other transactions that were used principally in an assistance - type relationship with commercial firms or consortia for government - sponsored research projects . consequently , we excluded one agreement that was entered into under the authority provided by section 845 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1994 ( p.l . this authority is distinct from agreements entered into under 10 u.s.c . 2371 as it enables darpa to conduct prototype projects that are directly relevant to weapons or weapon systems proposed to be acquired or developed by dod . further , we did not attempt to identify to what extent dod had used the authority of 10 u.s.c . 2371 to enter into other assistance - type relationships , such as in cases where dod loaned equipment to firms to conduct research or in reimbursable arrangements that allow a firm to conduct experiments aboard a government experimental launch vehicle . to characterize the agreements and analyze each participant's financial or technical contributions to the agreement , we reviewed the agreement file , which generally included the agreement , articles of collaboration , the contracting officer's agreement analyses , legal review , funding documentation , and other pertinent information .