( figs . first , commanders may administer a “command climate survey” when they assume a new position , but they have the option of keeping the results confidential . second , the army research institute has administered a “sample survey of military personnel” to army officers and enlisted personnel twice a year since 1943 . what do you plan to do after you leave the service ? do you want to stay in the service ? if given the opportunity , would you like to reenlist ? do you have any other thoughts on your occupation and your time in the service ? if you want to leave , is there anything the service could have done to make you want to stay ? while our interviews with first - term enlistees do not represent a statistical sample , they provided useful insights into enlistees' perceptions of the reasons for attrition . our interviews were intended to solicit any and all thoughts on why enlistees were not completing their first terms and on the advantages and disadvantages of military service . to gain insight into first - term attrition , we interviewed officials in the army's directorate of military personnel management , office of the deputy chief of staff for personnel , washington , d.c. ; the navy's office of the assistant chief of naval personnel for military personnel policy and career progression , bureau of naval personnel , arlington , virginia ; the air force's directorate of military personnel policy , office of the deputy chief of staff , personnel , washington , d.c. ; and the marine corps' manpower plans and policy division , office of the assistant deputy chief of staff for military and reserve affairs , arlington , virginia . we conducted our review between august 1997 and september 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . about one - third of all enlistees who entered the services between fiscal year 1982 and 1993 did not complete their first contract terms . most of these enlistees were separated between their 7th and 48th month of service , when they had been fully trained and were assigned to jobs . our analysis of all enlistees entering the services in fiscal year 1993 showed that these general historical trends continued . however , the rates were slightly higher in the army , the navy , and the air force . dod's attrition rates throughout this period are somewhat higher than reported because they do not include some enlistees who were allowed to separate early for various reasons , such as to attend a civilian school or to allow the services to meet mandated end strengths . dod estimates of fiscal year 1998 costs indicate that by the time enlistees have been recruited and trained , generally within the first 6 months of service , the services have already spent about $35,000 on each one . this figure includes enlistees' pay and allowances , as well as the cost of the services' recruiting and training infrastructure . for enlistees who entered the services in fiscal year 1993 , the cost of recruiting and training was lower , ranging from $19,143 to $24,885 .