ii ) . dod provided a number of comments addressing how the navy has taken significant steps to implement policies and coordination procedures to protect rotational billets from outsourcing considerations and to involve the major commands in the strategic planning process for attaining its future years' outsourcing goals . dod noted , and we concur , that a number of studies included in the navy's initial outsourcing announcement were canceled because a subsequent review revealed that they were not appropriate competition candidates . since then , dod notes that the navy has made progress to widen the scope of its outsourcing program and to involve all claimants ( major commands ) in the planning process . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the navy established ambitious goals for studying military and civilian personnel positions for potential outsourcing under a - 76 competitions . the navy estimates that about 10,000 of these positions will be military billets and the remaining 70,500 will be positions currently occupied by civilians . ( see table 3. ) because the funding for the navy's military billets is eliminated from the personnel budget when the billets are announced for study , the funding for all military billets approved for competition will be deleted from the navy's personnel budget by the year 2003 . moreover , both services rely , to varying extent , on contractor personnel to perform base support type functions . the navy , on the other hand , operates forward - deployed forces from its ships and requires military personnel to perform virtually all of its support services that might be done by civilians were the navy operating from land bases . therefore , the focus of the review was on the navy . we met with officials from the office of the secretary of defense , the army , the air force , and the navy regarding their policies for considering rotational and career development requirements in outsourcing decisions . we obtained policies related to outsourcing and rotational billets , memorandums of agreements , and procedures for identifying a - 76 study candidates . we also met with officials from the army training and doctrine command at fort monroe , virginia ; the air force air combat command at langley air force base , virginia ; and the navy commander in chief , atlantic fleet in norfolk , virginia ; to discuss their policies and procedures for identifying and protecting rotational billets from outsourcing considerations .