agency did not respond . agency not sent a data collection instrument . corrected data provided by agency . interior did not have data from the defense gateway to report for october - december . data not verified by agency . corrected data provided by agency . john a. carter the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . according to the director for dod ec , as of december 5 , 1996 , dod has not issued policy guidance on the use of faxes pertaining to facnet solicitations . we asked ec program managers and comparable agency officials at dod , its 4 major buying activities , and 17 federal civilian agencies to give us information and observations on facnet implementation . officials from 18 agencies responded . they acknowledge that the kind of program management and reporting described above has not been developed and is needed . gsa stated that there have been leadership challenges in the implementation of facnet as well as technical and procedural problems with the use of edi for public requests for quotation . however , they observed that ad hoc funding and staffing of the eca - pmo from executive agencies has hampered effective program management efforts . the administrator told us he had concluded by the summer of 1995 , on the basis of discussions with frontline contracting officials , that there were extensive and persistent problems with facnet implementation . he said that over time he became convinced that ( 1 ) facnet's basic concept ( discussed in the previous section ) was not sound and needed to be revisited and ( 2 ) improved program management would not remedy this fundamental problem . he added that there was not , and still is not , a consensus among agencies' senior procurement executives that these problems were so fundamental that a major redirection of facnet was needed . the shortcomings in governmentwide management of the facnet program have left important issues unresolved . for example , no convincing business case has been made for governmentwide reliance on the current facnet infrastructure . similarly , the lack of resolution of questions concerning the ccr database has impeded its implementation .