1 and app . because nws earle is located in the southern most part of the northeast region , these officials stated that there would likely be a greater reliance on travel by air than by car where several persons could travel together at less cost . our review of factors such as office space , housing , and conference / training facilities at the sites we visited shows that nws earle has the least existing infrastructure to support the new command's requirements . we observed that the available infrastructure at nws earle is primarily suited to support its mission of receiving , storing , and distributing naval ordnance and has limited office , conference , and classroom space . as stated previously , placing the new command at nws earle would require the displacing and relocating of existing command staff and renovating of other space to accommodate their relocation . conversely , at nsb new london , the navy would not incur any major renovation costs beyond the purchase and installation of additional office modular furniture to accommodate the increased number of staff . we observed that the current headquarters building for the regional coordinator staff at nsb new london has sufficient vacant space on the first and third floors to accommodate the proposed expansion . even if the navy decides that the commander , navy region northeast , and the commander , submarine group two , would not occupy the same building , officials at nsb new london identified four other buildings on base that could accommodate the commander , navy region northeast . we also found that the navy facilities and infrastructure at newport would be adequate to support the command without major renovation costs . additionally , nws earle does not have sufficient officer housing quarters available to accommodate an admiral and additional staff officers . the proposed staffing of the new command includes 17 officers , including the commanding officer , whereas the on - base family housing at nws earle includes 38 officer housing units of which only 2 were vacant as of august 1998 because they were being renovated . furthermore , according to officials at nws earle , none of these officer housing units meets the standards for a flag officer . although renovations could be made to improve some officer housing units , officials at nws earle stated that it is more likely the admiral and his senior staff would choose to reside in quarters available to them at the fort monmouth army base , about 6 miles away . this latter option is already the housing of choice for some command staff officers currently stationed at nws earle . conversely , at both nsb new london and newport , there is sufficient housing space to accommodate the proposed command's military staff . we observed that both of these bases have housing areas with sufficient space to accommodate both the numbers and grade levels of the command's military staff . as part of the regional coordination mission involving management and oversight of naval shore activities in the region , the command hosts frequent conferences and training seminars for personnel from other naval installations throughout the region .