app . i contains more information about the wto sps agreement. ) in addition to these rules and principles , the wto and nafta also provided dispute settlement procedures to help resolve disagreements between countries about their sps measures . these procedures include consultations ( discussions ) and review by a dispute settlement panel . before invoking dispute settlement procedures , countries generally try to resolve their disagreements through more informal means . although the sps agreement and nafta have established certain standards for the application of sps measures , disagreements between countries about these measures often involve complex issues not specifically addressed by the texts of the agreements . first , the agreements require measures to be based on scientific principles , but scientific research on certain topics may not exist or existing research may be inconclusive . for example , the lack of sufficient research on certain poultry diseases affects u.s. exports of poultry meat to australia . second , the sps agreement and nafta require measures to be based on an assessment of risk , but governments may have different risk tolerances or may disagree about how to ensure certain minimal levels of risk . such a disagreement exists between the united states and china concerning wheat imports . finally , because of domestic pressures or larger outstanding trade or political issues , governments may be unwilling or unable to change their sps measures . an eu ban in place since the mid - 1980s that prohibits importing meat treated with growth - promoting hormones appears to be linked , in part , to such issues . moreover , in attempting to resolve such concerns , the u.s. government may not fully understand a foreign government's reasons for establishing a measure and therefore may have difficulty determining what strategy will be most effective to resolve the issue or assessing whether its efforts are having any impact . if additional research is required , such research can be time consuming to complete . finally , the government must work closely with industry officials to determine whether they are willing to perform any risk - mitigation techniques that the foreign government may request . in some cases , although the government may not believe such techniques are necessary , industry officials may be willing to perform risk mitigation in order to gain access to a new market . because of such issues , addressing and seeking resolution to foreign sps measures can be a long and complex process that requires substantial negotiation between the united states and foreign governments . the united states has had long - standing concerns about several foreign sps measures that the new wto rules on sps measures have helped resolve . for example , on june 30 , 1997 , a wto dispute settlement panel requested by the united states found that the eu hormone ban does not conform with a number of provisions in the wto sps agreement . while this represents a significant achievement for the united states , the matter is not yet resolved because the eu has filed an appeal regarding the decision .