the process is complicated . the majority of employee housing overseas is provided by state through short - term lease arrangements with local landlords . other employees either receive housing allowances and enter into private lease arrangements or occupy government - owned housing . most of state's overseas posts are “furnished posts,” meaning that government - owned residential furniture is provided for state employees and those of other agencies participating in posts' furniture programs . furniture is typically procured in the united states and shipped to overseas posts . however , at about 25 posts , employees' household effects are shipped to meet most furniture requirements . employees are also authorized limited shipments of their household effects to furnished posts . the residential leased housing and furniture process is also costly . for example , state's direct costs include about $120 million annually for residential leases and about $36 million annually to ship employees' household effects . in addition , state and other agencies spent about $12 million in fiscal year 1996 to purchase government residential furniture and according to 1997 data , spent more than $10 million annually to rent warehouses used to store residential furniture and other government property . the support costs associated with the process are more difficult to quantify , but according to state documents they total well over $30 million annually for a variety of overseas support and administrative functions . in addition , state and other agencies maintain more than 300 overseas warehouses to store furniture and other items , and the value of state's furniture inventory alone has been estimated to exceed $100 million . while state is reengineering its logistics process to reduce costs and eliminate inefficiencies , it has not initiated actions to streamline its employee relocation process . however , state and other agencies operating overseas are now implementing the new international cooperative administrative support services ( icass ) system , which offers for the first time the opportunity for agencies to document the total costs of their current support processes and develop less costly and innovative alternatives . many u.s. companies also have substantial investments in overseas operations and spend considerable sums to support their overseas expatriate employees . according to a study by a private consulting firm , corporations have about 250,000 u.s. - based expatriate employees overseas . similar to state , these companies each share a common goal of providing employees and their families with safe and suitable housing at a reasonable price . to improve the efficiency of their operations and reduce costs , u.s. corporations are focusing on core business processes and increasingly contracting with outside service providers to help employees find a residence and typically use one instead of many commercial forwarders to ship employees' household effects . state's leased housing and furniture processes are very cumbersome and inefficient and result in unnecessarily high costs due to a combination of factors . state performs most housing support functions in - house involving several layers of management and oversight to monitor and enforce compliance with housing standards and numerous regulations . the system for furnishing housing is equally complicated and costly because of its long - cycle times , several handoffs , substantial inventories , and large numbers of in - house support staff requirements .