( app . i shows the same information by service and the defense agencies. ) as table 1.1 also shows , both military and civilian personnel end strengths have declined since 1987 , when dod was at its peak strength . based on its fiscal year 1995 budget , dod estimates that , by 1999 , it will achieve a 33-percent reduction in its military end strength and a 30-percent reduction in civilian end strength since 1987 . while most civilians support the military forces both at home and abroad in peacetime and at home during times of war , some civilians historically have deployed with and supported the military forces within theaters of operations . as far back as the american revolution , civilians served as wagoneers and drivers to tow artillery and move supplies . for example , the army issued an extensive annex to the army mobilization and operations planning and execution system and revised its civilian mobilization planning regulations . the army materiel command has published a guide for deploying and processing its civilians . the guide addresses the key problems identified during the gulf war . dod officials indicate that they would like to use the army's deployment guide as a prototype for the other services . some problems identified during the gulf war are only partially solvable by dod and will require coordinated action with other agencies . for example , dod officials acknowledge that civilians should be entitled to danger pay when serving in hostile areas ; however , specific designation of foreign areas subject to danger pay requires a formal determination by the secretary of state . the army's civilian deployment guide outlines how such pay is to be provided and its relationship to other pay and allowances . similarly , rules governing overtime pay limits are controlled by the office of personnel management . waivers to the pay caps may be granted by the office of personnel management when appropriate forms are completed by the civilian employees . according to dod and service civilian mobilization officials , steps will be taken during future civilian deployment processing to ensure that dod employees are aware of the forms and waiver request procedures . the above actions are oriented to dod civilians , not civilian contractor personnel . some officials said they believe contractor companies should be responsible for ensuring that their employees are ready for potential deployment , as well as caring for them while in - theater . these officials believe , however , that dod should be responsible for ensuring the noncombatant status of civilian contractor personnel by issuing them geneva convention identity cards . dod and the services have not fully integrated into their wartime planning systems requirements for essential wartime support that civilian employees and contractor personnel will perform in - theater during future conflicts . such planning includes identifying civilian personnel requirements , designating emergency - essential employees , and ensuring the availability of contractor personnel for potential deployments . officials in dod , jcs , and service contingency planning offices acknowledge the importance of dod civilian employees and civilian contractor support to war - fighting efforts .