also , the u.s.s . john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) will remain in the active fleet for a total of 50 years , 7 years longer than projected in the bur option . the plan requires that the u.s.s . john f. kennedy ( cv - 67 ) remain in the active fleet 5 years longer than currently planned.this longer service life may be feasible for the ship in its new role as the reserve / training carrier because it will have a reduced tempo of operations , resulting in a reduced amount of “wear and tear.” this option maintains the workforce at nns above the 10,000-employee level throughout fiscal years 1995-2035 . the shipyard maintains a very stable employment level after fiscal year 2006 — the workforce fluctuates between approximately 15,000 and 20,000 employees in fiscal years 2006-7 , with only one significant drop in employment in fiscal year 2015 . we have not verified this data . our upcoming review will examine in greater detail the life - cycle costs of nuclear and conventional carriers , considering the incremental fuel - driven demand of conventional carriers for additional logistics support ships . the objective of the bur strategy is to maintain a 12-carrier force , maintain the industrial base at nns , avoid cost increases associated with a delay in construction , and preserve carrier force size flexibility . under the bur , the navy would purchase cvn - 76 in fiscal year 1995 consistent with a sustaining rate strategy but would shift to a replacement rate strategy beginning with cvn - 77 . the navy's recapitalization plan transfers resources from the navy's infrastructure and savings from a smaller fleet to fund the navy's protected major procurement accounts , including the carrier program , in order to maintain the bur force structure and / or critical industrial capabilities . under the navy's recapitalization strategy , the navy would buy cvn - 76 in fiscal year 1995 but would defer cvn - 77 until fiscal year 2002 and then shift to a sustaining rate strategy of one carrier every 4 years . the bur and the navy's recapitalization plan were analyzed to determine the effects of their strategies on the carrier force structure , financial investment requirements , and the newport news shipbuilding total employment level . in addition , we analyzed eight alternatives for structuring a 12-carrier force to achieve one of the following objectives: 1 . maximize budgetary savings through a carrier replacement rate strategy . this approach maximizes the carriers' useful service lives and builds new carriers when actually needed to sustain force levels . ( see the analysis and discussion of alternatives 1a and 1b. ) maximize the stability of newport news shipbuilding ( nns ) employment through a sustained rate construction and refueling / complex overhaul program . this approach requires forgoing useful service life by accelerating inactivations to maintain a sustained rate production program . ( see the analysis and discussion of alternatives 2a and 2b. ) optimize budgetary savings and employment level stability . this approach optimizes the service lives of nuclear carriers and provides a stable employment base . ( see the analysis and discussion of alternative 3. )