baltimore , md . quonset , r.i. channel island ang sta , calif. reno , nev. peoria , ill. little rock , ark . selfridge , mich. schenectady , n.y. nashville , tenn. charleston , w.va. louisville , ky. minneapolis / st . what is the mission of the current and planned c - 130 fleet ? what are the c - 130 requirements for the air national guard and air force reserve ? what is the c - 130 procurement history in the guard and reserve units ? what are the air force plans for retiring excess c - 130s in the master stationing plan ( msp ) ? is the air force's process for retiring c - 130 aircraft when replacement aircraft become available effective ? what is the air force c - 130j requirement and what other alternatives were considered ? what is the c - 130j logistics support funding shortfall ? the c - 130 hercules aircraft is a medium - range , tactical airlift aircraft designed primarily for transporting personnel and cargo . the aircraft was originally flown in 1954 and has been under continuous production ever since . the air force currently has approximately 700 c - 130s of various configurations in its current c - 130e and h fleet . the average age of the active duty c - 130 fleet is over 25 years old , while the average age of the guard and reserve c - 130s is about 15 years old . see appendix i for an illustration of the c - 130j aircraft , along with the contractor's comparison of the capabilities for the c - 130e , h , and j . at the time of our review , 23 air force c - 130js were on contract , with delivery of the first aircraft initially scheduled for december 1997 . the schedule has slipped , however , and delivery of the first aircraft is now scheduled for october 1998 . the schedule has been delayed due to technical problems and the pending faa certification . the following sections provide the answers to each of your specific questions . our scope and methodology for obtaining this information are discussed in appendix ii . the current c - 130 fleet is comprised of 12 different variants and the missions vary with each variant . while most of the current fleet is comprised of combat delivery aircraft , many of the c - 130 variants perform specialized missions . the combat delivery c - 130 fleet , designated as c - 130es and c - 130hs , is used in a wide variety of wartime and peacetime missions . in wartime , the c - 130 combat delivery aircraft primarily performs the intratheater portion of the airlift mission , leaving the long - range intertheater transport mission to larger aircraft such as the c - 5 and c - 17 . these c - 130s primarily provide rapid transportation of personnel or cargo for delivery by parachute to a designated drop zone , or by landing at austere locations within the conflict area . these aircraft are also the primary aeromedical evacuation aircraft in a conflict .