enterprise . at these locations we discussed with supply , maintenance , and aircraft squadron personnel , the operations of the current logistics system , customer satisfaction , and the potential application of private sector logistics practices to their operations . also , we reviewed and analyzed detailed information on inventory levels and usage ; repair times ; supply effectiveness and response times ; and other related logistics performance measures . except where noted , our data reflects inventory valued by the navy at latest acquisition costs . we did not test or otherwise validate the navy's data . to identify leading commercial practices , we used information from our february 1996 report that compared air force logistics practices to those of commercial airlines . this information included an extensive literature search to identify leading inventory management concepts and detailed examinations and discussions of logistics practices used by british airways , united airlines , southwest airlines , american airlines , federal express , boeing , and tri - star aerospace . we also participated in roundtables and symposiums with recognized leaders in the logistics field to obtain information on how companies are applying integrated approaches to their logistics operations and establishing supplier partnerships to eliminate unnecessary functions and reduce costs . finally , to gain a better understanding on how companies are making breakthroughs in logistics operations , we attended and participated in the council of logistics management's annual conference in san diego , california . we did not independently verify the accuracy of logistics costs and performance measures provided by private sector organizations . we conducted our review from june 1995 to april 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of defense and the navy ; the directors of dla and the office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . charles i . ( bud ) patton , jr. kenneth r. knouse , jr . best management practices: reengineering the air force's logistics system can yield substantial savings ( gao / nsiad - 96-5 , feb. 21 , 1996 ) . inventory management: dod can build on progress in using best practices to achieve substantial savings ( gao / nsiad - 95-142 , aug. 4 , 1995 ) . commercial practices: dod could reduce electronics inventories by using private sector techniques ( gao / nsiad - 94-110 , june 29 , 1994 ) . commercial practices: leading - edge practices can help dod better manage clothing and textile stocks ( gao / nsiad - 94-64 , apr . commercial practices: dod could save millions by reducing maintenance and repair inventories ( gao / nsiad - 93-155 , june 7 , 1993 ) . dod food inventory: using private sector practices can reduce costs and eliminate problems ( gao / nsiad - 93-110 , june 4 , 1993 ) .