furthermore , we question some of dod's assumptions . as discussed in chapter 3 , war - fighting commands are analyzing the two - conflict strategy using a different scenario and deployment concept from those outlined in the defense planning guidance . they , too , are examining dual - tasking , including how many and what type of assets would need to shift and at what point in the conflict such a shift could reasonably occur . until this analysis is completed , currently projected for sometime in 1995 , and its results are reconciled with ongoing air force and dod studies , the specific requirements for dual - tasking will not be known . according to the bottom - up review , the illustrative planning scenarios that dod used in determining force and strategy options for regional conflicts assumed that a well - armed regional power would initiate aggression thousands of miles from the united states . on short notice , u.s. forces from other areas would be rapidly deployed to the area and enter the battle as quickly as possible . because dod assumed that most of these forces would not be in the region when hostilities begin , it emphasized that sufficient strategic mobility — airlift , sealift , and prepositioning of equipment at forward locations — would be needed to successfully execute the two - conflict strategy . the bottom - up review called for specific enhancements to dod's existing strategic mobility capability — most of which dod had identified in its 1991 mobility requirements study . this congressionally required study determined future requirements for airlift , sealift , and prepositioning and recommended a program to improve dod's mobility capability . in conducting the study , dod analyzed various scenarios involving single regional conflicts and a scenario involving two concurrent conflicts . based on the requirements for the single conflict scenario deemed to be most demanding , the study recommended increasing sealift capacity for prepositioned equipment and rapid deployment of heavy army divisions and other u.s. forces by ( 1 ) acquiring — through new construction and conversion — additional capacity equal to 20 large , medium - speed , roll - on / roll - off ships ; ( 2 ) leasing two container ships ; ( 3 ) expanding the ready reserve force from 96 to 142 ships ( an increase of 46 ships ) ; and ( 4 ) increasing the overall readiness of the ready reserve force ; increasing u.s. capability to respond within the first few weeks of a regional conflict by prepositioning army combat , support , and port - opening equipment aboard nine of the newly constructed or converted large , medium - speed ships ( by fiscal year 1997 ) ; improving airlift by continuing the c - 17 aircraft program , acquiring up to 120 aircraft ; and improving the capability of the u.s. transportation system to move combat and support units from their peacetime locations to ports of embarkation by , among other things , purchasing 233 additional heavy - lift rail cars and developing an ammunition loading facility on the u.s. west coast .