iv ) . g of p. l. 106-113 ) amended the original expectation regarding privatization to require that broadcast operations to a given country should be phased out when there is clear evidence that democratic rule has been established and that balanced , accurate , and comprehensive news and information is widely available . in line with congressional expectations , radio free europe / radio liberty reduced its budget from $208 million in fiscal year 1994 to approximately $71 million in fiscal year 1996 by taking the following actions . in 1995 , radio free europe / radio liberty relocated its headquarters from munich , germany , to quarters in prague , czech republic , provided by the czech republic as a public service . in conjunction with the move to prague , radio free europe / radio liberty reduced its total staffing by almost 1,200 individuals , or almost 75 percent of its workforce . radio free europe / radio liberty and voice of america officials coordinated their respective broadcast schedules and eliminated over 300 weekly broadcast hours in overlapping and duplicative programming . the polish and czech language services were reconstituted as separate , nonprofit corporations . radio free europe / radio liberty transmission facilities were turned over to the international broadcasting bureau in 1995 in connection with the consolidation of engineering and technical operations under the bureau . prior to this consolidation , radio free europe / radio liberty controlled a network of six transmission stations located in germany , portugal , and spain . the two stations in portugal were closed as a result of the consolidation . international broadcasting bureau officials estimate that the consolidation of engineering and technical operations initially resulted in more than $32 million in annual recurring savings and that current annual savings have grown to more than $50 million . a digital sound recording and editing platform was installed in connection with the move to prague . this technology , under appropriate circumstances , allows one individual to produce a radio broadcast that previously would have required the services of an announcer , a producer , and a sound technician using the analog recording and editing technology that had been used in munich . one radio free europe / radio liberty official noted that approximately 75 percent of the station's output lent itself to the streamlined mode of production enabled by digital technology . the board completed its first annual language service review in january 2000 and plans to use the results of this review to strategically reallocate approximately $4.5 million in program funds across broadcast regions on the basis of priority and impact ratings assigned to each language service . the priority ratings reflected a number of factors , including the language service's contribution to furthering u.s. strategic interests , audience size , and other variables . the language service's impact was based on the mass audience size and the number of “elite” ( that is , government and other influential decisionmakers ) listeners reached . the board plans to use next year's language service review to examine the issue of duplication in program content among the voice of america and surrogate language services . we also found overlap in overseas news - gathering resources among broadcast entities .