air force negotiators did neither . we found that the defense plant representative office had issued recommended rates and factors covering 1998 and 1999 . thus , air force negotiators — using the existing fpra and recommended rates — had rates and factors covering 1993 through 1999 . according to negotiation records , this period accounted for 99 percent of the mlu contract value . furthermore , the $8-million increase to the mlu contract is not due to higher rates and factors for the years beyond the fpra period . rather , the increase is due to increased rates and factors for 1993 through 1997 — the same period covered by the existing fpra . in addition , the mlu contract awarded to northrop grumman for radar systems encountered the same situation as the lockheed martin contract — that is , it extended beyond the period covered by the existing fpra . however , in contrast to the lockheed martin situation , the air force used existing fpra rates and factors to price the radar contract . the contract performance period extended into the year 2002 , while the existing fpra went through only 1996 . northrop grumman proposed and the air force used the existing fpra rates and factors and projected these rates and factors over the remaining contract performance period . northrop grumman proposed and the air force accepted a g&a overhead rate established for pricing foreign military sales contracts rather than a lower domestic rate established for pricing u.s. government contracts . use of the g&a rate for foreign military sales contracts increased the mlu contract price by $1.3 million . northrop grumman officials told us they used the g&a rate for foreign military sales contracts because of the additional costs in doing business with foreign customers . they also stated they were unaware of any requirement to use the same rates applied to u.s. government contracts . they further stated that such a requirement was not made known to the corporation in the air force's request for proposal or subsequent contract award . in commenting on a draft of this report , the air force pointed out that use of the foreign military sales g&a rate was proper on the northrop grumman mlu contract . the air force advised us that the contractor could not use and the air force could not accept the domestic g&a rate for pricing the contract because it would be a misallocation of costs . we agree that the certification was signed in good faith . we also agree that the existing fpra extended only through 1997 and that rates and factors were needed to cover the mlu contract performance period . however , when changing conditions cause rates in an fpra to be no longer valid , defense procurement regulations provide approved methods for dealing with the situation — either withdraw from the rate agreement or obtain a waiver from the head of the contracting activity . the air force also pointed out that use of the foreign military sales g&a rate did not violate the intent or the spirit of the agreement between the u.s. and the european participating governments .