ii ) . both agencies provided specific technical clarifications that we incorporated in the report , as appropriate . we have explicitly recognized the distinction the department of state makes for the purposes of policymaking . however , we note that ( 1 ) landmines are included in the dod definition of uxo and ( 2 ) for the thrust of this report — research and development to advance technology — it is important to stress the similarities between the problems posed by landmines and by other uxo rather than the distinctions . 4.a summary of all u.s. mine clearance programs currently underway was beyond the scope of our work . dod may be able to provide a reasonable summary at this time , but a better summary would likely be possible following the establishment of the multiagency clearinghouse function . 5.the u.s. agency for international development is included in the report as a member of the interagency working group on demining and landmine control . we have also added the agency to our list of u.s. organizations contained in table 2 . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . all of these methods are slow and costly . for example , the navy estimates that it would take $2 billion and 20 years to clear the 28,800-acre hawaiian island of kaho'olawe to achieve a 4-foot depth needed for farming . the services have used the island as a bombing range since 1941 . similarly , we have previously reported that a study of the jefferson proving ground found that current cleanup technologies were not practical for removing the uxo from the installation's 51,000 heavily forested acres . army officials estimated that cleanup estimates for the installation could range from $5 billion to $8 billion . these estimates underscore the current challenge the united states faces in cleaning up millions of acres of its defense sites . the worldwide challenge is even more daunting . generally , more advanced technologies being pursued aim to make the detection of landmines and other uxo quicker , safer , and more cost - effective . they employ sensors that can be operated from remote distances , such as from manned or unmanned ground and air vehicles .