ii ) . the estimated u.s. share chiefly consists of a portion of direct enlargement costs commonly funded through nato's security investment program . dod assumed that the other costs would be borne by the new members and other current member states and concluded that they could afford these costs , although this would be challenging for new members . cbo and rand estimated the cost of incorporating the czech republic , hungary , poland , and slovakia into nato . several efforts have been made to estimate these costs . at the request of congress , the executive branch prepared a study on nato enlargement issues , including cost , which was released in february 1997 . other estimates have been developed by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the rand corporation . in response to your request , we have evaluated the executive branch's estimate . our specific objectives were to ( 1 ) assess the reasonableness of the study's key assumptions , ( 2 ) verify the pricing of individual cost elements and identify the basis for the pricing , ( 3 ) determine whether the estimate's major cost categories and elements should be ascribed to nato enlargement , ( 4 ) identify factors that were not included in the study's cost estimate that could affect enlargement costs , and ( 5 ) compare the executive branch's estimate with the cbo and rand estimates . as agreed with your offices , we did not independently estimate the cost of enlarging nato . nato was established in 1949 to help provide for its members' common defense . the key provision of the treaty in this regard is article v , which states that an attack on one member shall be considered an attack on all members . to meet its military objectives , nato ( 1 ) developed standards to help ensure that its members' forces can operate with one another , ( 2 ) established force requirements for its members , and ( 3 ) agreed to commonly fund the procurement of equipment and facilities needed to accomplish common goals . in 1994 , nato announced that it would invite other european states to join the alliance . twelve central and eastern european nations indicated interest in doing so , and since 1994 , nato and its members have been providing assistance to help these countries prepare for eventual membership . figure 1 shows those nations interested in becoming nato members . in july 1997 , nato invited three of these countries — poland , hungary , and the czech republic — to enter into negotiations to become nato members . dod's estimate for modernization and restructuring of new members' ground forces was also notional and was based on improving 25 percent of the new members' forces . however , it did not include specifics as to what would be done to upgrade the equipment and how much it would cost . ( see app . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . it is nato's goal to have the 16 member states ratify the new members' admission into nato by april 1999 . some analysts indicated that defense spending in some current member states may decline further over the next several years .