kilogram . median lethal dose . milligram . constriction of the pupil of the eye . toxins that exert direct effects on nervous system function . family of chemical compounds that inhibit cholinesterase and can be formulated as pesticides and nerve agents . measures designed to preserve health and prevent the spread of disease . nasal secretions . manifestations of an exposure that are so slight as to be unnoticeable or not demonstrable . microgram . agent that produces vesicles or blisters . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . funding levels for this effort have not been established . dod's current nbc policy and doctrine do not address exposures of u.s. troops to low levels of chemical warfare agents on the battlefield . nbc defense doctrine is focused on ensuring mission accomplishment through the prevention of acute lethal and incapacitating effects of chemical weapons and is not designed to maximize force protection from exposure to clinical and subclinical doses . moreover , dod has no chemical defense research plan to evaluate the potential performance effects of low - level exposures or the implications they may have for force protection . even though research funded by dod and others has demonstrated adverse effects in animal studies , the literature does not adequately address the breadth of potential agents ; the combinations of agents either in isolation or in combination with battlefield contaminants ; the chronic effects ; animal - human extrapolation models ; or the operational implications of the measured adverse impacts . we recommend that the secretary of defense develop an integrated strategy for comprehensively addressing force protection issues resulting from low - level chemical warfare agent exposures .