ii. ) because the average wartime sortie significantly increased , the number of sorties in relation to the number of flying hours was less than planned in the 1992 draft rm&a evaluation plan . we estimate that if the average duration of peacetime and wartime aircraft sorties had not changed , the air force would have needed to fly 90 additional sorties . this represents a 15-percent increase in the number of sorties necessary to maintain the proportional mix of flying hours to aircraft sorties identified in the 1992 draft evaluation plan . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . dod provided no documentation to support its assertion that adjusting the growth curves would have had only minimal impact . moreover , the c - 17 contractor has stressed that the profiles flown during the evaluation must be the same as those used to develop the growth curves . dod acknowledged that the limited wartime surge activities during the rm&a evaluation did not provide a statistical basis for predicting the c - 17's ability to meet its wartime surge rate . dod said we questioned the value of utilization rates in this report , even though in a prior report we had indicated that utilization rates were a useful statistic when comparing aircraft . our point in the prior report was that the value of comparing utilization rates was undermined when dod artificially constrained the utilization rate of one aircraft while using the planned wartime surge utilization rate for another . however , to assure that our position in this report is clear , we have modified the text dealing with utilization rates . simply stated , utilization rate is the number of hours , per aircraft , that a fleet of airplanes is in the air on a given day . it consisted of a 23-day peacetime segment and a 7-day wartime segment . aircraft operations , using 12 aircraft , were conducted at 6 u.s. airfields and 1 overseas base . table 1 shows the number of missions , sorties , and flight hours flown during the evaluation . missions included logistics ( transporting equipment , personnel , and supplies ) ; joint operations ( training with equipment and personnel from the army ) ; and peacetime aircrew training . the wartime logistics missions were designed to simulate long - range movement of equipment , personnel , and supplies to forward operating bases or small austere airfields . peacetime and wartime missions included aerial refueling ; equipment and personnel airdrops ; formation flying ; low - level operations ; and operations into small , austere airfields . the wartime missions ranged from 12.5 to 26 hours , while the peacetime missions ranged from 2 to 20.5 hours . by the end of the evaluation , the c - 17 fleet had logged about 13,000 total operational flying hours since initial squadron operations began in 1993 .