it expects to complete this plan by september 30 , 2000 . knowledge management is a very important component of the panel's recommendations . the panel's intent is that our overseas agencies be able to not only communicate with each other and back to their respective headquarters , but also to obtain and share the information and knowledge that already exists among agencies and around the world , but is currently fragmented and not readily accessible . state is in the process of developing a structured project plan for the lifecycle of its common platform initiative . in doing so , state intends to define user and system requirements ; identify risks and assess technical feasibility ; identify the major work elements that will be accomplished over the life of the project ; analyze costs and benefits ; establish project goals , performance measures , and resources ; assign responsibilities ; and establish milestones . given the risks , complexities , and potential costs involved in the common platform initiative , it is critical that state carefully scope the effort , anticipate and plan for risks , and establish realistic goals and milestones . experience with similar undertakings has shown that poor project planning can cause agencies to pursue overly ambitious schedules , encounter cost overruns , and / or find themselves ill - prepared to manage risks . to date , state has developed high - level preliminary project milestones and decided to pilot a prototype common system , from april through september 2001 , at two posts , mexico city , mexico and new delhi , india . each of the more than 40 agencies involved in foreign affairs has its own unique requirements , priorities , and resource constraints and many are accustomed to developing , acquiring , and maintaining their own systems . it has also decided to follow a methodology for managing the project called managing state projects , which provides a structured process for planning , applying , and controlling funds , personnel , and physical resources to yield maximum benefits during a project life cycle . the methodology focuses on a number of key factors critical to ensuring the success of any large , complex information technology effort , including ( 1 ) clearly defining what users need , ( 2 ) determining what the system will ultimately cost , and ( 3 ) defining how management will monitor and oversee progress , and ensure that the project stays on track . state is already in the process of taking the first step — defining requirements for the overseas common technology platform . system requirements include such things as system functions , communication protocols , interfaces , regulatory requirements , security requirements , and performance characteristics . state officials responsible for managing the development of the common platform effort told us that they have developed high - level preliminary requirements and are in the process of further defining user requirements . given the range and number of agencies and employees involved in foreign affairs , this task will need to be carefully managed .