merchant marine . the $1 billion , 10-year program proposes subsidizing up to 52 u.s. - registered liner ships . one of the program's goals is to provide additional sealift capacity for national emergencies . therefore , this program would help maintain an active pool of u.s. mariners that can provide the necessary crews to operate rrf ships during an emergency . however , the specific number of mariners the program may ultimately provide to rrf vessels is not known . in 1986 , the navy examined crewing alternatives for the rrf and dod sealift ships . one alternative was to expand the existing merchant marine reserve component of the u.s . marad envisioned that the program would be comprised of 6,480 mariners and estimated its cost to be $46 million a year . by 1991 , marad had completed another study that included the concept of a civilian merchant marine reserve . we discussed our analysis with joint chiefs of staff officials . however , because these ships would be engaged in active shipping , some ships would have to first unload cargo and then return to the united states when notified and , therefore , might not be available to help meet dod's surge shipping requirements . another maritime labor union proposal is to develop a designated cadre of volunteers from within the ranks of the unions to be trained and available for surge call - up . this cadre would consist of three times the number of crew members required for rrf ships to account for mariners currently at sea and others not immediately available . dod would set the standards for training , and mariners would receive 2 weeks paid training aboard rrf ships . the cost of training , mariner wages , subsistence , transportation , and ship activity would be provided by dod , according to this proposal . other major contributors are listed in appendix iii . the ready reserve force ( rrf ) is a government - owned , inactive fleet of former commercial ships of various configurations and capabilities that should be ready to sail within 4 , 5 , 10 , or 20 days in response to national emergency sealift requirements . the rrf was organized in 1976 with 30 ships drawn from the 360 ships in the national defense reserve fleet , which was created in 1946 to be able to respond to national emergencies.during fiscal year 1994 , the rrf consisted of 108 ships . for example , according to marad officials during the war activation , one of five similar ships had recently had an engine overhaul , but marad personnel and ship managers were unsure which ship had been repaired . up - to - date inventories of vital components and spare parts were also not available for the aging machinery on the rrf ships , which caused activation delays while some parts had to be manufactured and shipped to the activation sites . after the war , marad implemented automated systems for tracking maintenance , repairs , and spare parts inventories . a maintenance and repair tracking system has been developed by marad officials and contractors , and all repair funding requests must now be supported by deficiencies recorded in this system .