increases currently under review in tradoc . however , additional officers provided under the 1996 legislation may be used for several of these positions . phase rotation of key personnel to limit turbulence . army infantry center conducts quarterly reviews of all officer rotations to help limit turnover . establish safety cells at each of the three training school locations to advise the officers in charge , and assist in daily go / no go decisions on training . brigade personnel named as safety cell members and infantry center is considering requesting additional civilian and military personnel . required by the fiscal year 1996 national defense authorization act . john w. nelson kevin c. handley the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . continue formal command inspection program . all battalions have been inspected , and a senior supervision plan has been instituted , that consists of frequent visits to each training site by brigade chain of command . 3. review complete waterborne procedures . secretary of the army directed a complete review of safety procedures and improvements now scheduled for completion in september 1997 . the army plans to staff the brigade at the 90-percent level by early february 1997 . obtain a brigade medical adviser , communications officer , and air operations officer . conduct nutrition and immunization study . the brigade commander has increased meals provided ranger students from 1-1 / 2 to 2 per day based on army nutritional studies . develop personnel status monitoring system technology for possible use in florida . experimental monitors tested in june 1996 , but no procurement made . procedure for florida training phase is completed . rewrites for brigade and remaining phases are in process . the 6th battalion identified specific lanes from the yellow river through the swamps . the lanes were narrowed and adjusted to avoid hazardous areas . students are no longer allowed to deviate from designated boat drop sites and training lanes . develop a training and certification program for instructors . the ranger training brigade developed a standardized instructor certification program .