additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . fbo's checklists also have some limitations . for example , they do not require area managers to determine if posts conducted annual facilities condition surveys or if the surveys were done consistent with fbo's guidance . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . the misuse of routine maintenance funds is not a new problem . beginning in 1990 , fbo's financial audits determined that several overseas posts had not used routine maintenance and repair funds for intended purposes . similarly , the september 1993 state inspector general report on maintenance and repair programs noted that all eight of the posts included in that assessment had used routine maintenance funds for improper and / or questionable purposes . according to the fbo and inspector general assessments , posts improperly used routine maintenance and repair funds on projects that should have been funded as special projects or minor improvements or from the salaries and expenses appropriation . the inspector general also found that posts used funds for questionable activities in part due to inadequate state guidance . one of the key fbo requirements for a successful ongoing maintenance program is the annual facility condition survey . according to fbo's facility maintenance handbook , the overseas posts should survey all government - owned and long - term leased facilities annually for structural , electrical , and mechanical deficiencies . according to fbo , the surveys are necessary for determining required maintenance and repair work at a post and for allowing management decisions on budget priorities . the failure of overseas posts to properly conduct annual surveys has historically been a problem in the department's maintenance system . in our 1990 report on maintenance management , we reported that none of the 14 posts included in that review had conducted annual property condition surveys . in our 1993 report on administrative issues affecting overseas embassies , we found improvements , but also noted that about 30 percent of the embassies responding to our questionnaire acknowledged that they had not conducted annual condition surveys . recently , we found that there are still some weaknesses in the system for surveying the condition of overseas property . for example , we found that state has kept undeveloped properties in nassau without adequate justification or plans for their use . these properties are: saffron hill , a 1.95-acre vacant lot adjacent to the ambassador's residence , used primarily as an overflow parking lot during official receptions at the residence . the lot was acquired in 1959 at a cost of $32,000 and its current value is not identified in fbo's real estate management system . according to october 1993 post documents , its intended and potential use was unknown .