( above are totals. ) drug treatment ; insecticide spraying to control blackflies . national and international funding commitments are uncertain . the number of reported disease cases is generally less than the number of actual cases . for dracunculiasis , the world bank estimated that the total number of cases in 1996 was 330,000 . dracunculiasis is caused by the parasite dracunculus medinensis , or guinea worm . infection occurs by drinking water contaminated with the intermediate hosts ( water fleas ) of the parasite . once a person is infected , the worm migrates throughout the body , growing to a length of up to 1 meter . about a year after infection , the worm emerges from the body , normally through the foot , causing an intensely painful swelling and blister . perforation of the skin is accompanied by fever , nausea , and vomiting . secondary infections are common and can cause permanent deformity of the joints . although the infection rarely kills , it inflicts intense suffering and sickness for at least several months , and a small percentage of victims may become permanently disabled . the diagnostic tools for dracunculiasis are visual and testimonial . health workers and trained villagers can see the emerging worms or the scars from previous infection and take the testimony of the victim . in endemic countries , the disease typically appears during the agricultural season , with farmers in particular being affected . a united nations children's fund ( unicef ) study of an area in nigeria with 1.6 million people found that rice farmers lost about $20 million a year due to the effects of the disease on their ability to harvest . a world bank study showed an economic rate of return of 29 percent for the eradication program for 1987-98 , acknowledging a conservative assumption of 5 weeks for the average disability period caused by infection . according to the world bank study and a carter center expert on dracunculiasis , the average period of disability is about 8 weeks . dracunculiasis is present in yemen and 16 countries in africa , 10 of which are considered least developed countries . last year , pakistan was the first endemic country to be certified free of dracunculiasis ; india and kenya recently reached zero cases . the number of endemic villages decreased from about 23,000 in 1992 to 9,900 in 1996 ; reported cases during the same period fell from 422,555 to 152,814 , according to the world health organization ( who ) . dracunculiasis eradication has been divided into three major phases — interruption of transmission in endemic countries , surveillance in formerly endemic countries , and certification that countries are free of the disease . because no vaccine or drugs exist to prevent dracunculiasis or to kill the worm inside the body , interrupting transmission of the disease is the basis of eradication . the strategy promoted in endemic countries combines several approaches , including community - based surveillance , case containment measures , and targeted interventions such as provision of safe water , health education , community mobilization , distribution of filters , and treatment of selected water sources .