this was not our intent . we used the term surcharge and the amounts represented by it in each of our examples to show the differences between underlying commercial transportation charges , and the total amounts billed . we recognize , as dod pointed out , that the amount shown as surcharge is for contract negotiation and administration , cargo booking , customs clearance , cargo receipt , automated in - transit visibility systems , port management , and surge and readiness programs . we have modified this report to clarify that point . finally , dod stated that fiscal year 1994 transportation composite rate changes should be included in our rate trend analysis as opposed to using fiscal year 1995 . we acknowledge that had we used fiscal year 1994 as the baseline there would be less of an upward trend in some rates . however , we chose fiscal year 1995 because it was the first year that reflected ustranscom - managed transportation rates . dod stated that using fiscal year 1994 was more appropriate because that was the first year ustranscom submitted rate changes for approval by the dod comptroller and was the first time a unique budget was developed for ustranscom . however , command officials told us that it was not until fiscal year 1995 that ustranscom developed customer rates for defense transportation . accordingly , we chose fiscal year 1995 as the baseline for our rate trend analysis . also , 1995 rates were the basis for the examples comparing contractor charges with customer charges as we reported in february 1996 . we agree that , due to the cyclical nature of rates , the selection of any particular fiscal year as a baseline would likely change the rate trend . in addition , it is important to note that comparing one's rate with another and determining the reasons for the shift in rates is difficult because of the various factors that comprise the rate changes . dod also provided several technical comments , which we incorporated into the text of our report as appropriate . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix iii . to determine the extent to which ustranscom expects to achieve long - term savings in its operating and infrastructure costs , we assessed the savings it reported to congress in december 1996 , including subsequent testimony that reported $780 million , cumulatively , in savings initiatives . we met with officials and obtained briefings and documents from ustranscom on the reported savings initiatives , as well as supplemental information from the component commands — amc , msc , and mtmc . we also analyzed available data on reported productivity savings / cost avoidance initiatives and streamlining initiatives and assessed fiscal year 1993 through fiscal year 1999 twcf budget estimates and submissions . we attempted to trace the savings to the affected budget accounts with the supporting documents and to validate the amount of the savings and their applicability to reducing transportation charges to defense customers . in most cases , ustranscom or the component commands reconstructed information to show how they best recalled having calculated the amount of savings reported . however , supporting documentation was generally insufficient to track and validate the savings to source and budget documents .