the oas / u.n . international civilian mission subsequently provided the unit summary information , and the haitian government provided some case files . by december 1995 , the unit had 20 dossiers . at that time , the unit prioritized the first 18 cases to be investigated and later added the bertin case to the list , bringing the priority cases to 19 . fourteen of these cases occurred before aristide's october 1994 return ; some went back as far as 1988 . as of march 1996 , no investigative work had been accomplished . according to a state department official , the unit had fallen into disuse , and the haitian investigators had been reassigned to other cases . the unit lacked complete documentation on many cases , particularly forensic data , and haitian witnesses are traditionally fearful of providing information to authorities . progress on human rights investigations was slowed after the prime minister resigned in october and the newly elected national assembly confirmed a new prime minister and cabinet . according to senior state department officials , the primary obstacle to the unit's progress was the lack of clear direction and support from the haitian government . they expressed the expectation that president preval would take human rights investigations seriously and have urged him to do so . as of april 22 , 1996 , according to one state department official , the unit's progress had improved significantly in a short period . this official stated that a chief for the unit had been assigned , the prosecuting attorney was working full time with the unit , and the investigators were conducting routine investigative work , such as interviewing witnesses and tracking down vehicle license plates . usaid has acknowledged that the special investigative unit accomplished little before the inauguration of president preval in february , but said that the haitian government has demonstrated a greater commitment to the unit and some progress had been made in investigating the bertin murder case under preval's leadership . the oas / u.n . specifically , aifld pointed to the establishment of the trade union election commission , labor's involvement in the tripartite commission discussing privatization and other issues in haiti , and its claim to have helped register 800,000 people during the spring 1995 registration period as being important accomplishments . aifld officials also said that usaid's decision to allocate funding for short periods reduced program effectiveness . aifld admitted that its june 1995 monitors did not receive observer credentials in time , but stated that they still served in an unidentified capacity . between 1992 and 1994 , the state department granted $29 million to the oas / u.n . international civilian mission in haiti for human rights monitoring . since october 1994 , the mission has conducted related programs in the areas of civic education , administration of justice , and medical services . about $3.7 million was spent for election observation and reporting by the oas electoral observation mission . the oas electoral observation mission brought in outside observers for the elections , but most of its observers were oas / u.n . international civilian mission human rights monitors who were seconded to election observation .