additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . their comments were incorporated in the report where appropriate . the navy is currently exploring these options . by the end of fiscal year 1997 , the navy will have received 10 of the 12 ships and has identified a requirement for 7 of them . our analysis showed that if the navy deactivated three ships — the number of ships on hand by the end of fiscal year 1997 less the identified requirement — it could save about $4.7 million ( $6.9 million total o&m costs less $2.2 million for deactivating the ships ) . therefore , congress may want to consider reducing the navy's o&m request by $4.7 million to encourage the navy to deactivate the unneeded ships . the army's morale , welfare , and recreation ( mwr ) programs are quality - of - life programs that provide a variety of community , soldier , family , recreational , educational , and other support activities . the programs are funded by appropriated funds and / or nonappropriated funds . appropriated fund support for the mwr programs is included in the army's o&m budget request . the army audit agency reported that the army's training and doctrine command could reduce its annual mwr overhead costs by $2.1 million if it would transfer mwr accounting functions to a centralized accounting facility at the red river army depot . the army audit agency also reported that the training and doctrine command was the only major army command in the united states that had not transferred its mwr accounting functions to red river . in february 1996 , the command agreed to transfer its mwr accounting functions to red river army depot . the transfer will save $2.1 million , which will be available to fund other mwr programs . because the fiscal year 1997 budget request does not reflect the transfer of accounting functions , congress could reduce mwr appropriated fund support to the army by $2.1 million and not adversely affect mwr services . this review is one of a series that examines defense budget issues . our review approach consisted of interviews with program and budget officials responsible for managing the programs and / or preparing the budget requests ; reviews and analyses of financial , budget support , and program documents related to the o&m issues being reviewed ; and analysis of prior - year funding levels and obligations to identify trends . in addition , we reviewed our ongoing assignments and recently issued reports as well as recently issued reports of the dod - ig and the service audit agencies to identify issues with o&m ramifications . our review was performed at army , navy , air force , and dod headquarters ; usareur ; forscom ; atlantic and pacific fleets ; and air combat command . our evaluations of the hunter program disclosed numerous deficiencies . in december 1993 , we reported that test results identified deficiencies that could jeopardize the system's ability to meet military requirements .