dod concurred with the report . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix ii . dod also provided technical comments on a draft of this report , which have been incorporated in the report where appropriate . to determine the laboratory's success in effecting changes to dod oversight requirements and reducing oversight costs , and to identify any obstacles to achieving these benefits , we reviewed the laboratory's december 1995 and july 1996 status reports and pertinent supporting documentation . these reports were prepared from data provided by dcaa , dcmc , and contractor participants . the reports' estimated cost reduction figures were generally rough order of magnitude estimates rather than detailed cost estimates . we did not independently verify the basis for or the accuracy of the information . further , we interviewed participants at 7 of the 10 laboratory sites to discuss the projects pursued under the laboratory , the factors affecting the laboratory's progress , and the participants' overall views on the laboratory . the laboratory sites we visited were boeing defense and space group , seattle , washington ; lockheed martin government electronic systems , moorestown , new lockheed martin tactical aircraft systems , fort worth , texas ; loral vought systems , grand prairie , texas ; mcdonnell douglas aerospace , st. louis , missouri ; raytheon electronics systems , bedford , massachusetts ; and texas instruments defense systems & electronics group , dallas , texas . during these visits , we generally met with senior contractor , dcmc , and dcaa officials and reviewed pertinent documents relative to the status of cost reduction activities . further , we obtained the views on selected laboratory projects from four of the services' participating program offices , including the air force's f - 15 , f - 16 , and f - 22 system program offices and the navy's aegis program office . we also discussed various issues concerning the laboratory's progress and the lessons learned from the laboratory with senior officials from the dcmc and dcaa headquarters at fort belvoir , virginia . we also reviewed documentation for the waivers proposed by laboratory participants , including the waiver request , cost / benefit analyses , and dod's final decision memoranda . we conducted our work from march 1996 to december 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the commander , defense contract management command ; and the director , defense contract audit agency . copies will be provided to other interested parties upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . cost deriving from daily interaction of contractor personnel with auditors from the defense contract audit agency and quality inspectors and functional experts from the defense contract management command . requirements for ensuring consistent and equitable allocation of costs and for disclosing accounting practices and contractor interpretation of certain standards . a requirement ( defense federal acquisition regulation supplement part 242.72 ) for certain contractors to establish and maintain a system that accurately forecasts material usage and ensures that costs of all materials are appropriately allocated to specific contracts .