( app . i provides additional information about the contents of the agreement. ) according to state and other administration sources , the agreement to replace north korea's 5-mw ( e ) reactor and the two larger reactors under construction was needed because , unlike light - water reactors , the north korean reactors and related nuclear facilities were particularly well suited to produce nuclear materials . in addition , if the two nuclear reactors had been completed , north korea would have vastly increased the amount of nuclear material in its possession . the united states announced that it would not participate in the third round of u.s. / north korean high - level negotiations scheduled for march 1994 . instead , the united states said it would refer the results of the aborted iaea inspection to the united nations security council for action . iaea indicated , once again , that it could no longer ensure that north korea's nuclear materials were not being diverted for nonpeaceful purposes . the u.s. secretary of defense warned publicly that the united states intended to stop north korea from developing a substantial arsenal of nuclear weapons , even at the cost of another war on the korean peninsula . the united nations security council decided to request that north korea allow iaea to complete its inspections . president clinton ordered the establishment of a senior policy steering group on korea to coordinate all aspects of the u.s. policy on the nuclear issue on the korean peninsula . president clinton publicly offered a “hand of friendship” to north korea if it pledged not to develop nuclear weapons . in a speech to the national press club , the u.s. secretary of defense outlined the two choices available to north korea: continue its nuclear program and face the consequences — including the possibility of war — or drop the program and accept economic aid and normal relations with the united states and its allies . workers began removing the spent fuel from the 5-mw ( e ) reactor in violation of north korea's safeguards agreement with iaea and iaea's previous instructions informing north korea that iaea inspectors would need to sample , segregate , and monitor the fuel rods to preserve evidence of past plutonium production . north korea refused to comply but allowed two inspectors to watch the fuel - removal process . iaea informed north korea that the removal of fuel without proper safeguards constituted “a serious violation” of the safeguards agreement . the united states offered to hold the long - deferred third series of high - level talks to consider the entire range of issues related to the korean peninsula , including the economic , diplomatic , and other benefits that north korea could receive in return for reversing its decision to withdraw from the npt . the talks were conditioned on north korea's willingness to allow iaea to monitor the refueling operation and to safeguard the fuel rods already removed . north korea agreed to meet with iaea inspectors to discuss ways to preserve the fuel rods that north korea was removing from its 5-mw ( e ) reactor in order to permit a future assessment of the reactor's operating history .