we have not been provided any such studies to evaluate . the fact that some aircraft were looked at in past comanche coeas does not address ( 1 ) the thrust of our finding or ( 2 ) the deputy secretary of defense's august 1994 call for the army to develop a program alternative that terminates the comanche . in our opinion , dod's response reflects the approach that has previously prevented the army from fully considering alternatives . the army has established the comanche's projected performance and capabilities as the baseline standard against which all alternative aircraft are judged . we continue to believe that in developing the strategy — especially in today's budget environment , the army should , at least , seriously consider the capabilities of other aircraft to perform the attack and reconnaissance missions called for in the aviation modernization plan . declining budgets mean that the army cannot afford to fund all of its modernization requirements , including aviation modernization . this is not consistent with the views of users we interviewed . although the army's leadership believes that the current strategy will accomplish its modernization objectives , some active unit commanders , pilots , and aviation maintenance personnel at the brigade , battalion , and squadron levels who provide input to the requirements setting process are concerned that the process , and ultimately the resultant modernization strategy , may not have adequately considered lower level recommendations and users' views . some users told us that requirements are often determined by advocates in the process . they also stated that implementation of the strategy will change the operational mix of some units and , therefore , reduce their operational effectiveness . the difficulty in trying to reconstruct the evolution of decisions generated by the requirements determination process is that the principals involved do not document the decisions made . according to dod and army officials , the information exchanged between proponents at different levels of the process that influence decisions is not recorded , but can be significant . as dod said , while the requirements process may consider all concerns , they may not be incorporated in the final decision . active unit helicopter users , the army's aviation center , an army test of scout helicopters , and the warfighting lens analysis , in some instances , support different system procurements and capabilities than what the army's aviation modernization strategy supports . for example , the strategy prescribes using the apache attack helicopter as the scout in the attack battalion ; however , a number of the attack battalion pilots and commanders we interviewed stated they preferred using the kiowa warrior in this role . according to some army personnel , the fact that user's desires and lower level recommendations do not always agree with the army's overall modernization strategy may be partially due to the advocacy driven nature and culture associated with the acquisition process . according to numerous aviation users that we interviewed , they did not need all of the costly capabilities being designed into the comanche to perform their assigned roles .