according to 10 u.s.c . 2400 , low - rate initial production is the minimum quantity needed to ( 1 ) provide weapons for operational test and evaluation , ( 2 ) establish an initial production base for the weapon , and ( 3 ) permit an orderly increase in production before full - rate production begins . with regard to the need for weapons used in operational test and evaluation , thaad equipment produced during low - rate initial production is currently intended for deployment to operational units rather than for use in operational test and evaluation . the low - rate initial production contract was scheduled for award almost 2 years before beginning operational testing to assess operational effectiveness . during low - rate initial production , the army plans to produce significantly more than the amount of thaad system components needed to equip the first deployed unit ( battery ) . for example , the first deployed unit is to consist of 9 launchers , 72 interceptors , 1 radar , and 3 bm / c4i systems . but the plan calls for production under the low - rate initial production contract of 32 launchers , 253 interceptors , and 3 radars . of the 253 interceptors , 234 are planned for deployment and 19 are planned for production verification and reliability testing . the 234 interceptors are more than three times the number needed to equip the first fielded unit and would represent about 20 percent of the total 1,178 interceptors planned for full deployment . concerning the other two purposes of low - rate initial production — establishing an initial production base and permitting an orderly increase in production before full - rate production begins — we believe that starting production of significant quantities of an unproven system 2 years before beginning operational testing increases risk . if the production line prove - out and ramp - up were delayed until after the completion of sufficient independent testing in an operational environment , initial quantities of unproven systems would be reduced and additional funding would become available to buy the proven systems at more efficient rates . as we previously reported , dod often budgets available funding for unnecessary increases in low - rate production quantities of unproven weapons whose designs are not yet stabilized with the result that it is unable to buy proven weapons at originally planned full rates because of insufficient funds . the army's latest approved thaad acquisition plan calls for initial fielding in fiscal year 2004 . under this schedule , a contract is to be awarded early in the engineering and manufacturing development phase to produce components for operational testing and later a $1.2-billion low - rate initial production contract for production of system components for deployment . in prior reports , we pointed out that an aggressive schedule is also the basis for the army's current plans to procure prototype interceptors well before it knows whether the interceptors will be operationally effective . according to a representative from the office of the director , operational test and evaluation , several flight tests against targets having a range of more than 2,000 kilometers will be required during developmental and operational testing to validate thaad's operational effectiveness against longer range missiles .