2208 ( j ) . red river , tobyhanna , and anniston army depots all have ongoing arrangements with private industry to provide services such as testing and repair of communications equipment ; development of training devices ; testing of circuit card assemblies ; and overhaul , conversion , and grit blasting of tracked vehicles . 4543 and subcontracting under 10 u.s.c . for example , table 2 lists sales statute partnering initiatives that are underway at the anniston depot as of july 1997 . in each of these sales arrangements , the army has awarded the private sector company a contract to perform a certain scope of work . the contractor then makes a business decision to have the depot perform a portion of that work under the sales statutes . the sale is accomplished by a contract between the depot and the private sector firm that allows the depot to be reimbursed for costs associated with fulfilling the contract . these costs are estimated by maintenance personnel and are based on direct labor , materials , and in - house support costs . the contractor must pay the depot in advance for performing the service , and the depot reimburses its working capital fund to cover these estimated costs . for illustrative purposes , the fox vehicle upgrade and m113 grit blast / test track partnering arrangements are described in more detail below . following award of the fox vehicle upgrade contract to general dynamics land systems , anniston representatives informed the contractor that the depot had facilities and capabilities that could meet the contractor's needs and provide for substantial facility cost savings and other benefits . in january 1997 , officials from anniston and general dynamics land systems agreed to partner on the upgrade of 62 fox reconnaissance vehicles . the partnering agreement included a 4-year contract with the depot under 10 u.s.c . under the contract , the depot performs asbestos removal , grinding , welding , machining , cleaning and finishing , and prime and final paint operations . under the terms of the contract with the army , general dynamics land systems does the upgrade using the depot's facilities . depot facilities are provided to general dynamics land systems as government - furnished property under its contract with the army and revert back to the army when the contract is complete . depot personnel stated that this partnering arrangement has resulted in ( 1 ) a lower total cost for the combined work performed , ( 2 ) sustainment of core depot capabilities , and ( 3 ) overhead savings from using underutilized facilities . the depot has received about $1 million for its efforts on the first eight vehicles . cost cannot be a basis for determining commercial availability . the army has also entered into a number of work - sharing arrangements that do not require specific legislative authority . they differ from a sales arrangement in that there is no contract between a depot and a private firm . the air force has not approved any proposed partnering arrangements . the secretary of defense has delegated to the secretary of the air force the authority to designate which depots may sell articles and services outside of dod .