( see fig . at the same time , employment was reduced from 6,044 to 2,879 ( 52 percent ) at the pearl harbor naval shipyard , and from 12,240 to 9,424 ( 23 percent ) at the puget sound naval shipyard . only one of the studies has been completed . it showed that savings achieved through the consolidation of activities in an electric motor rewind shop in the mid - atlantic region was about $4.4 million a year , or about 44 percent of the $9.9 million baseline cost each year prior to consolidation . baseline costs were being evaluated for some other selected projects so that post consolidation studies could be done . while the naval audit service is looking at costs before and after consolidation , it is not tracking rm savings into budget and accounting records to determine if they have actually been accrued . actual savings achieved through the rm program have been questioned within osd . an osd maintenance policy , programs , and resources office study of the rm program concluded that savings had been achieved from the restructuring of maintenance activities , but that some of the savings might have been the result of the four base realignment and closure rounds and other actions . the osd comptroller has gone further and concluded in 1996 that savings projected from the rm program for fiscal years 1994 through 1997 have not materialized as anticipated and are not evident in actual navy budgets submitted to congress each year . in a program review for fiscal year 1995 , the navy decreased its planned fiscal year 1995-99 budgets for operations and maintenance by $1.28 billion , anticipating that savings from regionalizing maintenance would offset the impact of the reductions ( see table 2 ) . according to navy officials in each fleet and in the cno's supportability , maintenance , and modernization division , rm savings did not materialize to cover the amounts taken from the programs , and the reductions had to be made up in other ways . while program budgets were reduced by $1.28 billion , the commands and fleets did not have records available showing how the reductions were finally absorbed . according to the osd comptroller , evidence indicates that other factors such as base closures , force structure reductions , directed civilian drawdowns and the general reduction in depot workloads resulting from force structure cuts during fiscal years 1992-97 , have accounted for the actual reductions in costs . the osd comptroller stated in a november 1996 budget memorandum that the rm program has not progressed enough to reap projected savings and that further review of regional maintenance might be in order to ensure savings occur and readiness is not degraded as a result of the reductions . in august 1997 , osd comptroller officials said that savings anticipated from the rm program have not materialized ; in fiscal years 1995 and 1996 regional maintenance did not progress much past isolated , small and informal tests ; and in fiscal years 1997 and 1998 , savings were offset by the need to finance construction of new facilities in navy simas .