iii. ) in addition , calhoun ema officials question the army's ability to maintain its current level of emergency support because of the decision during the base realignment and closure process to close fort mcclellan in alabama . previously , fort mcclellan was to provide medical , fire , decontamination , and transportation support to anniston army depot . according to alabama dem officials , the department does not plan to oppose the environmental permit on the basis of calhoun ema's concerns . in our 1995 report on csepp's financial management weaknesses , we said that allocated funds at four of the eight storage sites were generally used for priority items and other critical csepp projects . however , because of weaknesses in fema's financial management and reporting , we were unable to provide a complete picture of how program funds were spent at the other four storage sites and that the program was susceptible to fraud , waste , and abuse . in addition , we did not report that csepp funds were effectively allocated . on the contrary , we reported that critical items needed by local communities to adequately respond to a chemical stockpile emergency were not operational or had not been purchased . we revised the final report to more clearly state that some of alabama ema's and calhoun county ema's actions have contributed to the lack of progress in alabama's csepp . however , we do not agree with fema's position that the unexpended funds are mostly the result of calhoun county ema's refusal to initiate csepp projects until the army and fema agree to all of the county's demands . the delays experienced in alabama's csepp are likely to continue until an effective approach is developed for reaching timely agreements among federal , state , and local officials on specific requirements for projects . we revised our report to reflect fema's position that the 800-mhz communications system is not in place because calhoun county ema refused to initiate work on the contract until the county's demand for additional radios was met . however , we disagree with fema's statement that the overall scope of the 800-mhz communications project was resolved in 1993 . since 1993 , the army and fema allocated $1 million and $2 million for additional equipment and radios in june 1995 and august 1995 , respectively . as recently as april 23 , 1996 , fema authorized additional radios for alabama and talladega and calhoun counties . it appears that all the disagreements about the project may have been resolved on april 23 , 1996 , when army and fema officials agreed to provide additional 800-mhz radios to alabama and talladega and calhoun counties . calhoun county ema officials awarded the 800-mhz contract on may 30 , 1996 . according to calhoun ema officials , the contractor has 16 months from the contact award date to manufacture and install the communications system . the 800-mhz project is an example in which calhoun county ema delayed implementation of the project until it received enough radios , in its opinion , to help ensure maximum protection for the citizens of the county . in addition , alabama and talladega county benefited from calhoun ema's efforts in that they also received additional radios .