this is our second report on aerospace . our first report addressed executive compensation , as requested . ffrdcs are private sector organizations funded primarily by federal agencies to meet a special long - term research and development need that cannot be met as effectively by existing in - house or contractor resources . further , we obtained the views of aerospace's officials and cognizant defense contract audit agency and air force program and contracting officials at aerospace on factors affecting the use of fee . to determine the regulatory requirements governing the determination and use of fee , we reviewed applicable office of federal procurement policy guidance ; far and dfars provisions ; air force operating instructions and procedures ; and air force correspondence , contracts , and sponsoring agreement with aerospace . we reviewed aerospace's use of fee for fiscal year 1993 because , at the time we began our work , it was the most recently completed year for which aerospace had submitted its schedule of unreimbursed expenditures . we also exchanged information with dod staff involved in the congressionally mandated dod study on ffrdc fees during their study of the current fee determination process and fee management issues . we conducted our work from october 1994 to july 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of defense ; the director , office of management and budget ; the administrator , office of federal procurement policy ; and other interested congressional committees . copies will also be available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4587 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . odi cuero benjamin h. mannen amborse a. mcgraw the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . capital equipment used in direct support of an individual air force project is charged as other direct costs in the year acquired rather than depreciated .