munitions list . state and defense can include a dual - use item on this list , as provided by the itar , if it “is specifically designed , developed , configured , adapted , or modified for a military application , and has significant military or intelligence applicability such that control under [the itar] is necessary.” the department of commerce controls dual - use items under a system established under the export administration act . although the jet engine industry agrees in principle that selected high technology know - how should be protected for both competitive and national security reasons , manufacturers believe certain technical data transfers to foreign partners facilitate cooperative engine development , sharing of production , and operational maintenance . china is seen as a large and growing market for commercial aircraft engines . competing in the china market for the 100-passenger airliner requires transfer of technology for the maintenance and production of hot section components of an engine for such an aircraft . some of the militarily sensitive systems or characteristics of communications satellites are no longer unique to military satellites . state and commerce implement different laws to control exports of military and dual - use items . the underlying objectives of these laws differ . state controls munitions items to further the security and foreign policy of the united states . commerce , on the other hand , weighs u.s. economic and trade interests with national security and foreign policy interests . commerce controls the export of dual - use items under the export administration act , as implemented under the export administration regulations . the key provisions of its export control system are discussed in table 2 . while the export administration act provides broad authority to control exports , the national security and foreign policy controls that commerce has put in place through the export administration regulations provide for control of exports to specific destinations to achieve specific objectives . national security controls are to ensure that exports do not make a contribution to the military potential of specified countries such as china and russia . foreign policy controls can be imposed on all destinations and include the regional instability control and missile technology control . exports controlled for regional instability reasons are reviewed to determine whether the exports could contribute directly or indirectly to any country's military capabilities in a manner that would alter or destabilize a region's military balance contrary to the foreign policy interests of the united states . state controls munitions items under the arms export control act . state requires individual licenses for all exports under its jurisdiction , with the exception of certain defense exports . state has broad authority to deny a license , and it can deny simply with the explanation that it is against u.s. national security or foreign policy interests . 101-246 , title ix , as amended . the united states is a member of the missile technology control regime , a group formed in 1987 whose members coordinate their national export controls to limit the proliferation of missiles “capable of delivering nuclear weapons.” this group is composed of the united states and 27 other countries .