defense concurred with the report . commerce wrote that it had reviewed the draft report and did not have any comments . state , in general , agreed with our analysis and conclusions and found the draft report to be an accurate reflection of the international competition for military export contracts . ambassador and the secretary of commerce . the official stated that without u.s. government involvement , the french manufacturer would have received the entire $1-billion contract . france and the united kingdom each have a single organization within their respective defense ministries with responsibility for identifying defense export opportunities abroad , promoting and facilitating defense exports , providing assistance with defense equipment demonstrations and trade shows , and providing advice to industry regarding offsets . in france this organization is known as the delegation for international relations . in the united kingdom this organization is known as the defence export services organisation . although germany does not have a defense ministry organization comparable to that of france or the united kingdom , german companies involved in cross - border collaborative efforts with those countries are able to benefit indirectly from the export promotion activities of the french and u.k. organizations . while the united states has no centralized government organization with a comparable export promotion role , the departments of defense , commerce , and state each provide similar support for u.s. defense exports . the departments of commerce , defense , and state were given the opportunity to comment on a draft of this report . state also commented that offsets play a major role in determining which firms obtain contracts and foreign governments are eager to support offset arrangements to obtain a competitive advantage . in addition , state noted that sales of conventional arms are a legitimate instrument of u.s. foreign policy deserving u.s. government support when they help friends and allies deter aggression , promote regional stability , and increase interoperability of u.s. and allied forces . however , state pointed out that an examination of the dynamics of regional power balances and the potential for destabilizing changes in the region is required for each specific sale . we have made minor factual revisions to the report where appropriate based on technical comments provided by defense and state . we did our work between january 1994 and february 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a discussion of our scope and methodology is in appendix i . more information on government support to enhance the competitiveness of defense products is provided in appendix ii . the comments of the departments of defense , state , and commerce are presented in appendixes iii , iv , and v , respectively . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense , commerce , and state and the appropriate congressional committees . copies will also be available to other interested parties on request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4587 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . the value of direct commercial sales deliveries as a result of those licenses , according to government documents , may be as little as 40 to 60 percent of the value originally reported when the license was approved .