nimitz . in the years in which newport news has such a large workload , major funding spikes occur . in contrast , there was no similar workload assigned to newport news in fiscal year 1996 . navy officials told us that funding to newport news was smaller in 1996 because ( 1 ) there was less nuclear ship maintenance work — work historically allocated to either newport news or norfolk naval shipyard and ( 2 ) newport news was already operating near full capacity . newport news is a large nuclear - capable yard and is capable of doing ship repair work that other smaller shipyards and repair companies in the norfolk area are not . smaller private shipyards and repair companies in the area do repair work on conventional ships and are not qualified to do nuclear - related work . therefore , to make our private sector analysis more meaningful , we separated the navy's reported obligations according to whether they were provided to norfolk naval shipyard , newport news , or other smaller shipyards and repair companies . as shown in table 2 , newport news received the largest obligations in all but 1 year between fiscal year 1994 and 1998 . table 2 also shows that the smaller private shipyards and repair companies received a much lower percentage of the total obligations in fiscal year 1998 than in other years . there was less conventional ship maintenance work — work historically allocated to smaller shipyards and repair companies or to the norfolk naval shipyard . for example , the navy reported that the total number of ships in the atlantic fleet decreased from 191 in fiscal year 1994 to 165 in fiscal year 1998 . similarly , the reported number of conventional steam - powered ships , maintenance - intensive ships that smaller ship repair companies have historically worked on , decreased in the atlantic fleet from 38 to 26 between fiscal year 1994 and 1997 , and was projected to decrease to 23 ships during fiscal year 1998 . according to navy officials , conventional steam - powered ships require more maintenance than other ships because they are older and contain more mechanical parts than newer ships , which have more reliable component systems that are easier to remove , replace with new component systems , and repair elsewhere . during fiscal year 1998 , the navy provided the smaller private shipyards and repair companies in the norfolk area less conventional maintenance work than initially scheduled in its private sector planning report dated september 23 , 1996 . this change occurred largely for operational reasons and requirement changes and because four conventional maintenance projects originally scheduled to go to the private sector were reassigned to the norfolk naval shipyard to meet workload targets established for the public shipyard under the navy's guaranteed manday policy . appendix iii details the final distribution of the cno projects scheduled for fiscal year 1998 . in september 1996 , naval sea systems command ( navsea ) issued the navy's private sector depot - level planning report for fiscal years 1997 and 1998 .