we found few . throughout europe and asia , u.s. computer subsidiary officials stated that their competition is primarily other u.s. computer subsidiaries and , to a lesser extent , japanese companies . our information does not support commerce's position on all of these manufacturers . for example , our visit to government and commercial sources in singapore indicated that the country does not now have the capabilities to produce hpcs . we asked commerce to provide data to support its assertion on foreign manufacturers , but we received no documentary support . in addition , although requested , commerce did not provide documentary evidence to confirm its asserted capabilities of india's hpcs and uses . commerce stated that policy makers did not receive doe information prior to the revision of the hpc controls in 1995 and , further , there is current disagreement within doe over the contribution that hpcs make to nuclear programs in countries of concern . we agree that commerce did not obtain available information on this issue from doe laboratories , although such information was available and provided to us upon request . in addition , we found no dissent or qualification of views identified in doe's official study on this matter . commerce stated that worldwide availability of computers indicates that there is a large installed base of systems in the tens of thousands or even millions . commerce further stated that license requirements will not prevent diversion of hpcs unless realistic control levels are set that can be enforced effectively . while we agree , in principle , that increasing numbers of hpcs makes controllability more difficult , a realistic assessment of when an item is “uncontrollable” would require an analysis of ( 1 ) actual data , ( 2 ) estimated costs of enforcing controls , and ( 3 ) pros and cons of alternatives — such as revised regulatory procedures — that might be considered to extend controls . such an analysis was not done by the executive branch before its 1995 decision . in addition , commerce provided no documentary evidence for its statement that there is a large installed base of hpcs in the millions . commerce stated that most european governments do not enforce u.s. export control restrictions on reexport of u.s. - supplied hpcs . we agree that at least those european governments that we visited ( germany and united kingdom ) hold this position . however , although requested , commerce provided no evidence to support its statement that the government of the united kingdom has instructed its exporters to ignore u.s. reexport controls . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense letter dated july 16 , 1998 . dod provided one set of written comments for this report . we addressed dod's general comments relevant to this report on page 17 . we address dod's specific comments below . dod stated that the stanford study was only one of many inputs considered by the executive branch in its 1995 assessment of computer export controls . we agree , and our report states , that there were other inputs to the decision .