in practice the competition program has not been reinstituted . no public - private competitions have been held since the program was terminated in 1994 and depot officials in each of the services told us they have been precluded from bidding on dod workloads and have dismantled their competition offices . title 10 u.s.c . 2469 provides that the performance of a depot - level maintenance workload that has a threshold value of $3 million or more being performed by a depot - level activity of dod may not be changed to the private sector without using competitive procedures that include both public and private entities . this provision is intended to assure that the work will be awarded based upon where it can be accomplished more cost - effectively . following dod's 1994 decision to terminate the public - private depot competition program , the fiscal year 1995 defense appropriations conference report directed dod to reinstitute public - private competition and to report its policy regarding public versus private competition for depot maintenance workloads . in a report responding to the committee's direction to reinstitute the program , dod stated that the financial systems and data bases within dod are not capable of supporting the determination of actual cost of specific workloads . the report concluded that dod cannot reinstate public - private competition until cost accounting and data systems are in place to conduct fair and open competitions . the congress continued to support the public - private competition program in considering the fiscal year 1996 appropriation and authorization bills . we interviewed 14 officials at navair , aso , the naval aviation depot operations center , the norfolk nadep , and the jacksonville nadep to obtain opinions regarding the future use of public - private competition for aviation maintenance . each official had detailed experience with the program . all of the officials stated that barriers exist that limit the future use of the competition program . for example , the officials stated that the nadeps are required to maintain the ability to perform depot repairs on front line weapon systems . to meet this requirement , the nadeps must perform a defined minimum quantity of work , called core workload , on front line weapon systems . thus , only workload requirements above the level defined as core are considered potentially available for public - private competition . because of defense downsizing , funding for airframe and engine depot maintenance decreased about 30 percent between fiscal years 1991 and 1994 and further reductions are expected . as depot workload decreases , the above - core workload also decreases making less work potentially available for competition . however , we noted that findings of the report of the commission on roles and missions challenged the validity of the core concept . likewise , the secretary of defense's comments to the senate armed services committee regarding this report noted that dod agrees with the commission's recommendation to outsource a significant portion of dod's depot maintenance work . the secretary's letter also noted that dod believes it must retain a limited organic core to meet essential wartime surge demands , promote competition , and sustain institutional expertise .