hypergravity can be created by a centrifuge . space - based research is principally conducted in pressurized and nonpressurized facilities on the space shuttle . the centerpiece for this research is a 23-foot by 16-foot pressurized module — spacelab — that fits in the space shuttle payload bay . spacelab was developed by the european space agency and contains utilities , computers , work areas , and instrument racks for experiments . an exterior cutaway view of spacelab is shown in figure 1 . the most recent spacelab flight was the second international microgravity laboratory ( iml - 2 ) , which ended a 15-day mission on the space shuttle on july 23 , 1994 . iml - 2 was a collaborative effort by nasa ; the european space agency ; and the national space agencies of canada , france , germany , and japan . according to nasa officials , iml - 2 provided a preview of the science operations to come on the space station . the iml flights , which began in january 1992 , gave the u.s scientific community access to foreign - developed flight hardware while providing the international research community with access to the space shuttle / spacelab . approximately 80 investigations were performed on iml - 2 , including 15 u.s. experiments — 11 in the biotechnology , fluid physics , and materials science and 4 in the life sciences . iml - 2 was the last flight of this international series of spacelabs before the station era begins in 1997 . an interior view of iml - 2 is shown in figure 2 . nasa publicly solicits research proposals from investigators in the life and microgravity research communities . the funding decision is principally based on an evaluation of the project's scientific merit by a peer review panel . nasa's peer review and other quality assurance procedures are outlined in appendix i . nasa intends to build a space station - era research community from the ground up . to do so , a larger cadre of ground - based researchers than currently available will be needed to adequately support u.s. research on the station . a nasa official estimates that the number of ground - based microgravity researchers needs to increase from 73 to 240 between fiscal years 1992 and 1998 . nasa officials have not made comparable estimates for life science researchers . to accomplish this goal , nasa has abandoned its tradition — principally associated with life science research — of soliciting research proposals for general and specific space flight opportunities . although this approach appears reasonable , the planned funding levels do not match the program's objective , and funding priorities may need to be reassessed if the number of life and microgravity ground - based investigators is to be significantly increased . in recent years , nasa has used two approaches for developing life and microgravity science research communities — “select for flight” or “select for science.” in the select - for - flight approach , all of the u.s. life science and most of the u.s. microgravity investigators on iml - 2 were selected from proposals submitted in response to flight - related announcements .