laboratory section . most of the adverse cost and schedule variances are due to development problems being experienced by lower tier subcontractors . data from the performance measurement status report show that 67 percent of the over cost and 52 percent of the behind schedule conditions at the end of 1995 existed at lower tier subcontractors where performance measurement oversight is limited . program managers have identified lower tier subcontract performance as a top program risk . the program manager for the largest product group subcontractor also told us that subcontractor performance is one of his major concerns . these unfavorable trends indicate developing cost and schedule problems that may be difficult to overcome . contractor analyses in early 1996 showed that the unfavorable cost variance could exceed $114 million by july 1996 if the trends continued and recovery actions were unsuccessful . analyses of cost performance data at that time predicted estimates of project completion costs ranging from $5.93 billion to $6.29 billion . as previously mentioned , the prime contractor's january 1996 cost estimate , including all authorized but unpriced changes , was $5.87 billion . against this baseline , estimated overruns at project completion ranged from about $60 million to over $400 million . the monthly performance measurement status reports include instances where the contractor's estimated total completion costs did not recognize over budget conditions . the accompanying narrative did not explain how the over budget conditions would be corrected and included indications that overrun conditions could worsen . to the extent that contractors' estimates of completion costs are based on overly optimistic recovery plans , reported estimated completion costs would be understated and would potentially obfuscate the funding requirements for completing the program . understated costs will ultimately further strain the limited financial reserves . accurate information and analyses of cost and schedule status and estimates of total completion costs are important because they provide cost visibility of the actual funding requirements for the approved scope of work . at a minimum , estimates of completion costs should consider actual performance and costs to date , projections of future performance , and estimates of the cost of work remaining . research has shown that once a project is about 15-percent complete , it becomes increasingly unlikely that unfavorable cost or schedule trends will be reversed and more likely that the percent overrun at completion will be greater than the percent overrun to date . such circumstances heighten the importance of contractors detailing their recovery plans when they claim that there will be no or little cost overrun at completion . nasa's and boeing's surveillance audits of contractor cost and schedule control system compliance , which are discussed in chapter 3 , also identified the lack of realistic completion estimates as a problem area . the following examples illustrate potentially understated completion cost estimates from the january 1996 performance measurement status reports . the structures and mechanism line item , with 40 percent of the work completed , showed a $11.3-million , or 11-percent , overrun . the estimate at completion forecast a $5-million overrun . the report narrative said that a lower tier subcontractor forecast a $16-million overrun at project completion for its portion of the work .