it just moves some of it to the private sector . private sector manufacturing and repair facilities also have extensive excess capacity . the privatization - in - place of the sacramento and san antonio depots will not reduce the large amount of excess capacity in the air force depot system and the private sector or their associated costs , unless additional facilities are closed or other cost - reduction means are successfully implemented . the air force's planning has not progressed far enough to compare precisely the cost of privatizing depot workloads in place with the cost of transferring the work to other underused depots . however , because privatization - in - place will have little effect on excess capacity at the remaining depots , it is unlikely that any savings would offset the cost of maintaining excess depot capacity . the navy's experience closing naval aviation depots and consolidating workloads at remaining navy facilities provides useful insights regarding the benefits of this closure option . according to navy officials , consolidating workloads from three closing naval aviation depots and quickly moving most of this workload to the three remaining depots was projected to reduce excess capacity and decrease the overhead rates at remaining naval aviation depots . capacity utilization was projected to increase 35 percent as a result of this consolidation . the utilization rate for each depot varies depending on the specific workload transfers and other variables , such as the rate of decline of their pre - consolidation workload base . overall , the economy and efficiency improvements were projected to decrease the overhead rates by 18 percent between fiscal years 1994 and 1997 . based on a 10-million hour workload program , the consolidation could save an additional $100 million annually . navy officials stated that because of the continuous decline in depot maintenance workloads and other factors , anticipated savings cannot be measured precisely . however , they noted that closing naval aviation depots and consolidating workloads in the navy's remaining three depots has clearly improved efficiency and lowered the cost of the navy depot maintenance program . our analysis of brac commission estimates indicates that the closure of the depots at the san antonio and sacramento logistics centers were expected to save about $70 million annually . based on our analysis of air force data , the actual savings could be as much as $206 million annually , if the closing depots' work is transferred to the remaining military depots . the commission's estimate assumed that about 15 percent of the maintenance personnel at the closing centers could be eliminated . this evaluation did not attempt to measure economy and efficiency improvements that resulted from workload consolidation . however , our analysis indicates that transferring about 8.2 million hours of work from the closing air force depots to the three remaining depots would ( 1 ) reduce these three depots' excess capacity from about 46 percent to about 8 percent , ( 2 ) lower the hourly rates by an average of $6.00 at receiving locations , and ( 3 ) save as much as $182 million annually as a result of economies of scale and other efficiencies .