service has been cost - effective . administrative support has focused on value - added work . another company that we visited and that asked for anonymity has for years had one point of contact for its employees assigned internationally . this company , which has an international employee assignment work force of about 2,200 , transferred about 400 employees to and from the united states in 1996 . historically , most of its international transfers have been in professional and mid - to upper - level management positions . the typical period of assignment overseas has been for 3 years . this company relies on a centralized international assignments unit to manage the transfer of employees . key to the process are regional counselors in the unit , who provide one focal point for the employee for coordinating all aspects of the transfer . these include a one - on - one discussion of corporate relocation policy , referral to a moving company , and arrangements for a homefinding visit to the next post . to facilitate the process , the unit also purchased an off - the - shelf software system to handle the process' information requirements . according to company officials , this eliminated older obsolete systems , reduced costs and time requirements for administering the program , and created better interface with other corporate systems . similar to texaco , the use of enhanced information systems also improved the company's budgeting , accountability , and control over the relocation process . problems and complaints have diminished . appendix ii compares state's practices to some of the best practices we identified . if state implemented one - stop shopping ( one focal point for the employee ) and centralized program administration , it could achieve benefits such as improved quality of services for employees and their families , reduced time required for employees to complete the process , and possibly lower costs resulting from fewer staff required to administer the program . if state were to develop an integrated information system to support the transfer process , it could significantly enhance counselors' support capabilities and possibly enable them to efficiently handle a greater number of transfers . state officials in the bureau of personnel were very supportive of the one - stop shopping concept and an integrated information management system to support the process . officials in state's bureau of administration endorsed the development of an integrated system for tracking and coordinating the transfer process . they also endorsed one - stop shopping wherever possible , although they expressed some concern about whether one coordinator / counselor should be given complete responsibility for both the transfer of the employee and the shipment of his / her household effects . they believed that ( 1 ) certain functions such as counseling , travel , passport , and visa requirements , could clearly be consolidated into one customer service office and ( 2 ) customer service coordinators could help coordinate other transfer activities with designated transportation specialists and medical , security , and assignments officers . based on the best practices we identified in the private sector and the views of state officials , figure 4 shows a one - stop shopping process that we believe state could effectively adopt .