due out requirement . this requirement is used to satisfy requisitions for stock that is on hand and not yet sent to the customers . backorder requirement . this requirement is used to satisfy requisitions that have been received but cannot be satisfied from stock on hand . war reserve requirement . this requirement is used to ensure fast mobilization in the event of war . when an item manager determines that more items are needed than are on hand and due in , a contract is generated for the quantity that is needed plus an economic order quantity — the amount of inventory that will result in the lowest total costs for ordering and holding inventory . a contract can be terminated or modified if requirements change . our analysis of september 30 , 1996 , computerized navy inventory files showed that the navy was purchasing a reported $1.6 billion of secondary inventory , $121 million of which exceeded requirements and economic order quantities . we judgmentally selected 200 items with a reported $48.3 million of inventory on contract that were not needed as of september 30 , 1996 . we reviewed these items to determine if the navy had valid requirements to support inventory purchases , what caused purchases to exceed requirements , and what the navy was doing to cancel purchases that were beyond what was needed . although this report concentrates on the processes for determining inventory needs and canceling excess purchases , past reports have discussed problems with the visibility and accuracy of on - hand and in - transit inventories . the scope and methodology of our work are described in appendix i . our analysis of 200 judgmentally selected items showed that the navy duplicates some inventory requirements , resulting in unnecessary purchases and inventory that exceeds needs . also , inventory was purchased without specific requirements or on the basis of inaccurate demand forecasts . one of the navy's uses of planned program requirements is to provide pools of parts that permit the timely completion of repairs scheduled at maintenance depots or the unscheduled replacement of failed parts . also , naval audit service research completed in november 1997 showed that observed demand rates often did not agree with those recorded in inventory control point records . in collecting data on individual sample items , we used the same data the navy uses for inventory management , reporting , and budgeting purposes . we used the data to identify navy inventory items that had inventory on contract or on purchase request that exceeded then - current requirements and economic order quantities . we identified 4,727 items that had $102.4 million of inventory on contract that exceeded needs and 732 items with $18.2 million of inventory on purchase requests that exceeded needs . purchase requests are internal documents generated by item managers that inform contracting officers of the need to purchase an item . we focused our efforts on items that were on contract because they represented the bulk of the inventory being purchased that exceeded requirements and economic order quantities .