these conditions are discussed below . limited competition and excess depot capacity could negate expected savings . the corm assumed depot workload privatization savings would result from private sector competition . we found that much of the depot work contracted to the private sector is awarded noncompetitively and that obtaining competition for remaining non - core depot workloads may be difficult and costly . in addition , privatizing depot workloads without reducing excess depot capacity could significantly increase the cost of work performed by the depots . the corm's recommendation to privatize essentially all depot maintenance assumed that meaningful competition would be obtained for most of the work . the commission generally defined meaningful competition as that generated by a competitive market , including significant numbers of both buyers and sellers . our review of selected dod depot maintenance contracts found that a large portion of the awards were not made under these conditions . to determine the extent of competition in awarding depot maintenance contracts , we reviewed 240 such contracts totaling $4.3 billion at 12 dod buying activities . we selected high - dollar value contracts from a total of 8,452 open 1995 depot - level maintenance contracts that were valued at $7.3 billion . as shown in table 1 , 182 of the 240 contracts — 76 percent — were awarded on a sole - source basis . these contracts accounted for 45 percent of the total dollar value . in nine other contracts accounting for about 4 percent of the total , competition was limited to only two offerors . the remaining 49 contracts were classified as awarded through full and open competition . these awards accounted for 51 percent of the total dollar value . however , some had only limited responses . for example , the number of offerors was 2 in each of 5 contracts totaling $525.8 million — 24 percent of the total award value for the 49 competed contracts . original equipment manufacturers were awarded 158 of the 182 noncompetitive contracts . the remaining 24 were awarded on a sole - source basis for reasons such as peculiar requirements , national emergencies , and international agreements . where competition was limited , the oems won eight of the nine workloads . the oems also won 9 of the 49 contracts that dod classified as awarded pursuant to full and open competition . table 2 shows the number of offers received for the contracts classified as awarded pursuant to full and open competition . the buying activities awarded the maintenance contracts to 71 different contractors but 13 of these contractors had received workloads valued at $3.3 billion — 76 percent of the total amount awarded . table 3 shows the distribution of the workload to the 71 contractors . although dod plans to privatize non - core workloads currently in the public depots , it has not assessed the extent that such workloads will attract private sector competition . factors that resulted in noncompetitive awards for much of the depot work currently performed by the private sector , may apply to much of the work currently performed by public depots .