this report responds to that provision . it also discusses the nature of the performance problems , the extent of the cost growth , and the results of dod's recent c - 17 cost and operational effectiveness analysis ( coea ) , which was conducted by the institute for defense analyses ( ida ) . to determine if the c - 17's original justification has changed , we reviewed program documents , including past and current system specifications , operational requirements documents , concepts of operation , and army field manuals and doctrine . we also used our past work on the major aircraft review , operation desert shield / storm , the mobility requirements study ( mrs ) , and the c - 17 program . we interviewed officials from the office of the secretary of defense , the joint chiefs of staff , air force headquarters , amc , army headquarters , and the army's training and doctrine command . we used information from our continuing work to monitor cost , schedule , and performance issues related to the program at the mcdonnell douglas plant , long beach , california , and c - 17 developmental and operational testing by the air force at edwards air force base , california . we also reviewed a recent defense science board report on the c - 17 and spoke with members of the board's working groups regarding the c - 17's payload / range performance and other aspects of the program . to determine whether cost - effective alternatives to the full c - 17 program exist , we reviewed the coea . we also interviewed officials from ida , the office of the secretary of defense , amc , mcdonnell douglas corporation , boeing corporation , and lockheed corporation . we conducted our review between april 1993 and december 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we obtained dod comments on a draft of this report , which are discussed at the end of each of the following chapters and are presented in their entirety in appendix i along with our detailed evaluation of them . major contributors are listed in appendix ii . in the event of a conflict or crisis overseas , the united states must be able to deliver the troops , equipment , and supplies necessary to meet the threat . the department of defense ( dod ) relies on airlift , sealift , and prepositioned assets to accomplish this mission . airlift , the vital component that provides rapid mobility to combat forces , delivers army light forces , equipment , initial resupply and bulk ammunition , and nearly all precision munitions and time - critical items . airlift can also rapidly transport troops and supplies to link up with prepositioned equipment , thus speeding the deployment of heavier units early in a conflict . airlift is classified as either intertheater ( from one theater of operation to another ) or intratheater ( operations within a theater ) . intertheater airlift services are provided by the air force's air mobility command ( amc ) , which has a fleet of c - 5 , c - 141 , and kc - 10 aircraft to carry out that mission .