ii ) . to identify indicators that are being monitored to supplement sorts data , we asked the 39 agencies to identify all the indicators they use to assess readiness and operational effectiveness . after compiling and categorizing the indicators by type , that is , personnel , training , and logistics , we asked the commands to rate the indicators' significance , predictive value , and quality . indicator significance was rated as either critical , important , or supplementary . some elements of sorts are not based on objective data . the c - rating for training , for example , is based on a commander's subjective assessment of the number of additional training days the unit needs to reach a c - 1 status . this assessment may be based on any number of factors , including completion of required or scheduled training or personal observation . in the past , we have found that army training assessments have not been reliable . for example , in 1991 we reported that training readiness assessments of active army units may have been overstated . we reported that the information provided to higher commands and jcs was of limited value because the assessments ( 1 ) were based on training conducted primarily at home stations rather than on results of more realistic exercises conducted at combat training centers and ( 2 ) may not have adequately considered the effect that the loss of key personnel had on proficiency . likewise , in our reviews pertaining to the persian gulf war , we noted that readiness reports for army support forces and national guard combat forces were often inflated or unreliable . for example , in a september 1991 report , we noted that when three army national guard combat brigades were mobilized for operation desert shield , their commanders were reporting readiness at the c - 2 and c - 3 levels , which meant that no more than 40 days of post - mobilization training would be needed for the brigades to be fully combat ready . however , on the basis of their independent assessment of the brigades' proficiency , active army officials responsible for the brigades' post - mobilization training developed training plans calling for over three times the number of days that the readiness reports stated were needed . reference to the fact that training readiness is based primarily on training conducted at home stations rather than on results of more realistic exercises conducted at combat training centers is intended only to illustrate how the reliability of sorts training information can be effected . to assess the adequacy of the current definition and indicators of readiness , we examined military service and jcs regulations , reviewed the literature , and interviewed officials from 39 dod agencies , including active and reserve service commands , defense civilian agencies , unified commands , and the joint staff ( see app . the commands' opinions of predictive value were provided on a five - point scale ranging from little or none to very great . the quality of the indicator was rated on a three - point scale — low , medium , and high .