( see fig . even with the downsizing of the force , the annual level of o&m funding for both of these programs has remained fairly constant over the entire 17-year period covered by this report . our analysis of the eight categories aggregates o&m funds and personnel data at various levels of detail to provide comprehensive and useful information . in oral comments , dod agreed with the report and offered points of clarification . specifically , dod said that o&m funding per person is an inappropriate measure to assess future o&m requirements . in our report , we analyzed o&m trends in a number of different ways , including annual o&m on a per person basis . we believe each measure of o&m funding produces a different , but equally insightful and appropriate , overview . furthermore , we did not attempt to determine an appropriate level of o&m funding . dod noted that answering the questions following each section requires an understanding of the significant accounting changes that have occurred since fiscal year 1981 . dod recommended that future o&m analysis use normalized fydp data . ( normalized fydp data account for the movement of funds whether inside the o&m accounts or to and from other appropriation accounts. ) where will dod get savings in infrastructure to pay for modernization ? how will dod's modernization plans affect future o&m levels ? another way to analyze the changes and components of o&m funding is to aggregate fydp data by dod's major defense programs . for its own force programming and budgeting purposes , dod organizes the defense budget into program elements that consist of collections of weapons , manpower , and support equipment . program elements are grouped into 11 major defense programs . each major defense program reflects a force mission or support mission of dod and contains the resources needed to achieve an objective or plan . three major defense programs — general purpose forces ; central supply and maintenance ; and training , medical , and other general purpose activities — receive the majority of annual o&m funding . in fiscal year 1996 , these three programs were allocated 65 percent of dod's o&m funds . figure 6 shows that of the three programs , only the training , medical , and other general purpose activities program's annual funding has continued to increase over the fiscal year 1985-2001 period . the training , medical , and other general purpose activities program's annual share of o&m appropriations increased by almost $4 billion between fiscal years 1985 and 1996 to about $19 billion . dod plans to maintain this level of o&m funding for this program through fiscal year 2001 . o&m funding per person for training , medical , and other general purpose activities has almost doubled over the fiscal year 1985-2001 period ; most of this growth occurred prior to fiscal year 1996 . o&m funding for the general purpose forces program is projected to fall by 28 percent between fiscal years 1985 and 2001 . this corresponds to the decline in dod's overall force level . the o&m funding per person assigned to this program is expected to generally remain between $25,000 and $30,000 per person over the entire fiscal year 1985 to 2001 period .