the types of problems varied . in three of the six case narratives , we found investigative problems such as failures to ( 1 ) follow up with appropriate individuals to confirm key evidence , ( 2 ) identify or ensure the validity of key physical evidence , ( 3 ) include important information , and ( 4 ) interview key witnesses . following is a more detailed description of the three case narratives containing most of these weaknesses . this case narrative addresses the reported exposure of an individual soldier to mustard agent while he was exploring an iraqi bunker . osagwi assessed this incident as a “likely” exposure . osagwi's assessment of this case has been highly controversial . some veterans organizations and others believe that the evidence presented in osagwi's case narrative and the army's presentation of the purple heart medal to this soldier for his injuries warranted an assessment of “definite” exposure . however , we found that this case was affected by many investigative and evidentiary problems . over 12,000 individuals receive the newsletter . osagwi's leadership and staff have met with veterans at 18 town hall meetings and made appearances at 41 national veterans conventions . in addition , osagwi officials frequently meet with veterans and military service organizations to discuss gulf war illnesses topics of interest to them . we will make copies available to others on request . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-5140 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . many persian gulf war veterans have complained of illnesses since the war's end in 1991 . over 100,000 of the approximately 700,000 gulf war veterans have participated in health examination programs established by the department of defense ( dod ) and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) . many of those examined reported health complaints , including fatigue , muscle and joint pain , gastrointestinal problems , headaches , depression , neurologic and neurocognitive impairments , memory loss , shortness of breath , and sleep disturbances . many veterans claim that their medical symptoms , some of them debilitating in nature , were not present before their service in the persian gulf war . some veterans suspect that their health problems may be linked to chemical or biological warfare agents that iraq may have used during the gulf war . various organizations have researched the causes of gulf war illnesses — the source of much controversy over the past 7 years . by the end of 1996 , dod and the va together had funded 82 research projects related to gulf war illnesses . despite these efforts , it remains unclear why some gulf war veterans became ill following their service in the persian gulf war . it also remains unclear whether the rates of reported illnesses for veterans that deployed to the gulf are higher overall than the rates for those that did not deploy or than the rates for the civilian or military population as a whole . also unexplained are differences in the frequency of symptoms reported by reserve units and active duty units and any correlations between the location of units and the occurrence of particular illnesses .