additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we believe these deficiencies were properly characterized . the corporation agreed that ongoing oversight of its operations would be beneficial . the corporation further stated that it has retained a firm of independent certified public accountants to perform an annual audit , which will encompass a review of its sales program , including an evaluation of the corporation's compliance with the enabling legislation and an assessment of its internal controls . we believe that such oversight will help to ensure that the corporation's firearms sales fully comply with the law . in addition to its general comments , the corporation submitted three detailed comments . first , the corporation stated that we did not accurately describe its mission . it stated that congress has given the corporation a considerably broader statutory objective . accordingly , the corporation stated that its declared mission envisions “fostering rifle marksmanship and firearms safety and other types of training to america's youth and other qualified citizens , emphasizing safety , discipline and dedication to the nation , state and community.” we believe that our report accurately describes the functions of the cmp as set out in section 1612 ( a ) of the 1996 act . we have , however , added in our report a reference to section 1612 ( b ) of the act , which discusses the youth - related priorities the corporation is statutorily required to consider in carrying out its mission . second , the corporation stated that our findings regarding the corporation's failures to adhere to its procedures are overstated and no longer applicable to cmp operations . our randomly selected sample of corporation sales records for three types of firearms sold to individuals showed that the corporation sold firearms without adhering to its procedures designed to ensure that purchasers had not been convicted of felonies , were u.s. citizens , and were members of a cmp - affiliated club . we continue to believe that the results of our three samples were properly characterized . regarding the corporation's recent procedural changes , we commend the corporation for its willingness to respond to our findings immediately . finally , the corporation stated that we greatly exaggerated the value of federal support provided to the corporation by using the army master data file values to determine the value of the rifles , ammunition , and parts that were transferred or were being held by the army for potential transfer to the corporation . more specifically , the corporation stated that the rifles , ammunition , and parts provided by the army were obsolete , militarily worthless , and would be reduced to scrap at further cost to the army . we believe that the army master data file values are valid for determining the value of the items transferred or being held for potential transfer to the corporation .