dod did not agree with our recommendations . it said that the recommendation to improve its finance and accounting system to accumulate and track cost data on institutional training would incur additional unnecessary costs , be incompatible with existing financial data systems , and would require rule - of - thumb allocations of facilities and training resources . we agree that the accumulation of such cost data may be incompatible with dod's existing systems ; however , as it goes forward with its efforts to improve the existing systems , dod should make adjustments to accumulate training cost data . without such data , dod cannot determine whether the current method of providing training is the most cost effective or whether an alternative method would be more cost effective . dod also did not agree with our recommendation for developing a long - range plan that would set out how much the training infrastructure should be reduced , how the reductions will be achieved , what it will cost to achieve the reductions , and when the reductions will be accomplished . dod officials said that they already assess the services' plans for accomplishing their training requirements as part of the annual budget process and future years defense program . they said that the report assumes that further infrastructure reductions can be made and that the report does not adequately consider the reduction initiatives already accomplished or in process . the officials said that they were not convinced that further reductions are possible and were unsure how to go about setting long - term reduction objectives . the officials also said that the report does not recognize factors that could increase the need for training resources even though there has been a reduction in military end strength and accessions . dod is correct that we believe further training infrastructure reductions are possible . as our report notes , dod continues to seek opportunities for reductions and dod officials have testified that further reductions are possible . with regard to a possible need for additional training resources , even with a reduction in end strength and accessions , our analysis of the future years defense program shows that training costs remain fairly constant with a slight decrease during the program period . we do not agree with dod's position regarding establishing long - term infrastructure reduction objectives . in our opinion , unless dod establishes objectives that set forth how much the infrastructure should be reduced , how the reductions will be accomplished , what it will cost , and when it will be accomplished , it will not know when it has reached the optimal infrastructure size . reviewing and assessing training requirements on an annual basis as part of the budget process will not accomplish these objectives . regarding our recommendation that a plan be developed that shows how dod will deal with excess training installations after the brac process is completed , dod said that the report provides little data and no examples to support this recommendation . dod is correct that our report does not identify excess installations or facilities . it was not our intent to single out specific facilities as being excess to the training needs .