it is not a treaty . the regime consists of common export policy guidelines applied to a common list of controlled items that each mtcr member implements in accordance with its national legislation . currently , 25 states are formal partners to the mtcr , while an additional 7 states , including china , have adhered or declared an intention to adhere to the mtcr guidelines . ( see app . i for a complete list of current mtcr partners and adherents or declared adherents. ) the mtcr annex divides controlled items into two categories , category i and category ii items . category i items are subject to a strong presumption of denial and are rarely licensed for export . they include such items as complete missile systems ; unmanned air - vehicle systems , such as cruise missiles ; and certain complete subsystems , such as rocket engines and guidance sets . category ii ( dual - use ) covers a wide range of commodities , including propellants , test equipment , and flight instruments , that could be used for missiles or satellite launches . category ii items must be evaluated case - by - case against specified criteria and if judged to be destined for use in weapons of mass destruction ( nuclear , chemical , or biological ) are subject to a strong presumption of denial . federal law regulates the exports of missiles and related technology and requires licenses for the export from the united states of certain missiles , components , and technology specified in the mtcr annex . the state department supervises and directs all governmental arms transfers and licenses commercial arms transfers , including u.s. exports of missile items and technology . the commerce department licenses exports of dual - use goods and technology , which are controlled for missile technology reasons pursuant to the mtcr annex to all countries . it has jurisdiction over production equipment for mtcr annex items , which is controlled as either category i or category ii , depending on the type of equipment involved . violators of u.s. export laws are subject to criminal and civil penalties and economic sanctions . federal laws require the president to impose sanctions on u.s. and foreign individuals and entities that improperly conduct trade in controlled missile technology . also , such sanctions would apply to a country with a nonmarket economy , such as china , to all activities of that government , with some qualifications ( 1 ) relating to the development or production of any missile equipment or technology and ( 2 ) affecting the development or production of electronics , space systems or equipment , and military aircraft . mtcr - related licenses comprised a very small portion of total export license activity for china . however , dod has questioned whether commerce has been adequately identifying for interagency referral and review all the applications for the export of dual - use missile - related technologies . the commerce department initially determines which commodities might contain missile technology .