we have incorporated these as appropriate . to examine the nature of mexico's drug threat , we received briefings from u.s. law enforcement , intelligence , and military officials , and reviewed and analyzed documentation in washington , d.c. , and at the u.s. embassy in mexico . to address mexico's progress in improving its counternarcotics efforts , we met with officials from u.s. agencies in washington , d.c. , and at the u.s. embassy in mexico . specifically in washington , d.c. , we reviewed and analyzed strategic and operational planning documents , cables , and correspondence at the departments of state , the treasury , and justice ; the u.s. customs service ; dea ; the federal bureau of investigation ; the u.s. coast guard ; and ondcp . in addition , at the u.s. embassy in mexico city , we interviewed u.s. embassy officials , including the chargé d'affaires , and personnel from the narcotics affairs section , dea , the federal bureau of investigation , the u.s. customs service , and the department of the treasury . we reviewed and analyzed planning documents , cables , and correspondence regarding the progress that mexico was making in improving its counternarcotics efforts . to assess the issues related to the provision of u.s. counternarcotics assistance to the mexican military , we met with dod officials from the office of the coordinator for drug enforcement policy and support ; the defense security assistance agency ; and the departments of the army , navy , and air force . at the u.s. embassy in mexico city , we interviewed u.s. military personnel from the military liaison office and the office of the defense attaché . we reviewed and analyzed all reports , cables , and correspondence provided by the u.s. embassy and dod regarding how u.s. - provided counternarcotics assistance was being used and problems associated with maintaining this assistance . to determine how the u.s. government plans to assess the effectiveness of u.s. and mexican counternarcotics efforts , we interviewed officials from ondcp and the department of state . we reviewed and analyzed documents and correspondence related to the status of developing performance measures for evaluating the effectiveness of counternarcotics efforts with mexico . while in mexico , we also interviewed mexican officials from the ministries of treasury , foreign affairs , and the office of the attorney general to obtain their views on the issues discussed in this report . we also visited with mexican police officials at their maintenance facility in mexico city and with mexican air force personnel at their maintenance facility in culiacan , mexico to determine how the police and air force were maintaining uh - 1h helicopters . finally , we analyzed mexican reports and other documents relating to the progress that mexico was making to reduce the flow of drugs into the united states and mexican military reports addressing operational readiness and issues relating to the delivery of u.s. - provided assistance . we conducted our review between september 1997 and april 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .