f / a - 18cs will . the navy does plan to add the capability to launch the advanced medium range air - to - air missile ( amraam ) to f - 14ds when their computer software is updated . ( amraam is the defense department's newest air - to - air missile. ) the navy has stated that it cannot afford to add stand - off weapon capability to other f - 14s . currently , f / a - 18cs have amraam capability . table 1 shows the weapons carried by f - 14s and f / a - 18cs . in defending the f - 14 upgrade , navy officials said f - 14s have a combat range and / or endurance approaching that of the a - 6e , which is considerably longer than the f / a - 18 . while range ( distance ) and endurance ( loiter time in the target area ) are important capabilities , they are not as critical in littoral warfare , when carriers may operate close to shore . operating close to the shore decreases the distance to targets and increases the amount of loiter time the aircraft has at or near the target . the secretary of the navy , in the 1994 posture statement , stated that 85 percent of the navy's potential targets are within 200 miles of the world's shorelines . although the f - 14 generally has greater range and endurance than the f / a - 18c , the majority of littoral targets should be within the f / a - 18c's range , even with an aircraft carrier operating 100 miles or more offshore . the navy's atlantic fleet officials told us that f / a - 18cs carrying four 1,000-pound bombs and external fuel tanks have an unrefueled mission radius of about 340 miles . future f / a - 18es are projected to carry the same weapon load up to 520 miles without refueling . while the longer range f - 14s could potentially reach the 15 percent of the targets beyond 200 miles of shorelines , alternatives are available . the navy's tomahawk cruise missile can strike fixed targets up to a range of about 700 miles . air force bombers , with mid - air refueling , have even a greater range . if aerial refueling is available , as should be the case with u.s. forces operating jointly , an aircraft's range , including the f / a - 18's , can be extended significantly . the block i f - 14 aircraft will not have all of the capability of the air force's f - 15e strike eagle ( a long range , all - weather , multimission strike fighter with precision weapons capability ) , the navy's own f / a - 18c hornet , or its a - 6e intruder ( see table 2 ) .