we disagree . regardless of which barracks design standard is used , barracks wear out and eventually require repair , modernization , and renovation . for this reason , our analysis considered only costs to fully implement the three barracks design standards . finally , dod commented that our analysis of costs for full implementation of the 1+1 barracks design is not based on any dod or service plan . as such , dod stated that our analysis failed to consider that the services plan to replace existing barracks only after they reach the end of their useful life . in describing the services' plans , our report notes that new barracks will be constructed , when required , to replace barracks at the end of their economic life . we did not intend to suggest that existing barracks should be abandoned and new 1+1 barracks should be immediately constructed . rather , our analysis is intended to estimate the costs for the army , the air force , and the navy to fully implement the 1+1 standard over time , which represents the current plans of these services . dod also provided some technical comments , which we have incorporated as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to senator robert c. byrd , senator carl levin , senator ted stevens , senator john w. warner , and to representative david r. obey , representative ike skelton , representative floyd d. spence , and representative c.w . bill young , in their capacities as chair or ranking minority member of senate and house committees . we are also sending copies of this report to the honorable william cohen , secretary of defense ; the honorable louis caldera , secretary of the army ; the honorable richard danzig , secretary of the navy ; the commandant of the marine corps , general charles c. krulak ; and the honorable f.w . peters , acting secretary of the air force . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5140 if you or your staff have any questions on this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . module with 2 private sleeping rooms , 2 closets , 1 bath , 1 kitchenette total building area maximum per module ( sq ft ) : total building area maximum per room ( sq ft ) : total net living area in sleeping room ( sq ft ) : net living area in sleeping room per member ( sq ft ) : e1-e4 ( e1-e3 marines ) : 1 member per sleeping room , 2 members share bath . e5-e6 ( e4-e5 marines ) : 1 member per module ( 2 sleeping rooms ) . module with 2 sleeping rooms , 2 baths , normally no kitchenette each room has 2 closets and 1 bath .