( see app . iii for department of state comments. ) both the department of state and ondcp noted that congressional pressure has constrained the u.s. counternarcotics effort and recently passed legislation further restricts what the united states could do in burma . ondcp , the department of state , and dea ( see app . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . little , if any , tax revenue has been used for badly needed development . elements of uwsa are comprised of many of the fighting forces of the former communist party of burma ( cpb ) . for many years , communist china supported cpb , including providing ( 1 ) food , mainly rice , that enabled the wa people to maintain a subsistence existence with little dependence on cash generated from opium cultivation and ( 2 ) military equipment that had enabled the wa people to successfully defend wa territory against slorc . however , following the collapse of communism worldwide and the subsequent withdrawal of support for the cpb by communist china , uwsa was formed . uwsa relies on funds derived from opium trafficking to buy arms and support its forces . the withdrawal of support from communist china , combined with the slorc's unfulfilled promises of development assistance , has resulted in hardships for many of the wa's subsistence farmers . u.s. legislation and policy restrict the level of assistance to the government of burma . the restrictions are based largely on the slorc's ( 1 ) insufficient progress in stopping opium cultivation and heroin trafficking within its borders , ( 2 ) record of human rights violations , and ( 3 ) refusal to install a democratically elected government . before slorc took over the government of burma , the united states was supporting counternarcotics activities in burma . however , we reported in september 1989 that , “eradication and enforcement efforts are unlikely to significantly reduce burma's opium production unless they are combined with economic development in the growing regions and the political settlement of burma's ethnic insurgencies.” regardless of the u.s. position , slorc is nonetheless the recognized government of burma , and wa territory is considered to be part of burma . as such , bilateral u.s. assistance to the wa people would require the slorc's knowledge and consent . however , according to u.s. government officials , slorc would strongly oppose direct u.s. assistance to the wa people . the officials stated that slorc would react with anger and regard such direct assistance as a violation of their sovereignty . furthermore , because of u.s. policy , which strongly criticizes burma's human rights violations and slorc's refusal to install a democratically elected government , u.s. counternarcotics assistance efforts in burma are nearly nonexistent .