we also met with the u.s . ambassador to honduras and other embassy officials , including the commander of the usmilgp , the defense attache , and the dea country attache . additionally , we interviewed former and present honduran government and military officials regarding the u.s. military presence in honduras . we did not assess the effectiveness of the programs that are supported by jtf - b and the other u.s. military units at the base . we conducted our review between october 1993 and june 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense , state , and treasury ; the attorney general ; the commissioner of u.s. customs ; the administrator of dea ; the directors of the office of national drug control policy and the office of management and budget ; and interested congressional committees . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4128 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . mario l. artesiano , regional assignment manager nancy t. toolan , evaluator - in - charge daniel e. ranta , evaluator sara l. bingham , reports analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . the remainder serve a 1-year tour . in april 1994 , authorized u.s. military personnel at soto cano was reduced to 780 ( see app . at the time of our fieldwork , dod officials told us that the level of personnel was scheduled to increase to about 900 in october 1994 due to the relocation of helicopter personnel and three helicopters stationed in panama . dod officials informed us that this move was being made to keep aircraft assets in the theater due to the drawdown of u.s. forces in panama . however , during discussions on a draft of this report , dod officials told us that the level is now scheduled to decrease to about 500 personnel in october 1995 due to the deactivation of a helicopter battalion , which will reduce the number of helicopters from 31 to 11 . in addition , all u.s. aviation operations and support at soto cano will be consolidated with jtf - b facilities , and the current main air facility , camp pickett , will be closed . according to dod documents , the u.s. military presence at soto cano contributes about $14 million annually to the honduran economy in the form of contracts and services to support the u.s. military presence . this includes the u.s. military personnel estimated spending on the honduran local economy . with the resolution of military conflicts and greater political stability in central america , the focus of u.s. interest in the region has shifted from political / military objectives to economic growth and democracy building .