these savings are attributable to two factors . first , dod expects that an air national guard squadron will require fewer flying hours than an active squadron because air national guard units are able to recruit more experienced pilots who require less frequent training to maintain their proficiency . personnel costs are the second major factor that account for the air national guard's lower cost . in comparison with active squadrons that consist primarily of active military personnel , air national guard units rely heavily on less - costly civilians and part - time guard personnel . placing an additional 24 b - 1bs in the air national guard , thereby achieving a 50 / 50 active / reserve ratio when attrition and backup aircraft are excluded , would result in a cost savings of about $70 million in budget authority for fiscal years 1997-2001 , according to the congressional budget office . table 5.5 identifies the annual savings associated with this option . in developing its estimate , the congressional budget office assumed that one additional air national guard unit consisting of eight aircraft would be started in fiscal year 2000 and two additional units would be started in 2001 . savings shown for 2001 would recur annually beyond the years shown . although there would be some costs associated with starting up new air national guard units , these costs could be kept to a minimum if the units are located at the same bases as active duty bomber units , as dod suggested in its 1993 report to the congress on transferring bombers to the reserve component . this has occurred at barksdale air force base in louisiana where the air force has located a b - 52h air force reserve squadron alongside active b - 52h units . the air force plans to move a detachment of six b - 1bs currently located at ellsworth air force base in south dakota to mountain home air force base in idaho so that the detachment will be collocated with the 366th wing , one of the air force's three composite wings . keeping these six aircraft at ellsworth would result in no measurable loss of capability and would enable dod to save about $40 million . leaving these six b - 1bs at ellsworth also would eliminate potential difficulties in operating from mountain home that could occur over the next few years if the air force moves the aircraft as planned before construction of permanent facilities has begun . force projection composite wings are a significant change from the air force's traditional peacetime basing and wartime employment of aircraft . traditionally , the air force has based one type of aircraft in a wing to achieve economies of specialization . in wartime , the air force assembles the needed mix of aircraft as a composite force package en route to a target . by permanently collocating different types of aircraft under one commander , the air force intends that force projection composite wings can deploy rapidly and fight autonomously , if necessary .