there are standard ways of dealing with these limitations . the problem of response bias can be dealt with first by sending out multiple questionnaires . the extent to which response bias is a factor can be estimated through a special survey of nonrespondents , which is typically conducted by telephone . the results of the nonrespondent survey are compared against the results of the principal survey to gauge the degree to which respondents are typical of the overall sample . subjectivity of the assessments of cancer can also be gauged to a degree through an independent medical review of a subsample of respondents . in addition , subjectivity of assessments is somewhat less of a concern in terms of tumors than many other illnesses . also , care needs to be taken to ensure that the size of the sample is large enough to characterize with confidence differences between the gulf war veteran and the comparison groups . tumors that have a low background incidence would need to be studied with extremely large sample sizes to detect an elevated incidence among gulf war veterans . sample sizes required to draw conclusions would need to be determined at the earliest stages of the study . a further concern in implementing large population surveys is that they tend to be much more costly than the other approaches being presented here . in addition , the type and number of questions must be restricted or people will not respond . this approach is being employed by va to study the general health status of gulf war veterans . the national health survey of persian gulf war era veterans uses a mailed survey to compare self - reported symptoms and illnesses between a random sample of 15,000 gulf war and 15,000 nondeployed veterans . the questionnaire includes a checklist of illnesses , including skin cancer and “any other cancer” and a checklist of symptoms such as “coughing” and “skin rashes.” in addition to questions about current health status , respondents are also asked to report about their exposure to a list of agents including nerve gas , depleted uranium , and smoke from oil well fires while they were in the gulf war region . the overall response rate to the survey has been relatively low ( 57 percent ) . va is conducting a survey of nonrespondents in order to evaluate nonresponse bias . va is also addressing the limitation imposed by subjective assessments through an independent review of medical records and “comprehensive physical examination” of a subsample of 2,000 respondents ( 1,000 in each of the gulf war veteran and nondeployed veterans groups ) . the sample size of va's survey may also be too small to identify elevated incidence of most cancers . with respect to the issue of statistical power , va has acknowledged that , “the study may provide inadequate statistical power to detect a small increase in risk for rare adverse health outcomes in a particular subgroup of veterans.” in 1996 , the institute of medicine concluded , “this is a well - designed and well - intended study.” according to the institute , however , “there appeared to be little statistical input in the analysis plan reviewed , and these data will require sophisticated statistical adjustment.