additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . this sample was not intended to be a scientific sample . in addition , we interviewed officials from ofpp , as well as industry officials about ( 1 ) the changes related to market research and the procurement of commercial items and ( 2 ) the feasibility of creating a governmentwide database for market data . industry officials were from lockheed martin ; mcdonnell douglas corporation ; international business machines corporation ; input — a market research organization ; the computer and communications industry association ; the computer business and equipment manufacturers' association ; the aerospace industries association ; and the electronics industry association . in addition , we reviewed prior reports , hearings , studies , and selected market surveys / investigations relating to the government's efforts to identify commercial items and ndi . we also reviewed ( 1 ) the draft and final versions of the new market research provisions in the far , along with comments provided by the various federal agencies and industry organizations and ( 2 ) agency guidance related to market research , such as the new dod series 5000.1 , entitled “defense acquisition” and 5000.2-r , entitled “mandatory procedures for major defense acquisition programs and major automated information system acquisition programs,” both dated march 15 , 1996 . we also observed several demonstrations by agency officials of market research tools on the internet and obtained various market research documentation from the internet . section 8305 of fasa also required us to make “ . any recommendations for changes in law or regulations that the comptroller general considers appropriate.” since it is early in the implementation of the far market research changes and the results from such changes are not expected until a year after implementation , we have no changes to recommend at this time . we conducted our review between october 1995 and july 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in commenting on a draft of this report , dod , epa , gsa , nasa , and ofpp generally agreed with the information in the report . each made some suggestions to improve the clarity and technical accuracy of the report and we have incorporated them in the text where appropriate . dod and nasa submitted written comments , and the other agencies submitted theirs orally . dod's and nasa's comments are reprinted in appendixes iv and v , respectively . we are sending copies of this report to the director , office of management and budget ; the secretary of defense ; the administrator of ofpp ; the administrator of nasa ; the administrator of gsa ; the administrator of epa ; and other interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please contact me or my associate director , david e. cooper , at ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix vi .