this problem is not new . in 1996 , in our review of combat air power , we reported that dod has not been adequately examining its combat air power force structure and its modernization plans from a joint perspective . we found that dod does not routinely develop information on joint mission needs and aggregate capabilities and therefore has little assurance that decisions to buy , modify , or retire air power systems are sound . we concluded that the chairman could better advise the secretary of defense on programs and budgets if he conducted more comprehensive assessments in key mission areas . we added that broader assessments that tackle the more controversial issues would enable the chairman to better assist the secretary of defense in making the difficult trade - off decisions that will likely be required . they can be powered or unpowered . the range from which they can be launched varies from a few miles for the unpowered guided bomb unit ( gbu ) series of weapons to several hundred miles for the tomahawk cruise missile and the conventional air - launched cruise missile ( calcm ) . most guided weapons are launched from aircraft or helicopters , but the tomahawk is launched from navy surface ships and submarines ; and the army tactical missile system ( atacms ) is launched from the multiple launch rocket system . they can be guided by the global positioning system ( gps ) , infrared sensors , electro - optical sensors , or lasers . some weapons have single warheads , others carry many antipersonnel or antiarmor submunitions . the specific guided weapon used depends on the type of target , the defenses around the target , and whether areas adjacent to the target must be avoided . deep attack guided weapons are used for operations carried out beyond the areas where friendly ground forces are operating . these weapons can be released very close to the target or at standoff ranges many miles from the target , either vertically or horizontally . “standoff” range is the distance between the weapon launcher and the target . guided weapons were first used in the vietnam war to destroy targets that previously required tons of unguided general purpose weapons . however , guided weapons proved their value in the persian gulf war , when the world watched them make precision attacks against targets in iraq . guided weapons were subsequently recognized as having the potential to revolutionize warfare . before the gulf war , aircrew training focused on a potential central european conflict and emphasized low - altitude tactics using aircraft and weapons designed for such missions . however , iraqi air defenses included large numbers of antiaircraft artillery that could put up a “wall of iron” against low - flying aircraft . after several aircraft losses , and to avoid the risk of losing a b - 52h to antiaircraft artillery , pilots were ordered to drop weapons from higher altitudes than anticipated . at these altitudes , however , bombing with general purpose bombs was not accurate , and wind forces became a factor . the improved accuracy and lethality of the new deep attack weapons are expected to facilitate the use of advanced tactics , such as nodal targeting .