additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the secretary of the treasury is responsible for manufacturing and protecting u.s. currency . the secret service investigates counterfeiting and maintains counterfeit - detection data , and the bureau of engraving and printing designs and prints u.s. currency . the federal reserve issues u.s. currency , pays u.s. currency to and receives u.s. currency from authorized financial institutions in the united states ( some of which may have affiliates and / or customers outside the united states ) , and is responsible for substantiating the authenticity of all u.s. currency received . the federal reserve also maintains data on the amount of u.s. currency that its customers report as shipped to and from the united states and the amount that it detects as counterfeit . developed in conjunction with the advanced counterfeit deterrence steering committee , the treasury's audit plan identifies data sources , sets forth site selection criteria , lists questionnaires to be used in interviews abroad , discusses what audit reports might contain , sets time frames , and states that the federal reserve will attempt to specify and test a model of currency usage abroad . the federal reserve indicated that through its foreign - origin currency receipts it is able to examine a significant portion of the u.s. currency estimated to be circulating outside of the united states . such receipts amounted to at least 13 percent of the currency that was likely to be outside of the united states in 1995 and may amount to 20 percent in 1996 , according to the federal reserve . the treasury official also stated that the treasury understands the limitations of the secret service's counterfeit - detection statistics and realizes that these actual detections do not capture all of the u.s. currency counterfeit - activity that occurs worldwide . nevertheless , the treasury believes that its data and supporting evidence on actual detections suggest that the amount of counterfeit u.s. currency in circulation is not much larger than federal reserve statistics indicate .