ii ) . to determine current depot support plans and the allocation of workload between the public and private sectors , we sent structured interviews to 88 new acquisition and major upgrade programs ( see app . 2466 statute . the 13 programs that have not yet officially decided on a support strategy include programs with some of the largest estimated acquisition costs in dod's acquisition programs . these programs include the c - 17 transport aircraft , the f - 22 fighter aircraft , f / a - 18e / f fighter and attack aircraft , and the comanche helicopter . several program officials told us that they were delaying final support decisions , in part , because of the uncertain status of dod depot and core policies and what they viewed as the potential for changes to the legislative requirements relating to the workload mix between the public and private sectors . in the meantime , officials plan to rely on interim contractor support or similar arrangements . the c - 17 program is an example . despite several comprehensive studies over a number of years , air force senior managers could not decide upon a long - term support strategy because of uncertainties about the future public depot structure , core capability requirements , privatization initiatives , and the 60 / 40 provision — which as previously discussed was changed to 50 / 50 by the 1998 defense authorization act . in addition , cost estimates did not identify significant differences between public and private options ; estimates were within 10 percent of each other and both options were considered viable . as a result , the c - 17 program office is using an interim flexible sustainment strategy and has awarded a contract making the prime contractor responsible for almost all logistics support and systems management tasks . lifetime support decisions will be deferred until 2003 or later for depot workloads other than the engine . officials decided that contractor support for the engine was clearly cost - effective and would be competed in the private sector . the c - 17 engine is a commercial derivative with existing private sector repair sources . depot officials noted , however , that they believe the flexible sustainment decision on the c - 17 is not so flexible and will by necessity lead to life - cycle support by the prime contractor . on this program , as well as on past interim contractor support programs we have reviewed , we note that by not acquiring or budgeting for the technical data and other depot support resources required to establish an organic depot capability , that dod may in fact be making the decision to leave life - cycle maintenance support with original equipment manufacturers . the data for the 71 new systems reflect a marked shift from past policies and practices , which generally preferred the public sector . officials from all three services told us that , in the past , public depots were generally the first option considered . a review of service data from about 10 years ago showed that most systems were to be supported by dod depots .