ii. ) as shown in figure 1.1 , more than half of the funds has been appropriated for operations and maintenance activities , such as operating salaries and utilities , and systems engineering and program management . the balance has funded procurement of equipment , construction of facilities , and research and development activities . from 1917 through the 1960s , obsolete or unserviceable chemical warfare agents and munitions were disposed of by open pit burning , land burial , and ocean dumping . in 1969 , an army plan to dispose of chemical agents and munitions at sea raised public concerns about the safety of transporting chemical weapons from their storage sites to a port of embarkation and about the potential effects of ocean dumping on the environment . in june 1969 , the national academy of sciences recommended that ocean dumping be avoided and that public health and environmental protection be emphasized . it suggested two alternatives to ocean disposal: incineration of mustard agents and chemical neutralization of nerve agents . in response , the army stopped ocean dumping operations . ( see chronology in app . iv. ) during the 1970s , the army destroyed obsolete chemical weapons primarily by high - temperature incineration or by chemical neutralization . the neutralization process involves altering the chemical , physical , and toxicological properties of a chemical warfare agent to render it ineffective for use as intended . in 1984 , the national research council , under the auspices of the national academy of sciences , decided that incineration was the more desirable disposal method . it concluded that the neutralization process was more costly and produced larger quantities of waste than incineration . in 1986 , the army submitted to the congress a plan to dispose of the chemical stockpile . its plan considered the costs and potential problems associated with three options: ( 1 ) transferring the entire stockpile to one site for disposal , ( 2 ) transferring it to two regional disposal sites , and ( 3 ) operating separate disposal facilities at each of the storage locations . in 1988 , the army formally announced that on - site incineration was its preferred disposal method . the army and many in the congress rejected transporting the chemical stockpile weapons to a national or regional disposal sites because of the increased risk to the public and the environment from moving the munitions . a baseline incineration process uses a reverse - assembly procedure that drains the chemical agent from the weapons and containers and takes apart the weapons in the reverse order of assembly . ( see fig . once disassembled , the chemical agent and weapon parts are incinerated in separate furnaces and the gaseous and solid waste is treated . liquid brine resulting from the treatment of exhaust gases in the pollution abatement system is dried to reduce the volume and transported to a commercial hazardous waste management facility . in november 1991 , because of public concern about the safety of incineration , the army requested the national research council to evaluate potential technological alternatives to the baseline incineration process . in the 1993 national defense authorization act ( p.l .