the pacific contract has not been used . the air force's program is known as the air force contract augmentation program . the air force solicitation process began on september 13 , 1996 , and contract award is expected during february 1997 . the contract will also be awarded for 1 year with 4 option years . the contractor upgraded 15 of these camps . the decision to accelerate the schedule for improving the camps also increased estimated costs . the army's december 1995 cost estimate was based on a plan in which both the contractor and the military engineer units would initially erect tents and construct rudimentary support facilities . the camps would then be upgraded by the contractor in two follow - on efforts . ( see fig . in the first effort , the contractor would add wooden floors to the tents ; provide lighting , heating , latrines , showers , electric power , and water ; and build kitchen and dining facilities . in the second effort , the contractor would provide for level tent pads and tent frames with insulated walls and ceilings . however , a u.s. army , europe official told us that because of the harsh weather conditions , which included flooding and mud , the commander in chief decided to have the contractor go straight to the end - state standard for all camps and to increase the standard to modular housing units at several camps where conditions were particularly harsh . because the contractor was not given additional time to meet the higher standards , significantly more equipment and material had to be commercially air transported into the area of operations . four companies competed for the contract . the 1992 logcap contract required the contractor to ( 1 ) develop a worldwide management plan and 13 regional plans , ( 2 ) participate in planning and exercises , and ( 3 ) be prepared to execute the plans upon notification . the worldwide management plan is a general description of the equipment , personnel , and supporting services required to support a force of up to 20,000 troops in 5 base camps for up to 180 days and up to 50,000 troops beyond 180 days . the regional plans use the worldwide management plan as a baseline to provide detailed logistics and engineering support plans for a geographic region based on a specific planning scenario prescribed by the requiring commander . the army decided to use the logcap contract in december 1995 to augment its forces that are part of the bosnian peacekeeping mission . the united states provides a major portion of the mission's implementing force as set forth in the dayton peace accords and occupies key leadership positions responsible for the mission . the u.s. army , europe provides most of the u.s. force and is the major command responsible for the mission's logistics planning and funding . u.s. forces deployed in support of the implementation force were located in 4 countries and numbered approximately 22,200: about 16,200 in bosnia , about 1,400 in croatia , and about 4,600 in hungary and italy . several factors created unique challenges for the army as it implemented logcap during the bosnian mission .