both decoys are single use systems . once deployed from the aircraft , the decoy's tow line is severed prior to return to base . each aircraft is to carry multiple decoys , so if one is destroyed by enemy fire or malfunctions , another can be deployed . therefore , substantial inventories of decoys are required to sustain potential combat operations . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . we interviewed officials from the office of the secretary of defense , the navy , and the air force involved in the acquisition and testing processes of towed decoy systems . we also interviewed contractor personnel involved in the development , integration , and / or production of towed decoy systems . we performed our work at the offices of the secretaries of defense , the navy , and the air force ; f - 15 , f - 16 , and b - 1 system program offices at the air force material command , wright - patterson air force base , ohio ; f / a - 18 and tactical air electronic warfare program offices at the program executive office for naval tactical aviation , naval air systems command , washington , d. c. ; the 53rd wing and air force operational test and evaluation detachment , eglin air force base , florida ; and selected contractor locations , including mcdonnell - douglas aircraft , lockheed - martin , and rockwell international . we performed our review from february 1996 to july 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the navy's plan is to procure enough rfcm systems and spares to equip and support 600 of its planned buy of 1,000 f / a - 18e / f aircraft . the services expect that these decoys will improve survivability of their aircraft against radar - controlled threats compared to the current technique of emitting the jamming signals directly from the aircraft . classified test results show that the ale - 50 towed decoy offers improved effectiveness against radar - controlled threats , including some threat systems against which self - protection jammers have shown little to no effectiveness . to accomplish our objective of determining whether towed decoys could improve survivability of air force and navy aircraft , we examined dod and contractor analyses of adding towed decoy systems and reviewed air force and navy ale - 50 test results from testing on a variety of aircraft . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense , the navy , and the air force ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other congressional committees . we will make copies available to others upon request . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-2841 , if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii .