use the commissaries . this information could be developed by deca using recognized survey techniques . while dod has conducted two surveys involving reservists in the past several years , neither has provided adequate or sufficient information regarding reservist usage . a 1992 dod reserve components survey was done to gain insight into the utilization of and satisfaction with military facilities by reserve officers , enlisted personnel , and their spouses . it did not attempt to estimate the overall commissary patronage level attributable to reservists or project their usage to the system as a whole . this survey disclosed that 39 percent of reservists reported that they used the commissary system ; however , 61 percent said they did not . sixty eight percent of all reservists surveyed cited distance from the commissary as a factor that limited their usage of the system while the policy restricting reservists' access to commissaries was reported by 25 percent . a 1994 commissary patron demographic survey developed information to describe certain aspects of the typical commissary customer and estimated that reservists represented about 5 percent of commissary patronage . however , according to deca officials as well as our analysis , the survey results were not projectable to a systemwide perspective because of flaws in methodology . specifically , ( 1 ) the distribution of commissaries selected for the survey was based on the distribution of the general population — not the population distribution of reservists in the united states — and ( 2 ) the survey was conducted during a holiday period that did not represent normal operations . to identify locations where increased patronage is most likely , deca needs to analyze the locations of commissaries in relation to concentrations of reservists and the distances to individual stores . reservists are located throughout the united states , but , only 209 stores were available within the continental united states in 1996 . this means that many reservists are not located close to a store and , therefore , may not be able to use the system on a regular basis . analyzing demographic data that reflects the location of reservists in relation to available commissary stores and baseline estimates of existing patronage levels in the overall system should identify those geographic areas where increased sales are likely or possible . the distribution of stores is shown in table 1 . stores likely to experience sales increases could be identified by analyzing the demographic data and determining the baseline estimates of existing patronage levels . none of the proposals were adopted by congress . the first was submitted for fiscal year 1994 and would have granted reservists , including “gray area” retirees , the same unlimited access as active duty personnel . for fiscal year 1996 , dod proposed that “gray area” retirees be granted permanent , unlimited commissary access and that the other reservists be provided unlimited access for a 1-year test period . for fiscal year 1997 , dod proposed a 1-year test of unlimited benefits for all reservists ( including dependents ) at one or more areas in the united states . no plans have been developed to conduct the field tests proposed in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 .