this report responds to that mandate . as agreed with your offices , this report specifically addresses ( 1 ) private sector practices that streamline logistics operations , ( 2 ) department of defense ( dod ) initiatives to improve its logistics systems , and ( 3 ) best practices that can be used to improve the military services' aircraft reparable parts pipeline . our analysis relates to work performed in public repair facilities rather than contractor repair operations . because aircraft parts represent a large portion of dod's secondary inventory investment , we focused our best practices analysis on dod's management of these items . however , many of the logistics system improvements identified through our analysis could be applied to dod's management of other reparable parts . as of september 30 , 1996 , dod reported the value of its secondary inventory — consumable items and reparable parts — at $68.5 billion . consumable items , such as clothing and medical supplies , are managed primarily by dla . reparable parts are generally expensive items that can be fixed and used again , such as hydraulic pumps , navigational computers , wing sections , and landing gear . each military service manages reparable parts that are used for their operations . these management functions include determining how many parts will be needed to support operations , purchasing new parts , and deciding when broken parts need to be repaired . as shown in figure 1 , aircraft reparable parts represent an estimated 59 percent of dod's secondary inventory . another airline that adopted this approach in its engine - blade repair shop was able to reduce repair time by 50 to 60 percent and decrease work - in - process inventory by 60 percent . several airlines and manufacturers have worked with suppliers to improve parts support and reduce overall inventory . two approaches — the use of local distribution centers and integrated supplier programs — specifically seek to improve the management and distribution of consumable items , such as nuts , bolts , and fuses . these approaches help ensure that the consumable items for repair and manufacturing operations are readily available , which prevents parts from stalling in the repair process and helps speed up repair time . in addition , by improving management and distribution methods , such as streamlined ordering and fast deliveries , these approaches enable firms to delay the purchase of inventory until a point that is closer to the time it is needed . firms , therefore , can reduce their stocks of “just - in - case” inventory . local distribution centers are supplier - operated facilities that are established near a customer's operations and provide deliveries of parts within 24 hours . one airline that used this approach has worked with key suppliers to establish more than 30 centers near its major repair operations . these centers receive orders electronically and , in some cases , handle up to eight deliveries a day . airline officials said that the ability to get parts quickly has contributed to repair time reductions . in addition , the officials said that the centers have helped the airline cut its on - hand supply of consumable items nearly in half .