for example , in the competition for the u.k . replacement maritime patrol aircraft , the two u.s. competing products lost to a british aerospace developed product , the upgraded nimrod aircraft . this british aerospace product , however , contained significant u.s. content with major components coming from such companies as boeing . we discussed procurement policies with european and u.s. government officials . we met with ministry of defense officials in france , germany , and the united kingdom , as well as u.s. embassy officials in those countries . we did not conduct fieldwork in italy or the netherlands , but we did discuss these countries' procurement policies with officials from their embassies in washington , d.c. we also reviewed documents describing the procurement policies and procedures of the selected countries and u.s. government assessments and cables about major defense contract awards that occurred in these countries and discussed factors affecting these procurement awards with u.s. government and industry officials . we did not review documentation on the bids or contract awards . we collected and analyzed data on defense budgets and defense trade , including foreign military and direct commercial sales to identify buying patterns in western europe over the past 5 years . we only used the foreign military sales data to analyze sales by weapons category for the five countries and western europe . direct commercial sales data , which are tracked by the state department through export licenses , were not organized by weapon categories for the last 5 years . however , we reviewed congressional notification records for direct commercial sales over $14 million for the last 5 years to supplement our analysis of foreign military sales data . to determine actions the u.s. industry and government have taken in response to changes in the european defense environment , we interviewed defense company and u.s. government officials within dod and the departments of commerce and state . with u.s. defense companies , we discussed their business strategies and the nature of the partnerships formed with european defense companies . we obtained and analyzed recently issued dod directives and policy memorandums on defense trade and international cooperation and discussed the effectiveness of these policies with u.s. and foreign government officials and u.s. and european defense companies . we performed our review from january to september 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and the secretaries of state and commerce . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4181 if you have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report were karen zuckerstein , anne - marie lasowski , and john neumann . western european union ( weu ) was established as a result of the agreements signed in paris in october 1954 modifying the 1948 brussels treaty . treaty of rome wae signed creating the european community . the independent european programme group was established to promote european cooperation in research , development , and production of defense equipment ; improve transatlantic armament cooperation ; and maintain a healthy european defense industrial base .