the program also benefits the government . for example , dod commented that the existence of a structured format for addressing contractual and legal violations encourages contractor ethics and internal review programs . the justice department pointed out that the program promotes corporate compliance with laws and regulations . according to dod , the key to deciding if a disclosure is voluntary is whether a contractor was aware of information the government possessed or was about to discover , thus motivating the contractor to make a disclosure . acceptance into the program has its benefits for contractors . for example , a contractor can expect ( 1 ) its liability in general to be less than treble damages , ( 2 ) action on any suspension to be deferred until after the disclosure is investigated , ( 3 ) the overall settlement to be coordinated with government agencies , ( 4 ) the disruption from adversarial government investigations to be reduced , and ( 5 ) the information may be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law and regulation . in a 1992 dod review of the program , dod noted cases in which it had determined that contractors' disclosures were eligible for admission into the program , but the justice department disagreed and recommended that the disclosures not be admitted into the program . in 1992 , when this disagreement was noted , the justice department proposed that it and dod establish a working group to resolve the issue . to date , we were told , this has not occurred . according to officials from the two departments , disagreements continue over whether some disclosures should be admitted into the program . in fact , two of the three cases that were the basis of the concerns reflected in the 1992 review remain in the program as open cases , and the justice department still has not concurred with dod's acceptance of these disclosures into the program . the disagreement between the two departments revolves around whether disclosures were triggered by knowledge of imminent discovery by the government . in this regard , dod believes that it is its prerogative , not the justice department's , to accept or reject a contractor's voluntary disclosure . dod stated that it did not always agree with the justice department on whether a company should be admitted into the program . however , dod stated that it and the justice department have worked well together in resolving the questions on a factual basis and that this cooperation has grown significantly over the last 2 years . dod stated that the dod inspector general staff and representatives of the defense procurement fraud unit meet every 6 weeks to discuss the status of disclosures . during our review , we were told that these meetings were to resolve cases that had been open for an extended period , not to address whether disclosures should be accepted into the program . through september 1994 , dod reported recoveries from the program of about $290 million , of which about 38 percent is associated with cases that are still open .