complaint documentation . the air force , the army , and the navy ( starting in nov. 1994 ) use complaint forms that guide and document the complaint process , from the filing of the complaint to the end of the investigation . each form is different . the marine corps' form is not eo specific , but is used to request a meeting with the commander for any reason . in its may 1995 report , deoc stated that differences in the complaint processes reflected differences in the services' missions , organization , and culture . “while general principles and standards can often be shared across service lines , the simple substitution of one service's complaints process for another is both undesirable and unworkable,” deoc asserted . in its focus group sessions with servicemembers , the house national security committee task force heard widespread reports that complaint systems did not serve members well . the task force identified a number of factors that an effective system should incorporate , including options for raising complaints outside the chain of command , strong support for the system from top leadership , and adherence to established timelines for investigating complaints and providing detailed feedback to complainants . at the time of our review , none of the six joint service commands and defense agencies we visited had written procedures for resolving eo complaints outside the chain of command . in addition , because the services' definitions of discrimination and procedures for resolving eo complaints vary , handling eo complaints involving members of different services could be difficult without written guidance for doing so . according to deoc , defense agencies were beginning to develop specific procedures for processing eo complaints . for the most part , the focus group discussions revealed that the servicemembers were familiar with their respective service's procedures for filing an eo complaint . one notable exception was in the navy . participants in these focus groups , particularly among the lower - ranked enlisted members , did not indicate they knew how to pursue a complaint beyond their chain of command . although most commands we visited adhered to their service requirements for addressing and resolving eo complaints , a few did not . most often , commands could not document that they had followed up to ensure complainants had not been subjected to reprisal . for example: at four air force bases we visited , 17 complaints filed during fiscal years 1993 and 1994 appeared to require follow - up , but 4 of these did not have the necessary documentation showing that follow - up reviews were done . at one army installation , 30 eo complaints filed during fiscal year 1994 appeared to require follow - up , but none of these had the necessary documentation showing that a follow - up review was done . two marine corps installations we visited could not provide evidence that they had procedures to detect and prevent reprisals . none of the three subordinate commands we visited at one navy fleet had established procedures to detect and deter reprisals , as required since 1989 . both the house task force and deoc focused on reprisal as a key issue .