this contract was recompeted three times . a cost - type contract was used because requirements could not be precisely estimated . in fort irwin's case , the base had been reactivated and there were no existing personnel operations on - site . during an extensive forces command review in the early 1990s , it was determined that the size and complexity of the contract had become cumbersome and in some cases not responsive to the installation's needs . this led to a may 1994 study to determine the most efficient and effective configuration to support the mission . as a result , fort irwin divided the multiple service contract into five separate contracts , two multiple service contracts , and three single function contracts for the 1996 resolicitation . the major portion of the existing multiple service contract was split into two cost - plus - award - fee contracts , one for installation support services and the other for logistics support . they were valued at approximately $14.2 million and $35.3 million , respectively . the logistics support contract provides services for tactical and nontactical vehicle maintenance , supply including ammunition , central receiving , and storage / issue / turn - in to name a few . the installation support contract provides a wide range of services such as public works , range , airfield , training support , community activities ( morale , welfare , and recreation ) , and provost marshal . the other three were fixed - price contracts for custodial services , food services , and indefinite quantity work , respectively . although contracts are used to meet most base support service needs , in - house personnel perform some support functions . examples of the services provided in - house include cooking , child development services , technical services , supply services , and training support . additionally , during the breakup of fort irwin's contract , the army medical command decided to take over contracting of the medical support functions — hospital housekeeping and biomedical maintenance . the last solicitation had two offerors . vance also uses other contracts and in - house personnel to meet its base operations support requirements . specifically , vance utilizes a single - service contract for simulation instruction , simulator maintenance , and technical support for training aircraft . other services such as pilot instructors , air traffic control , weather monitoring , and quality assurance are performed by in - house personnel . the arnold engineering development center at arnold air force base is an air force aerospace ground environmental test center providing testing services for the armed services , national air and space administration , both domestic and foreign commercial aerospace firms , and foreign governments . located in southern central tennessee , the center has been operated by contractors under the management of an air force commander and staff since 1951 . arnold meets its needs for base operations support by means of one contract for multiple support services and an additional service provided by in - house personnel . additionally , testing services , once part of the multiple support services contract , are now provided separately in a multiple testing service contract .