establishing its integration role has not been easy for usacom . retaining the effectiveness of america's military when budgets are generally flat and readiness and modernization are costly requires a fuller integration of the capabilities of the military services . as the premier trainer , provider , and integrator of conus - based forces , usacom has a particularly vital role if the u.s. military is to achieve new levels of effectiveness in joint warfighting . these assets are largely air force aircraft . in this support role , usacom has initiated several actions to help implement the policy , including bringing the services and geographic commands together to resolve conflicts over the distribution of assets , devising a monitoring report for the joint staff , and recommending to the services assets that should be included in future policy revisions . appendix vi provides a list of the low - density / high - demand assets currently assigned to usacom . the global military force policy does not capture all of the highly tasked assets . as of november 1998 , this interoperability concern had not been resolved . usacom can also enhance force integration through its responsibility as the trainer and readiness overseer of assigned reserve component forces . this responsibility allows usacom to influence the training and readiness of these reserves and their budgets to achieve full integration of the reserve and active forces when the assigned reserves are mobilized . this is important because of the increased reliance on reserve component forces to carry out contingency missions . the usacom commander ( 1993-97 ) described the command's oversight as a critical step in bringing the reserve forces into the total joint force structure . usacom and others believe that the command has helped advance the joint military capabilities of u.s. forces . while usacom has conducted several self - assessments of its functional roles , we found that these assessments provided little insight into the overall value of the command's efforts to enhance joint capabilities . the command has established goals and objectives as a joint trainer , provider , and integrator and is giving increased attention to monitoring and accomplishing tasks designed to achieve these objectives and ultimately enhance joint operational capabilities . our discussions with various elements of dod found little consensus regarding the value of usacom's contributions in its functional roles but general agreement that the command is making important contributions that should enhance u.s. military capabilities . usacom has conducted three self - assessments of its functional roles . these appraisals did not specifically evaluate the command's contribution to improving joint operational capabilities but discussed progress of actions taken in its functional roles . the first two appraisals covered usacom's success in executing its plan for implementing the functional roles , while the most recent appraisal rated the command's progress in each of its major focus areas . for example , the policy does not include less prominent assets such as dog teams , military security police , water purification systems , intelligence personnel , and medical units .