navy aircraft . a new production , all - weather , carrier - based airborne combat information center providing tactical early warning , surveillance , intercept , search and rescue , communications relay , and strike and air traffic control . air force aircraft . a major modification to provide the air combat command with new and improved capabilities for the awacs radar . it involves both hardware and software changes to the awacs . air force aircraft . a new production , next - generation stealthy air superiority fighter with first - look , first - kill capability against multiple targets . it will replace the f - 15c aircraft in the air superiority role . navy aircraft . a new - production , major model upgrade to the f / a - 18c / d multimission tactical aircraft for navy fighter escort , interdiction , fleet air defense , and close - air support mission requirements . planned enhancements over the f / a - 18c / d include increased range , improved survivability , and improved carrier suitability . it will replace f / a - 18c / d models , a - 6 , and f - 14 aircraft . marine corps helicopter . an upgrade to the marine corps ah - 1w attack and uh - 1n utility versions of this helicopter to convert both versions from 2-bladed to 4-bladed rotor systems and provide the attack version with fully integrated cockpits . the attack version provides close air support , anti - armor , armed escort , armed / visual reconnaissance and fire support coordination under day / night and adverse weather conditions . the quadrennial defense review does not provide sufficiently detailed projections to judge the affordability of dod's new aircraft procurement plans by comparing the long - term funding expected to be available with the funding needed to fully implement those plans . the utility version provides day / night and adverse weather command and control , combat assault support , and aeromedical evacuation . air force and army aircraft . we recognize that , while the f / a - 18e / f will provide some improvements over the f / a - 18c / d , most notably in range , the f / a - 18c / d's current capabilities are adequate to accomplish its assigned missions . our rebuttals to dod's specific comment are contained in our report , naval aviation: f / a - 18e / f will provide marginal operational improvement at high cost ( gao / nsiad - 96-98 , june 18 , 1996 ) . navy aircraft . a strike pilot training system to replace the t - 2c and ta - 4j for strike and e2 and c2 pilots . it includes the t - 45a aircraft , simulators , and training equipment and materials . army helicopter . a new production , twin - engine air assault , air cavalry , and aeromedical evacuation helicopter that transports up to 14 troops and equipment into battle . it continues to replace the uh - 1h iroquois helicopter . navy , marine corps , and air force aircraft .