they must be designed into the missile system . adding them later , according to the program office , would require a basic redesign of the system and a production block change . until recently , these characteristics were optional , but , after a march 1996 meeting between dod , service , and contractor personnel , carrier operability became a firm requirement and is to be designed into jassm . integrating jassm with the f / a - 18 is not scheduled during the development program . this integration issue was debated by the air force and navy during the formation of the jassm acquisition plan . the issues appear to be funding , availability of test aircraft , and increased complexity of the development program . in march 1996 , the chief of naval operations committed to providing funds for f / a - 18 integration , but this is not expected to occur during jassm development . to meet the air force's urgent need for jassm , the program's development and initial production is scheduled to achieve an initial deployment of the weapon system in late 2001 , or about 5 years after the start of the program . while no other missile in dod's inventory provides all the capabilities planned for jassm , several in inventory or development offer significant capability , particularly for the navy . accordingly , the services may have more time , if necessary , to develop and test jassm without excessive schedule risk . the jassm mission need statement identifies an urgent need for a new missile , because current air - launched standoff weapons are very limited in number and do not provide the required capability . the operational requirements document states that jassm should provide the following required capabilities: autonomous guidance , precision accuracy , automatic target recognition , ability to destroy fixed hard and soft targets , carriage by the primary fighter and bomber aircraft , and survivability . according to air force officials at the air combat command , jassm is urgently needed because ( 1 ) the command expected to have tssam in the year 2000 ; ( 2 ) until jassm is deployed , air force bombers and fighters will have only a limited number of long - range missiles ; and ( 3 ) available weapons are unable to destroy enemy command and control operations and integrated air defenses with acceptable attrition rates . until this need is met , command officials believe less cost - effective and less - capable alternatives will have to be used , resulting in potentially higher attrition rates for both the weapons and launch platforms . although no existing weapon has all the characteristics planned for jassm , several precision - guided munitions in the inventory or development have some of them . for example , the slam - er will provide much of the range planned for jassm . slam - er does not have an automatic target recognition capability , but can achieve precision accuracy with pilot assistance . the tomahawk missile , widely used during desert storm , can be launched hundreds of miles from a target to attack a specific building .