it did not model the qdr modernization decisions . some panel officials suggested that a better linking of the two assessments could improve the quality of the qdr , because changes in force structure could affect the size of some procurements . ( see fig . according to osd officials , several key assumptions were made for the regional great power assessment . jicm assumed that each side had equal intelligence on the activities of the other . in addition , it assumed that projected mobility forces were available and in working order and that support forces were ready and available . success in a war with a regional great power was based on assessing the extent to which u.s. and allied forces accomplished specific tasks , such as minimizing allied losses and moving battle lines , and returning the enemy to its pre - war border . service officials criticized the regional great power scenario for not representing a full range of threats that would require a broader range of joint war - fighting capabilities . for example , navy officials told us that main combat actions in the scenario occurred too far inland for naval aviation to make an effective contribution to the war and allow amphibious landings to be modeled at all . in general , maritime warfare was depicted only in a separate , supporting mobility analysis . an air force official stated that the proximity of the hypothetical continent to the united states was favorable to airlift capabilities . like tacwar , jicm is an aggregate model and not sensitive enough to show the impact of other than major changes in force structure , according to osd officials . also , service officials told us that jicm did not simulate their forces' capabilities well . for example , army officials complained that the theater - level focus of jicm modeled aircraft and air - delivered weapons more accurately than ground forces . therefore , the contribution of different ground forces is not as clearly discernable as various types of air power . an air force official said the use of the air force's space assets also could not be modeled with jicm . according to osd officials , the results of the assessment reassured them that the 1997 modernization program was the correct one to follow for the foreseeable future . they ran numerous excursions with varying levels of modernization , warning time , and ballistic missile threat . in no excursion were the united states and its allies in danger of losing the war . however , dod concluded that some excursions caused unacceptable levels of risk that the united states and its ally would not achieve their specific tasks . the regional great power assessment modeled four levels of modernization: the 1997 force , the 1997 force extended to 2014 , one - third and two - thirds of the 1997 extended force . the results showed that the more modernized the force , the faster the adversary was defeated , with less risk . in addition , the results showed that most of the benefits gained by modernization were achieved by the one - third modernized force .