this buyout was accepted by 1,178 employees . the buyout allocations focused on headquarters , marshall space flight center , lewis research center , and kennedy space center — the installations most affected by the space station's redesign and program management restructuring . no occupational categories were targeted in the 1994 buyout , but members of the senior executive service , attorneys at kennedy space center and marshall space flight center , and astronauts were not permitted buyouts , in part , because nasa felt that critical skills would be lost if these employees separated . after the 1994 buyout , nasa was confronted with an even larger downsizing challenge when the president's fiscal year 1996 budget request reduced nasa's budgets through fiscal year 2000 by $4.6 billion . nasa announced its intention to cover this reduction by cutting its infrastructure , including personnel , rather than canceling or cutting back program initiatives . the nasa administrator tasked the agency to conduct a zero base review ( zbr ) , which included examining every civil service and support contractor position in nasa to find and eliminate overlap and over staffing . one of the review's conclusions was that nasa's civil service workforce could be reduced to about 17,500 by the end of the decade without eliminating core programs . in anticipation of lower numbers of personnel , nasa offered another buyout in 1995 . we conducted our review principally at nasa headquarters , washington , d.c. , and the goddard space flight center , greenbelt , maryland . we also discussed personnel - related issues with nasa officials at marshall space flight center , huntsville , alabama , and lewis research center , cleveland , ohio . we performed our work from june 1995 to june 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 14 days from its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , the nasa administrator , the director of omb , and other interested parties upon request . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4841 . all employees were eligible and it was accepted by 1,482 employees . the 2,660 buyouts represented about 66 percent of the more than 4,000 employees who left nasa during fiscal years 1994 and 1995 , as shown in table 2 . nasa's scientists and engineers had the largest reductions in numbers , but the smallest proportionate reductions , as shown in table 3 . consequently , as of september 30 , 1995 , scientists and engineers made up almost 58 percent of nasa's ftp employees — slightly higher than a few years ago when they were about 56 percent of nasa's workforce . nasa personnel managers consider the two buyouts a success . given the rate of employee turnover experienced in the 2 years preceding the buyouts , they estimate that as many as 2,000 workers left the agency sooner than they would have without a buyout .