( see app . i for a list of service and dla icps by location and by those that are scheduled for downsizing. ) additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . to identify the cost savings of its scenario , lmi considered three areas through which savings were possible: ( 1 ) a transfer in place , ( 2 ) site consolidation , and ( 3 ) business process improvements . ( see app . ii for a list of the business improvements identified by lmi. ) lmi developed the cost savings for the transfer in place and site consolidations using the services' and dla's icp and supporting headquarters cost data . for the business process improvements , however , lmi could not obtain complete data from the services for all 16 improvements , but was able to price 4 individual initiatives that would result from the transfer . to develop the potential cost savings in these areas , lmi used cost factors and made assumptions that were conservative in nature . according to an lmi official , the team's conservative approach was designed to avoid overstating the anticipated cost savings . after examining the report on consolidation , we believe osd's approach was reasonable , given the sensitive nature of the issue , the limited amount of time to perform the review , and the data available . however , we concluded that the cost savings estimates would have been $1.3 billion to $2.3 billion greater if brac principles had been used . also , indications are that the savings estimates would be even greater if the review included the savings associated with all 16 business process improvements and likely future improvements to the material management information systems . full achievement of these additional savings is dependent on the consolidation of the icps under a single manager . given the short time frame lmi had to review the icp consolidation , it performed a conceptual analysis to show whether savings were possible . it did not use the cost of base realignment actions ( cobra ) model , which was used during the four brac rounds since 1988 to evaluate the cost of stationing alternatives .