government ? non - wto member countries are not subject to atc requirements ; therefore , quota determinations involving those countries are not notified or referred to the textile monitoring body ( tmb ) , and negotiations with them do not have specified time limits . the first step in the process is for otexa to identify an import increase that could indicate a “surge” in a particular product category . otexa then looks at domestic production data and gathers other relevant economic information for the same category . while otexa usually initiates tracking of likely cases of potential damage , industry representatives also maintain contact with otexa staff to inform them of their industry's economic conditions . when otexa believes that the economic indicators appear to signal serious damage to domestic producers , otexa staff contacts industry representatives and / or their trade associations to obtain more detailed information on the current situation and confirm production figures . when a case for serious damage appears strong , otexa staff forwards it to commerce's deputy assistant secretary for textiles , apparel , and consumer goods industries , who is also the cita chair , to decide whether to propose a call to the other cita principals . if the cita chair decides positively , then the otexa staff prepare a statement of serious damage or actual threat thereof . the statement , which is classified as confidential at this point , is distributed to the cita principals about 1 week before a cita meeting . at the meeting the principals have an opportunity to discuss the merits of and vote on the cases presented . if the principals approve the call by majority vote , the department of state then prepares a diplomatic note . the note , sent to the foreign government , contains the statement and requests consultations . in cases involving wto member countries , tmb is simultaneously notified . the decision to request consultations does not cause a quota to be imposed immediately on the product . after cita receives confirmation that the diplomatic note has been delivered , the statement is declassified and made public through a department of commerce telephone recording announcing the call . it is also published in the federal register , which provides notice of the request for consultations and a summary of the statement along with a request for public comment . commerce opens a public comment file on each call . commerce also makes the statement available in its trade reference room . before consultations with the foreign government begin , affected parties have an opportunity to meet with u.s. negotiators . ustr notifies industry advisors , including representatives of both the domestic producers and the importing and retailing community that may be affected . ustr and otexa officials meet with industry representatives for various reasons , including advising them of the call , obtaining information about the current market situation , and seeking guidance on the appropriate quota level . in addition , industry advisors , on their own initiative and expense , may accompany the u.s. government negotiating team on consultations abroad . however , they do not participate in the actual negotiations .