ward , evaluator . louis j. rodrigues director , systems development and production issues the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . these problems have yet to be resolved . to ensure that the hunter is reliable and does not create an excessive maintenance burden , system requirements specify that it require no more than one unanticipated repair every 4 hours . however , limited user tests showed that the hunter required unanticipated repairs every 1.2 hours . dod acknowledges that the system failed to meet this requirement but has taken no further action to demonstrate that the system can perform as required . instead , dod has relied on contractor estimates , which state that the requirement for unanticipated repairs is achievable . the importance of system reliability was demonstrated during operation desert storm . according to dod's lessons learned , the frequent failure of the pioneer showed that uav systems must be reliable to adequately support combat operations . limited user tests conducted in june 1992 disclosed that the two engines used in each air vehicle , which were designed for a motorcycle , were particularly unreliable and had a short life . the engines experienced recurring problems with valve seizures . because of the repeated engine failures during testing , the project manager directed the contractor to replace all engines with modified versions . although the purchase price of the motorcycle is under $8,000 , dod has contracted not - to - exceed prices as high as $53,000 each for the engines . the replacements showed some improvements , however , failures continued . army test officials concluded that each uav unit equipped with 2 hunter systems could be required to replace from 3 to 10 engines a week . furthermore , the frequent engine replacements could overburden the services' logistics systems . according to program officials , these engine problems have been corrected and the original systems procured have been retrofitted with the changes . program officials also plan to incorporate the modifications in the systems being produced . program officials also said the air vehicle engines demonstrated acceptable performance during subsequent verification testing . however , valve seizures reappeared during more recent testing . in fact , during july 1994 , while testing the first low - rate production system delivered , the problems with push rods and valve seizures continued . test officials have refused to accept delivery of this system until these problems are resolved . in addition , at least two earlier crashes , which resulted in significant damage to the air vehicles , have been partially attributed to other engine - related failures . hunter's built - in - test is supposed to identify system faults needing repair . however , following limited user testing , test officials concluded that the built - in - test equipment consistently failed to meet requirements and required redesign to correct the deficiencies . the built - in - test detected only 11 of 154 problems during the tests and isolated the cause of only 2 of the 11 faults detected . the test agency concluded that the inadequate built - in - test design significantly hampered system maintenance and increased the time to correct problems .