( app . iii contains additional information on the industries with foreign investments that were reported to cfius. ) a majority of the investor group's voting stock was held by u.s. entities . the singaporean company was indirectly owned by a holding company that was 99.9 percent owned by the singapore ministry of finance . the u.s. company had classified contracts with dod , necessitating a security agreement protecting classified information and technologies . cfius based its finding that the foreign company would not have control partly on the minority investor's willingness to execute a proxy agreement under industrial security regulations that would give the minority investor's voting rights to two u.s citizens . ( the minority foreign investor later entered into a security agreement that would allow the foreign investor to gain board membership. ) in our discussions on this case , cfius officials agreed that a proposed security agreement should not be used to determine foreign control . the exon - florio control standards are not comparable to the control issues under the industrial security regulations , which intend to isolate foreign control and influence over certain aspects of the business , not to determine whether the entire company will become foreign controlled . although cfius's letter to the company notifying it of its decision referenced the proxy agreement , cfius officials stated the finding of no foreign control was based on other factors , including a requirement for a two - thirds stockholder majority for certain decisions . because cfius found no foreign control , it did not review the transaction for national security concerns . two israeli companies acquired a total of 35.6 percent of the outstanding stock of a u.s. company . one of the israeli companies increased its ownership from 10.5 percent of the outstanding stock to 17.4 percent , while the second company acquired 18.2 percent of the outstanding stock . the notification to cfius stated that the two companies were considering entering into a shareholders' agreement to vote their respective shares in concert . in subsequent correspondence , cfius was informed that the two israeli companies had not concluded a shareholders' agreement . cfius found that there was no foreign control because the two firms were not acting together and did not either individually or collectively have the ability to control the u.s. company . because cfius found no foreign control , it did not review the transaction for national security concerns . the 1992 legislation required mandatory investigations of cfius cases in which the foreign company proposing an investment is controlled by a foreign government and the transaction could result in foreign control that “could affect the national security.” as a result , cfius also reviews cases for foreign government control . of the 174 cases reviewed between october 1992 and december 1994 , cfius found foreign government control in 18 cases . none of these cases resulted in investigations . cfius found the national security concerns in these cases were not sufficient to warrant investigations . in implementing the legislative requirement , cfius has determined that even when there is foreign government control , the provision does not mandate an investigation for a notification that does not pose a credible threat to the national security .