we disagree . the problems with dod's capital investment program are long - standing and have been reported many times by us , the inspectors general , and service audit agencies over the past 6 years . although the new policy statement is a step in the right direction , we believe dod needs high - level management oversight and attention to achieve effective implementation . listing the program as a material weakness in the federal managers' financial integrity act report provides an added level of management attention . further , during the fiscal year 1995 defense authorization process , the senate and house committees on armed services considered the problems in this area serious enough to reduce the money available for capital asset purchases by $160 million ( from $1.6 billion spending authority requested by dod to $1.44 billion ) . this emphasizes the need for dod to address this issue as a material weakness and ensure that improvements are effectively implemented . additional dod comments and our responses appear in appendix ii . we performed our audit work between december 1992 and june 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( see app . iii for details on our scope and methodology. ) we will also be sending copies to the chairmen , senate committee on governmental affairs , house committee on government operations , and senate and house committees on appropriations ; the director , office of management and budget ; the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , and the air force ; and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others on request . if you have any additional questions , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8412 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . the new policy guidance states that the primary criterion used for evaluating alternative investments should depend on the cost of the project . for projects under $100,000 , the guidance requires the minimum payback period ; for those $100,000 or more , it requires the maximum ratio of benefit to investment cost . this appendix presents some simple numerical examples to demonstrate that it is possible for either of these two criteria to signal the selection of one or more projects that differ from the selection signaled by the maximum net present value criterion . the minimum payback period criterion calls for selection of the project that recovers its investment cost in the shortest period of time . table i.1 shows a comparison of two competing , mutually exclusive projects . according to the maximum benefit - to - cost ratio criterion , project a should be chosen because its b / c , 1.9 , exceeds that of project b , 1.5 . yet a comparison of total benefits net of costs clearly indicates that project b is preferable because project b's net benefit , $2.60 , exceeds that of project a , $0.90 . both of the preceding examples tacitly assume that only two projects are candidates for selection . situations can arise , of course , when two or more projects can be selected , subject to a budget constraint .