we have revised the text accordingly . dorian r. dunbar kenneth h. roberts thaddeus s. rytel , jr . ruth - ann hijazi donald y. yamada the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix i . to determine the amount and nature of restructuring costs , we requested the cognizant dcmc office to provide updated restructuring - related cost and savings information for each of the business combinations in our review . we analyzed this information to determine the amount of restructuring costs incurred for workforce reductions and to identify the costs associated with services provided to assist laid - off workers find reemployment . we did not , however , independently verify the information provided . in assessing restructuring savings relative to the restructuring costs paid by dod , we relied on the information contained in dod's november 22 , 1997 , report to congress . we did examine , however , the methodology dcaa used to estimate the amount of restructuring costs paid by dod and the amount of estimated savings at selected units of business combinations at which we conducted work . the secretary of defense is currently required by 10 u.s.c . 2325 to determine in writing that the savings will be at least twice the amount of allowed costs or that projected savings will exceed costs allowed and that the combination will result in the preservation of a critical capability . dod's process to comply with these provisions requires , in part , that ( 1 ) the contractor submit a restructuring proposal , including details on planned restructuring activities , their projected costs , and anticipated savings ; ( 2 ) the defense contract audit agency ( dcaa ) audits the proposal ; and ( 3 ) following the audit , a dod contracting official recommends whether the proposal should be certified . assuming a favorable recommendation , a senior dod official issues a written certification stating that projected savings should exceed the projected costs . the certification enables the contractor to bill restructuring costs to dod and , in turn , allows dod to reimburse the contractor for dod's share of such costs .