organizations . in these cases , what is important is to find companies that are considered by experts to be among the best at the process you are reviewing . objectives . what is behind these improvements ? in large measure , these organizations have benefited from gao studies emphasizing “best practices,” carried out by the defense management and nasa ( dmn ) issue area within the national security and international affairs division ( nsiad ) . the best practices approach to change involves identifying organizations that are widely recognized for major improvements in their performance and efficiency in a specific area , such as inventory management . the processes , practices , and systems identified in these organizations are referred to as best practices , and provide a model for other organizations with similar missions . frequently , benchmarking is used to gather information on these practices from a number of different organizations , which is then applied to improving operations . benchmarking is also an effective approach for promoting organizational change . by applying a best management practices approach , dmn has been able to make recommendations intended to radically change dod processes and correspondingly produce substantial savings . to date , dmn has issued 14 reports related to implementing and managing best management practices . many of these reports illustrate the benefits from a best practices review . appendix i contains a listing of these reports . the best practices approach need not be confined to our defense issues . in this report , we explain how others could go about using the same principles and techniques to promote and implement improved processes . if you have any questions about this strategy , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8412 . major contributors on the best practices assignments are listed in appendix ii . best management practices refer to the processes , practices , and systems identified in public and private organizations that performed exceptionally well and are widely recognized as improving an organization's performance and efficiency in specific areas . successfully identifying and applying best practices can reduce business expenses and improve organizational efficiency . best practices we have identified in our work resulting in recommendations to the defense community include: ( 1 ) relying on established commercial networks to manage , store , and directly deliver defense electronic items more efficiently ; ( 2 ) using private sector food distributors to supply food to the military community faster and cheaper ; and ( 3 ) adopting the use of supplier parks to reduce maintenance and repair inventories . most of the defense management and nasa's ( dmn ) best practices reports have focused on using best management practices to improve a specific the department of defense ( dod ) process . dmn has also reported on management concepts that are important in successfully implementing best management practices throughout an organization , such as reporting on techniques companies use to achieve and manage change . see appendix i for a list of the reports related to the use of best management practices and additional information on each report's findings .