( app . iii provides a history of attempts to realign defense transportation. ) in 1992 , the commander - in - chief , ustranscom , stated before the house committee on appropriations , subcommittee on defense , that moving cargo in peacetime the same way they are moved during a contingency would simplify the process . it would require no change in procedures to “gear up” for a deployment , just an increase in the level of operations . he added that the single manager assignments of the component commands — mtmc , msc , and amc — would be integrated into ustranscom , making ustranscom the single manager for all defense transportation . operations desert shield / desert storm deployment experience highlighted the need for centralized transportation management as the most effective and flexible way to manage and coordinate air , sea , and land movements , while retaining the ability to react quickly to changing priorities and efficiently schedule and employ transportation resources . studies dating back to 1949 also concluded that an integrated transportation system was a critical element of an efficient and effective transportation system . “b . military traffic management command ( mtmc ) . the mtmc shall plan for and maintain a reserve industrial capacity ( ric ) to transport personnel resources , material and other elements required to satisfy a mobilization requirement . the costs of ric will be funded by army operation and maintenance.” accordingly , the army directly funded about $52 million for readiness in fiscal year 1994 , through the reserve industrial capacity budget line item . however , the army did not clearly show what this funding was used for . no specific guidance exists for navy support of msc . yet , msc charges customers through its billing rates for what amounts to mobilization costs . msc contractually agrees to book some cargo to other than the low - cost ocean carriers . it does this , in part , to maintain a sufficient number of ships in the maritime mobilization base to meet the continuing requirement to augment emergency sealift capacity . the additional costs for using other than the low - cost carriers are paid for by the customers . three factors drive ustranscom defense transportation costs higher: process fragmentation , organizational redundancy , and mobilization requirements . in each of these areas , there are opportunities to improve effectiveness and efficiency . as discussed in chapter 4 , dod and ustranscom are reengineering fragmented transportation business processes , but they are delaying organizational structure change . recommendations relative to improvements in areas discussed in this chapter are addressed in chapter 4 in the context of our overall recommendations regarding reengineering the entire defense transportation process . dod partially concurred with our findings . dod acknowledged the impact of defense transportation business processes and readiness / mobilization costs on the charges dod customers pay . it also agreed that msc often uses other than the low - cost carrier to meet its customers' needs . dod said that this practice serves to maintain a mobilization capacity and ensure retention of more carriers , thereby fostering competition among the carriers and resulting in lower costs to its customers .