i , fig . when odes is added to stars i , the configuration is designated stars ii . the development phase of the stars program was completed in fiscal year 1994 , and bmdo provided about $192.1 million for this effort . the operational phase began in fiscal year 1995 . ten would support tmd and 1 would support nmd . table 1 provides the schedule by fiscal year for the stars launches . the firm launch scheduled for 1995 involves launching a stars ii that will deploy numerous objects for the midcourse space experiment ( msx ) satellite to observe . the msx satellite is scheduled to be launched into orbit from vandenberg air force base on a delta ii booster during the second quarter of fiscal year 1995 to conduct a variety of experiments , one of which will involve observing different types of target objects deployed from the stars pbv . although this experiment will support work being conducted in a number of areas , the data will primarily support the space and missile tracking system ( formerly called brilliant eyes ) demonstration and validation program . the targets for the msx satellite to observe are scheduled to be launched on a stars ii in the third quarter of fiscal year 1995 . the msx's sensors are to view the numerous objects deployed from the pbv during sunrise conditions , and the objects are to be representative of various targets and deployment techniques . other mobile and ground - based sensors will provide trajectory identification , definition , stereo viewing , and dynamic motion verification of the test objects . until the abm treaty is clarified , the use of stars to support tmd testing , including the 10 potential tmd missions shown in table 1 , is in question . the 1972 abm treaty prohibits mobile , land - based systems that can counter strategic missiles . however , it does not define the characteristics of either a strategic or theater missile . based on the nature of the present and projected threat from ballistic and cruise missiles armed with weapons of mass destruction , the secretary of defense decided to proceed with a more robust tmd program to emphasize protection of forward - deployed u.s. forces in the near term . additionally , he decided to limit the nmd effort to a technology program , which drastically reduced the number of stars launches to support nmd . in may 1994 , based on declining launches for stars and budget reductions resulting from the “bottom - up review,” bmdo requested ssdc to develop a long - range plan for the stars program . the ssdc stars project office developed a draft long - range plan that included management options for ( 1 ) continuing the stars program ; ( 2 ) placing it in a dormant status , retaining the capability to reactivate it ; and ( 3 ) terminating it . bmdo is currently evaluating stars as a potential long - range system for launching targets for development tests of future tmd systems .