, combat identification ) . studies and incidents subsequent to operation desert storm , such as the friendly forces shootdown of two blackhawk helicopters over iraq during operation provide comfort , have reiterated the need for improved combat identification . combat identification has been defined as “the means to positively identify friendly , hostile and neutral platforms in order to reduce fratricide due to mis - identification and to maximize the effective use of weapon systems.” the services are pursuing a number of solutions to provide combat identification . in 1991 , the army started implementing a five - phased program to develop and field battlefield identification techniques through fiscal year 2000 . the army is actively into the third phase of the program , the near - term phase , whose objective is to integrate a battlefield combat identification system ( bcis ) into selected ground vehicles and helicopters . a millimeter wave cooperative iff q&a system was selected for bcis as the near - term technology . the near - term cooperative iff q&a system is currently in engineering and manufacturing development ( emd ) . the army is acquiring 45 emd models and is planning to acquire another 115 in fiscal year 1996 to be demonstrated during the fiscal year 1997 digitized brigade experiment known as task force xxi . the army currently estimates the cost of providing the near - term bcis to 6,400 selected platforms of force package i at between $250 million and $300 million . the ultimate cost of bcis would be substantially higher if all army divisions were to be equipped . the army is just beginning the mid - and long - term phases of its bci efforts with the development of a coea to identify affordable and promising alternatives . the objectives of the mid - and long - term phases are to integrate situational awareness and target identification and to have an automated correlation and display of situational awareness and target identification information . the mid - and long - term cooperative iff q&a system may be different than the near - term technology . as the lead for cooperative aircraft identification development , the navy has been working on its cooperative aircraft identification ( cai ) effort to address deficiencies in the currently used aircraft identification system , mark xii . the cai effort is to provide a system to replace or upgrade the mark xii system for use in air - to - air and ground - to - air identification . navy officials have estimated that a mark xii follow - on system could cost more than $3.5 billion . in addition to providing reliable , secure identification of friends , any mark xii follow - on system will have to ensure future civil aviation air traffic control compatibility . mode s is a civil aviation air traffic control capability started by the united states and now planned for international use . eurocontrol , the european aviation authority , has mandated mode s usage by january 1 , 1999 . mark xii transponders , however , do not currently incorporate mode s. without this capability , u.s. military aircraft may face delays in the use of civil airspace or may even be excluded from certain regions during peacetime .