additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we did not validate the current dod requirements for inductees . however , according to dod , the current requirements maintain an adequate margin of safety and provide time for expanding military training capabilities . the portions of the $22.9 million 1997 budget that could be most affected by the alternatives total approximately $15.2 million: $7.4 million for the registration program and $7.8 million for operational readiness . registration program activities include handling and entering information into the database on new registrants , producing and distributing publicity material about the requirement to register , running subprograms on registration compliance and address updates , deactivating registrants who no longer remain eligible because of age , and verifying the registration of individuals who may be applying for federal or state employment or other benefits . operational readiness activities include organizational planning ; national guard and reserve training and compensation ; tests and exercises ; and various boards' operations , including training , automatic data processing support , and other logistical types of support . suspending the current registration requirement , with or without maintaining the boards , would generate cost savings primarily through reduced personnel levels . however , savings derived from implementing either option would be partially offset by the cost of downsizing the agency to accomplish planning and maintenance missions only and by severance costs associated with reducing personnel levels . sss officials estimate one - time severance costs ( including severance pay , unemployment insurance , lump sum leave , and buyouts ) of $1.6 million for the suspended registration alternative and of $2.8 million for the deep standby alternative . also , under current federal law and a number of state laws , certain benefits may be denied to individuals who fail to register for a draft . sss officials estimate that the current cost to verify registration to ensure compliance with such provisions totals about $1.6 million annually . therefore , the amount of savings under either alternative would depend upon whether the agency is required to continue its verification function ( for individuals who were subject to registration prior to suspension ) or whether the applicability of such provisions is suspended . according to sss officials , under the suspended registration alternative , 74 civilian , 4 active duty military , and 241 part - time reserve positions may be eliminated . sss officials estimated first - year cost savings of $4.1 million and subsequent annual cost savings of $5.7 million under this alternative . sss would maintain the various boards , their training and operating programs , and the ability to update automated data processing capabilities as technology advances . the agency also informed us that it would continue readiness planning and training plus conduct or participate in mobilization field exercises to test and fine - tune its role in national security strategies . sss officials told us that under the deep standby alternative , 120 civilian , 7 active duty military , and 440 part - time reserve positions may be eliminated .