forces command . we initiated this study in response to a request from the chairman and ranking member of the house committee on international relations to examine u.s. participation in the mfo . our specific objectives were to describe and assess ( 1 ) the level of u.s. participation , training , and operational impacts ; ( 2 ) the actual cost of mfo operations , the u.s. contribution , and any cost - saving opportunities ; ( 3 ) state oversight of the u.s. contribution ; and ( 4 ) views of the state department and other relevant parties on the mfo performance and lessons learned . for objectives 1 , 2 , and 4 , we performed our work at the mfo headquarters in rome , force headquarters in the northern and southern sinai , remote observation posts throughout the sinai , and mfo offices in cairo and tel aviv . at the mfo headquarters , we met with the director general and officials from the following offices: ( a ) comptroller ; ( b ) policy , planning , and operations ; ( c ) logistic , facilities , and contracts ; and ( d ) political affairs and general counsel . in the sinai , we visited the mfo north camp , where we interviewed the force commander , senior u.s. military officials at the force headquarters , civilian observers , u.s. infantry battalion and 1st support battalion personnel , and support contractors performing logistical functions . the director general directed that all documents we reviewed and / or requested be individually reviewed and cleared by the general counsel prior to release . aside from this administrative formality , the mfo assisted us with accommodations in the field and generally cooperated with this review . to gain israeli and egyptian government perspectives on mfo effectiveness as a peacekeeping operation , we met with egyptian and israeli officials from the headquarters of the egyptian liaison agency with international organizations and the israeli defense force liaison unit . for objectives 2 , 3 , and 4 , we interviewed officials and reviewed documents from the dod and department of state . we performed our work at the state department bureau of near east and south asian affairs ; the office of the under secretary of defense ( policy ) ; the army operations , readiness and mobilization directorate operations and contingency plans division ; politico - military affairs division ; dod joint chiefs of staff strategic planning directorate ( j5 ) ; department of the army budget ; headquarters , xviiith airborne corps , fort bragg ; and the headquarters forces command operations and budget office , fort mcpherson , georgia . we performed our review from february 1994 to february 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we obtained agency comments from state , dod , and the mfo . since inception of the mfo , the united states has always provided significant military and civilian support . the united states provides the largest military contingent , constituting 49.6 percent of the total force at the time of our review .