( app . i explains how bank projects are developed and approved. ) in the years immediately following world war ii , the u.s. government and financial markets were the primary sources of capital for the bank . the u.s. contribution to support the bank has declined substantially over the years as other member countries have increased their contributions and the bank's financial dealings have diversified . for example , the u.s. share of donor contributions to ida declined from about 42 percent when the association was formed to about 21 percent during the first half of the 1990s . nonetheless , as of june 30 , 1995 , the united states still held the greatest share of the votes in each bank group institution's board of executive directors . this preserves the u.s. leadership position and allows the united states to keep the bank's headquarters in washington , d.c . the united states retains sufficient votes to veto changes in ibrd's basic articles of agreement . table 1.3 lists the percentage of voting share the united states has in each bank group institution , along with the relative voting share of the four other largest donors . u.s. policymakers have supported participation in the world bank as a means for advancing u.s. humanitarian , economic , and security interests through alleviating poverty and encouraging economic growth and political stability in developing countries . however , much of the impetus behind u.s. participation in the bank during the cold war era was derived from the perceived utility of the bank in containing communist expansionism in the developing world . one bank official commented , for example , that because of u.s. concern about communist insurgency in the area , the bank remained active in several sub - saharan african countries long after the corrupt nature of these countries' governments became evident . the fall of the berlin wall in 1989 and the subsequent collapse of the soviet bloc have dramatically altered the international status quo . in the post - cold war environment , the need to actively oppose communist expansionism no longer serves as an underlying rationale for u.s. foreign policy activities . virtually all traditional u.s. foreign policy assumptions and instrumentalities , including support for the bank , have come under increased scrutiny . mounting government budget deficits in the united states ( and other donor countries ) have lent added urgency to scrutiny regarding the effectiveness of foreign operations spending . a variety of critics have opposed the continuation of traditional levels of u.s. support for the bank , stressing that the bank is not an effective agent for economic development . the critics argue that , good intentions aside , the bank has not effectively facilitated real economic growth in the developing world or made progress toward reducing poverty . they point out , for example , that the number of impoverished persons in the world continues to rise despite the efforts of the bank and other multilateral and bilateral assistance agencies . some of the harshest criticism of bank intervention has been leveled at the bank's activities in sub - saharan africa , where the gross domestic product per capita continues to decline .