seven states have both . there are nine states that have air force reserve wings with c - 130 aircraft and five states that have air force reserve wings with kc - 135 aircraft . seven of the guard wings with kc - 135 aircraft are located on military bases and 12 are located with civilian airports . all six reserve wings with kc - 135 aircraft are located on military bases . most guard wings with c - 130 aircraft , 20 of 23 , are located with civilian airports . half of the 10 reserve wings with c - 130 aircraft are located on military bases , and the other half are with civilian airports . several locations maintain both guard and reserve wings . though reserve component members are sometimes thought of as weekend warriors , about one quarter to one third of wing personnel are full - time military or civilian employees . these personnel are concentrated in areas such as maintenance , logistics , and security squadrons and the wing staff . the balance of wing personnel are part - time military personnel and are likely to have full - time employment in addition to their military responsibilities . larger - sized reserve component units would still be able to perform peacetime missions . when reserve component c - 130 and kc - 135 units have participated in peacetime deployments in bosnia , saudi arabia , and panama they have done so on a rotational basis . however , unlike the active air force , reserve and guard rotations are not assigned completely to a single flying squadron or wing , which makes the squadron size less important . in a typical reserve component rotation , while one wing is designated to lead the mission , it depends on many other wings to provide aircraft and personnel . for example , the reserve component was assigned to support operations in saudi arabia for a 3-month period . personnel and aircraft from 19 guard wings were typically rotated for 15 to 30 days to staff a flying squadron of 8 aircraft . a similar practice was used in bosnia and panama . rotations are done in this manner because participation by reserve component members without a presidential call - up is voluntary . to obtain the complement of personnel needed , individual volunteers from many units are necessary . thus , the number or size of units is not as important as the number of people that volunteer . unit officials from several wings cited advantages in increasing the number of aircraft in a flying squadron . these included increased training opportunities and improved scheduling flexibility . creating fewer larger - sized flying squadrons should have little impact on wartime missions as well . wartime requirements for c - 130 and kc - 135 aircraft are not typically defined by the number of squadrons or wings but by the number of aircraft . for example , the july 1996 joint chief of staff's intratheater lift analysis expresses c - 130 requirements in terms of aircraft , not wings or squadrons . the recent c - 130 airlift master stationing plan also expresses requirements in terms of the number of c - 130 aircraft .