it contains recommendations to you . the head of a federal agency is required under 31 u.s.c . , regression testing ) ? what is the appropriate use of software “patches” ( eg , temporary software programming fixes ) during testing ? however , osd does not plan to issue guidelines specifically directing the services how to manage these complex issues . rather , it plans to issue a series of “expectations” or “evaluation guidelines” for software development and test and evaluation for use by oversight action officers in addressing both maturity and regression testing . osd is also considering developing an on - line data base for software issues to capture best practices , lessons learned , and some specific guidance from superseded software test and evaluation policy . although these efforts may prove beneficial , they fall short of providing enforceable criteria for ensuring effective oversight and test and evaluation . even though many factors contribute to dod's failure to produce systems that meet user needs in a timely , cost - effective manner , one critical factor is defining and managing users' requirements . effectively defining requirements , along with focused management and appropriate user involvement , is critical to the success of a program . as discussed earlier , the inability of software - intensive systems to meet users' needs has consistently been demonstrated during ot&e and , in general , has been a pervasive problem in the acquisition process . the definition of users' requirements , particularly for large , complex systems and for unprecedented systems ( i.e. , those that are unlike any that have already been built ) , is subject to varying interpretations by many different groups . these groups include field users , users' representatives , program managers , contracting officers , and contractors . each group brings different expectations and agendas to the contracting , development , and acquisition processes . 720 to submit a written statement on actions taken on our recommendations to the house committee on government operations and the senate committee on governmental affairs not later than 60 days after the date of the report . a written statement must also be submitted to the house and senate committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the house committee on government operations , senate committee on governmental affairs , and house and senate committees on armed services ; the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; and the director of the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-4587 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . because computer software controls most functions of modern defense systems , the systems' performance depends largely on the quality of that complex and increasingly costly software . in fact , many major weapon systems may be inoperable if software fails to function as required .