title 10 u.s.c . 2464 provides that dod activities should maintain a core logistics capability sufficient to provide the technical competence and resources necessary for effective and timely response to a mobilization or other national defense emergency . navy data submitted during the 1995 brac process indicated that about 95 percent of the louisville workload was mission essential , needed to support contingency requirements , and considered necessary to sustain core capabilities . in an april 1996 report to congress on depot maintenance policy , dod required the military services to conduct a risk assessment before privatizing mission - essential workloads . dod officials stated that qualitative factors have been established for conducting a risk assessment and that privatization is determined to be an acceptable risk when an adequate number of private sector sources exist , and those sources are economical , possess the capability and capacity to do the work , and have demonstrated proven past performance . according to navy officials , they did not perform a risk assessment for the louisville depot maintenance workloads . as we previously reported , various statutory restrictions may affect how much dod depot - level workloads can be converted to private - sector performance , including 10 u.s.c . title 10 u.s.c . 2464 provides that the secretary of defense must identify a “core” logistics capability and dod must maintain it unless the secretary waives dod performance as not required for national defense . titles 10 u.s.c . 2469 limit the extent to which depot - level workloads can be converted to private - sector performance . title 10 u.s.c . 2466 specifies that not more than 40 percent of the funds allocated in a fiscal year for depot - level maintenance or repair can be spent on private sector performance — the so - called “60 / 40” rule . title 10 u.s.c . 2469 prohibits dod from transferring in - house maintenance and repair workloads valued at not less than $3 million to another dod activity without using “merit - based selection procedures for competitions” among all dod depots or to contractor performance without the use of “competitive procedures for competitions among private and public sector entities.” although each statute affects the allocation of dod's depot - level workload , 10 u.s.c . 2469 is the primary impediment to privatization without a public - private competition . the current competition requirements of 10 u.s.c . 2469 were enacted in 1994 and apply to all changes to depot - level workload valued at not less than $3 million currently performed at dod installations , including the navy depot at louisville . the statute does not provide any exemptions from its competition requirements and , unlike most of the other laws governing depot maintenance , does not contain a waiver provision . further , there is nothing in the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 — the authority for the brac recommendations — that , in our view , would permit the implementation of a recommendation involving privatization outside the competition requirements of 10 u.s.c .