( fig . 3.1 shows a parade and banner advertising diarrhea prevention and treatment. ) in indonesia , usaid provided about $2.05 million in food aid to care to be sold to fund a pilot rural water and sanitation project . the project's objectives were to increase access and use of water and sanitation facilities among villages in rural indonesia and demonstrate that rural communities could develop and self - finance improved facilities . the pvo used proven technical approaches and the design included measurable objectives . rather than working with an ingo , care employed local staff to work directly with the communities to plan and carry out the construction of water systems , including designing and building the appropriate system . ( fig . 3.2 shows the resulting water reservoir that is filled by gravity from a spring 400 meters away. ) the communities agreed to take responsibility for sustaining the improvements . an outside evaluation of the program concluded that care's approach was successful in creating sustainable water sanitation systems . beneficiaries of the project in one village told us that the incidence of cholera had decreased since the system was built and that villagers could spend the 2 hours a day they had spent hauling water on more productive activities . the projects that were having the most difficulties suffered from poor design , inadequate project management , and lack of participation by the local community . the following describes some of the problems evident in the projects we examined: in romania , usaid contributed $200,000 to a $1.02 million world vision health care project to improve the delivery of primary health care services . the project was delayed almost a year due to internal management problems and difficulties in recruiting suitable staff . further , the pvo met with difficulties in working with ministry of health officials because of changes in leadership there . a mid - term evaluation concluded that the achievements of the project at that date were mixed and could not always be clearly linked to project goals or to activities carried out . the final evaluation of the program , conducted after our fieldwork , noted that the conditions we observed had changed and the project achieved its objectives . the evaluation cited accomplishments in improving health knowledge , attitudes , and behaviors . in niger , usaid provided africare $1.8 million for a project to train community health workers in child survival techniques such as oral rehydration , growth monitoring , and nutrition . the congress authorized donations of commodities in 1954 . public law ( p.l. ) 480 , as amended , authorized commodity donations to voluntary agencies for distribution overseas to meet emergency and nonemergency food needs . although still heavily involved in the provision of emergency assistance overseas , since the mid - 1960s pvos have gradually shifted their emphasis from charitable relief to development activities . the pvo community is comprised of diverse organizations from the traditional voluntary relief and development agencies to family planning organizations , labor institutes , and cooperatives .