any person who . is unable or unwilling to return to . [his or her country of nationality or habitual residence] because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion . the immigration and naturalization service's ( ins ) 1983 refugee processing guidelines state that the burden of proof of refugee status rests with the applicant . according to ins' guidelines , the applicable burden to be met by the applicant is a well - founded fear of persecution , based on one of the reasons for persecution in the refugee definition . in determining an applicant's refugee status , ins officers must evaluate whether the applicant's statements and feelings lead to a finding of well - founded fear of persecution based on their consistency and credibility in light of known conditions and practices in the country from which refuge is sought . in addition , public law 101-167 states that certain categories of aliens ( including vietnamese who are members of categories of individuals determined by the attorney general to be targets of persecution ) may for purposes of refugee status determination establish that they have a well - founded fear of persecution based on one of the five reasons for persecution by asserting such a fear and asserting a credible basis for concern about the possibility of such persecution . categories of vietnamese found by the attorney general to be of interest to the united states include former south vietnamese government officials and members of the military ; persons formerly closely affiliated with the u.s. or western institutions ; those sent to re - education camps , or to new economic zones because they were considered politically or socially undesirable ; members of certain ethnic or religious groups ; and family members of the above . according to ins guidelines , these categories of aliens shared common characteristics that identified them as targets of persecution in their countries . the facts surrounding the establishment of the categories were sufficiently known and established to permit what was , in essence , “judicial notice” to be taken without further proof . thus , according to ins guidelines , if applicants clearly proved themselves to come within one of the established categories they would have also established themselves likely targets of persecution . ins guidelines state that if in interviewing an applicant the ins officer is satisfied that he or she falls within a designated category , a strong likelihood will have been established that the applicant is qualified for refugee status . the interviewing officer should then obtain information regarding the applicant's actual persecution or well - founded fear of persecution . statements indicating that category applicants fled their country for fear of persecution or due to actual acts of persecution , if credible , are generally sufficient for findings of refugee status , according to ins guidelines . notwithstanding the view by some that the u.s. refugee definition fully replicates the international definition , both u.s. and unhcr officials acknowledged that the definitions — and their applications — can differ .