additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . dod's comments are included in appendix i . we reviewed and analyzed dod's logistics strategic plan to determine whether it was characteristic of generally accepted models that focused on the process of strategic planning . in analyzing dod's plan , we applied fundamental strategic planning practices identified from our review of literature on this topic , including our prior reports that addressed the implementation of strategic management processes in government agencies . we also discussed the adequacy of dod's logistics strategic planning efforts with a consultant ( a retired high - ranking military officer ) who is on our logistics advisory panel . in addition , we reviewed selected services' logistics strategic plans to determine the extent to which their individual goals and objectives matched those contained in dod's plan . we selected six top - priority strategies contained in the plan to assess how well dod was carrying out the plan's goals , objectives , and strategies — total asset visibility , cim , mobility requirements study bottom - up review , battlefield distribution , cals , and in - transit visibility strategies . specifically , we spoke to officials responsible for developing the plan and monitoring its implementation . we also reviewed pertinent documents such as implementation plans , charters , status reports , and other related information . we did not independently verify the accuracy of this information . in conducting our review , we held discussions with officials in the office of the deputy under secretary of defense for logistics ( materiel and distribution management ) ; the office of the under secretary of defense for acquisition and technology ; the office of the joint chiefs of staff ; the offices of the air force and army deputy chiefs of staff for logistics , washington , d.c. ; dla , fort belvoir , virginia ; the u.s. transportation command , scott air force base , illinois ; and the office of the chief of naval operations and the naval supply systems command , arlington , virginia . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we conducted our review from september 1995 through july 1996 in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards .