process controls were recommended in the pat report . dod's current milspec program addresses many aspects of developing and applying milspecs and identifies tasks that need to be accomplished . this can be attributed , in part , to the fact that the pat report developed more detailed plans for implementation than most of the prior reports . in addition to identifying tasks for each recommendation , the report identified risks , barriers , possible benefits and disadvantages , resources , timeframes , responsible organizations , and progress indicators associated with the recommendations . for example , one principal recommendation is to establish standards improvement executives that have the authority and resources to implement an improvement program in each service and defense agency . for this recommendation , the report identifies six tasks for implementation , such as appointing the executives by a specified date and developing a separate budget line item for the funding they control ; a risk to successful implementation , the concern that adequate resources might be unavailable ; a barrier , the failure of past dod leadership to demonstrate long - term commitment to the milspecs improvement program ; benefits , such as helping foster cultural change , and disadvantages , such as creating another dod power base ; estimated costs of about $269 million for the entire milspecs improvement program over 6 fiscal years starting in 1994 ; and time frames for the tasks . in june 1994 , a report implementation group — consisting of representatives from osd , the services , and the defense logistics agency — met and developed dod's implementation plan . the plan addresses an approach for ensuring that the infrastructure and resources required for reform are in place . a key feature of the plan is that each major buying command and center is required to provide a draft of its own implementation plan to its service / agency by the end of october 1994 , with final submittal by the end of november 1994 . additionally , to help ensure stable milspecs improvement funding and provide management oversight , the plan envisions that the assistant secretary of defense ( economic security ) work with the dod comptroller to create a common program element for each service's budget . direct the establishment and execution of an aggressive program to eliminate or reduce and identify the quantities of toxic pollutants procured or generated through the use of specifications and standards . * direct revision of the training and education programs to incorporate specifications and standards reform . contractor participation in this training effort shall be invited and encouraged . * senior dod management take a major role in establishing the environment essential for acquisition reform cultural change . * formalize the responsibility and authority of the standards improvement executives , provide the authority and resources necessary to implement the standards improvement program within their service / agency , and assign a senior official with specifications and standards oversight and policy authority . use innovative approaches in the acquisition of weapon systems , components , and replenishment items by using commercial practices . increase the use of “partnering” in contracts and program management to improve relationships and communication between government and industry .