iii. ) according to the world bank , over the past 2 years the boards of the world bank and the imf have met about 30 times each , and about 25 multilateral development banks have been meeting every 6 months under the chairmanship of the world bank to coordinate the implementation of the hipc initiative . in 1996 , the world bank and the imf made a preliminary determination regarding which of the 40 countries might eventually receive relief based on the hipc initiative's specific criteria concerning income , indebtedness , and reform , and identified 20 countries as potential recipients . as of august 1998 , the world bank and the imf estimated that the creditors would provide debt relief through the initiative to 20 countries , worth about $8.2 billion in 1996 present value terms . the limited evidence for the particular debt targets in the hipc initiative suggests that reducing debt - to - export ratios to near 200 percent is not likely to provide countries with a “cushion” to protect against adverse economic events . specific eligibility decisions have been made for eight countries , with six countries deemed eligible for relief under the hipc initiative . one country — uganda — has completed the process . the hipc initiative builds on prior debt relief efforts , most notably those of the paris club . the hipc initiative's goal is to bring countries' debts to levels that are considered sustainable , meaning the countries can make debt payments without incurring loan arrears or requiring debt rescheduling . the hipc initiative has also focused attention on the limited capacity of some countries to manage their debt . the basic hipc framework establishes eligibility criteria based on a country's per capita income , indebtedness , and track record of reform . as shown in figure 1.3 , implementation of the initiative involves two stages . each stage can last 3 years and can be shortened in some cases . the present value of debt relief for these countries due to the hipc initiative ranges from a low of 6 percent of debt for côte d'ivoire to a high of 57 percent for mozambique , with the average reduction 22 percent for the first six participants . eligibility for hipc debt relief is assessed at the end of stage one , following the successful completion of world bank - and imf - supported programs . at this point ( termed the decision point ) , the boards of executive directors of the world bank and the imf determine whether ( 1 ) existing debt relief mechanisms are sufficient to bring a country's debt to a point considered sustainable or ( 2 ) the country requires additional debt relief . the determination of whether debt is sustainable is based mainly on a world bank and imf assessment of whether the projected ratio of a country's debt ( in present value terms ) to the value of its exports will be greater than a target value that is set within the range of 200-250 percent .