this warranty was a warranty in name only . it was clear to us from discussions with several officials that they believe that obtaining a warranty requires a relatively small amount of time and effort for the program office compared to the amount of time and effort required to avoid spending that money by obtaining a waiver . in addition , according to officials at a major air force command , contractors are aware that waivers are exceedingly difficult to obtain and may insist on a high warranty price if the program office seeks an effective warranty . this in turn may drive the program office to obtain reduced warranty coverage to reduce the warranty price . program managers do not request a waiver because they believe it will not be granted and , consequently , unnecessary or costly warranties are purchased . as required by the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ( p.l.103-355 ) , dod revised dfars regarding weapon system warranties . ( see app . for example: the government paid $12 million for the f - 15e ( 1 ) design and manufacture and ( 2 ) materials and workmanship warranties for the 1989 and 1990 contracts , which covered the purchase of 72 aircraft . another factor limiting the potential insurance benefits of warranties is the relationship of the government to major defense contractors . if a contractor were someday to incur large losses as a result of a warranty on a weapon system , the threat of insolvency might cause the government to excuse the contractor from its warranty obligation . historically , when a defense firm incurs large losses because of a contract , the government has taken action to provide relief and prevent the firm from going out of business . dod's ability to provide extraordinary contractual relief to a defense contractor is recognized in public law 85-804 . from 1959 to 1993 , dod used this provision to provide over $4.3 billion ( in constant 1996 dollars ) in relief to assist contractors in recovering from losses . as a result , the utility of warranties may be limited to collecting small or marginal amounts from a contractor rather than making good a catastrophic loss . the second purpose of warranties is assurance - validation . applied to weapon systems , assurance - validation means assuring dod that the manufacturer's product conforms to the design , quality , and performance levels specified in the contract . although dod is moving more toward a commercial acquisition system , it uses many quality assurance processes to verify product quality and contract conformance independent of the warranty clauses . since the cognizant contract administration office is responsible for verifying that the accepted product conforms to the specifications in the contract , the assurance - validation function of a weapon system warranty may not be necessary . in weapon system acquisitions , dod uses many different program management tools to reduce the inherent risks of the acquisition process .