additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we have incorporated nasa officials informal comments in the text where appropriate . although the development programs have not experienced significant schedule slips to date , the programs have experienced some early development problems and an independent management review team concluded in february 1995 that the largest of these programs — the super lightweight tank — had the potential for further problems during development and manufacture . as we note on page 5 , nasa deleted two expensive hardware programs by substituting operational changes that substantially reduced weight but increased the risk of mission failure . nasa does not have an estimate of savings that may result from implementing the recommendations . according to the director of shuttle management and operations at kennedy space center , the station's assembly schedule will slip unless ( 1 ) nasa provides additional funds for shuttle operations or ( 2 ) more efficiencies are found . officials in the office of space flight told us that they estimated that there is a medium to high risk that the station's assembly completion date will slip because of shuttle delays . these officials estimated that the schedule could slip about 4 to 5 months . we conducted our review at nasa headquarters , marshall space flight center , johnson space center , and kennedy space center . we examined ( 1 ) shuttle enhancement documentation , ( 2 ) budgetary data , ( 3 ) internal and external analyses regarding the shuttle program , ( 4 ) shuttle manifests , ( 5 ) shuttle processing data , and ( 6 ) space station assembly schedules . in addition , we interviewed officials from nasa headquarters , the shuttle program , and the space station program regarding issues related to nasa's plan to support space station assembly . the main engine improvements are expected to make the engines heavier than the current engines . however , the new engines are expected to be more efficient , thus needing less propellent . they are also expected to permit occasional use at higher than normal thrust levels . early test results indicated that the engines would not achieve all of the efficiency originally expected . nasa made additional modifications , and it now expects to achieve most of the originally predicted performance .