iii. ) trade union development assistance in russia , implemented through usaid and ned grants to the free trade union institute ( ftui ) , has helped increase the size and effectiveness of democratic trade unions . using ned funds , ftui provided important equipment and training for the first independent , non - communist unions that arose in the late 1980s , that backed boris yeltsin and other reformers , and that played a key role in the breakup of the soviet union . since then , ftui's support for democratic unions , funded by usaid and ned , has helped increase the quality of russian unions through an extensive education program . major activities funded by usaid in russia under this initiative include efforts to develop and strengthen independent media , new democratic trade unions , reformist political parties , laws and legal institutions , election processes , local government , nongovernmental organizations , and civilian control of the military . some activities under this initiative are implemented through transfers from usaid to other agencies , such as to usia for journalist training and to state for rule of law activities . other usaid democracy - related activities in russia not part of the initiative include funding for the eurasia foundation , which awards small grants for media , public administration , and other projects , and an exchange program usaid uses to support all its assistance projects . dod shares program management for the imet program with the state department . the secretary of state is responsible for the program's general direction , and he also recommends funding levels for congressional approval and allocates approved funds to each country . the secretary of defense is responsible for planning and implementing the program , including administration and monitoring , within established funding levels . ned provided about $8.8 million from its annual usia grants for democracy - related activities in russia from fiscal years 1990 through 1994 . of that amount , about $6.4 million was spent on activities implemented by three of ned's four core institutes — the national democratic institute , the international republican institute , and the free trade union institute — which have also received significant usaid funding . however , the fund director told us that only a minor portion of the half hour show is spent on worker and union issues because listeners are more interested in other issues of local concern . he said the activity contributes more to an independent media than to union development because it attempts to make local broadcast stations less reliant on central authority for material and more responsible for their own operations . the russian - american foundation for trade union research and education initially had problems managing its research component , though some improvements were evident by late 1994 . foundation research is supposed to inform unions of the economic , social , and legal aspects of the workers' movement to help unions better represent their interests at the national and local levels . however , ftui officials told us that during 1993 , the foundation's first year , little research was actually done because many of the researchers assisted the foundation's former director in trying to form a political party , not in doing research .