iii ) . dod stated that , in an attempt to reduce basic training attrition , the army , the navy , and the air force are now taking steps similar to the marine corps to better prepare recruits in the dep for the physical rigors of basic training . furthermore , dod stated that the office of the secretary of defense for force management policy will investigate the legal status of dep members and the limits of their medical entitlements while they are in the dep . all of the services reward recruiter success . however , many existing awards and incentives are based on output measures that do not reflect dod's long - term retention goal to retain quality personnel . only the marine corps and the navy use basic training graduation rates as criteria in evaluating recruiters for awards , thus linking dod's strategic goals to their recruiters' daily operations . according to dod recruiter satisfaction surveys , recruiter job performance has been declining since 1991 , and is the lowest it has been since recruiter surveys were first administered in 1989 . in 1996 , 58 percent of the services' recruiters said they had missed their monthly goals 3 or more times during the previous 12 months . recruiters also said that they are under constant pressure to make their assigned goals and that their working hours are increasing . dod's 1996 recruiter survey showed that 54 percent of recruiters were dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with recruiting , compared with 47 percent in dod's 1994 survey and 35 percent in the 1991 survey . the results of dod's recruiter surveys and our interviews with experienced recruiters show that current award and incentive systems have not effectively dealt with recruiters' two biggest concerns — their monthly goals and working hours . incentive and award systems based on recruit graduation rates from basic training would provide the services with a required link between dod's long - term strategic goals to recruit and retain well - qualified military personnel and daily recruiter operations . however , only the marine corps and the navy use recruits' basic training graduation rates as key criteria when evaluating recruiters for awards . the army and the air force measure recruiter performance primarily by the number of recruits who enlist or the number who report to basic training rather than the number who graduate and become productive servicemembers . award and incentive systems have differed significantly by service and within services over time , but they are usually based on point systems that take into account the quality of recruits enlisted , the positions the recruits fill , and the recruiter's success in making his or her goal . at various times , the services have used individual , team , and combination awards , and they have based these awards on both absolute and relative performance . despite numerous studies on recruiter award and incentive systems , all of the services have been unable to settle on an optimal system . also , the services have , at times , altered their recruiter incentive systems in opposite directions: as one service moved from individual to team awards , another de - emphasized team awards and moved toward greater reliance on individual awards .