( see app . i for dod's written comments. ) we also contacted osadbu's contractor who is responsible for administering and summarizing the dod survey questionnaire and dcmc to identify its progress in conducting performance reviews of the mentor - protege agreements . to review the manner in which the funds were obligated , we met with osadbu and washington headquarters service personnel who transfer mentor - protege funding from osadbu to the responsible services and the defense agencies . as such , we obtained overall funding information dealing with the program from fiscal year 1992 to 1998 that showed a breakdown of the funding by responsible organization . to verify the funding information , we contacted officials within the services' and defense agencies' offices of small and disadvantaged business utilization responsible for administering the mentor - protege agreements . when necessary , these officials contacted supporting commands to gather more reliable information regarding the obligation of the funding . we attempted to assess the extent to which the funds benefited the proteges by reviewing osadbu's files and contacting service and defense agency officials to identify the number of mentors and proteges that have participated in the program . sufficient and reliable information on program performance , however , was unavailable on the overall extent that the proteges benefited from the funding provided by the program . we performed this phase of work between august 1997 and february 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we will send copies to the chairmen and the ranking minority members of other appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of defense ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you have any questions regarding this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-4841 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's ( dod ) letter dated february 26 , 1998 . dod states that a case study approach can sufficiently portray the impact of the program upon the protege firms . we found that there is no uniformity among the services on making these payments . we recommend that the secretary of defense instruct the director , osadbu , to strengthen osadbu's performance reviews to ensure that sufficient and reliable information on program performance is gathered on planned and actual mentor assistance as well as on the protege firms' business development . congress may wish to clarify mentor - protege program legislation as to whether mentors can be paid fees in addition to expenses and proteges can be reimbursed for various expenses . dod concurs with the recommendation to strengthen performance reviews and will continue to make efforts to improve the reliability and sufficiency of data on the program . however , dod states that there have been a significant number of proteges that have benefited from the program and provides nine examples of mentor - protege agreements that it believes illustrate the effectiveness of the program .