other suggestions had limitations . for example , the army initially suggested a trauma sustainment program based in georgia but then did not support it because the surgeon in charge of the program was deployed to bosnia for a year . the air force suggested ben taub general hospital in houston ; however , its current program for general surgeons only consists of observation and no hands - on experience . because of the limitations of these and other possibilities , health affairs requested that the naval medical center portsmouth conduct the dod demonstration program . in october 1997 , the medical center signed an agreement with eastern virginia medical school to obtain sustainment trauma training for navy general surgeons at sentara norfolk general hospital . the first rotation began in november 1997 . sentara norfolk general hospital , a nonprofit hospital , is the only level i trauma center located in norfolk , virginia . it is also the primary teaching hospital for eastern virginia medical school . the hospital is a 664-bed facility located on a large medical complex that includes eastern virginia medical school and a children's hospital . in 1996 , sentara's trauma center saw 2,060 trauma and burn patients . the hospital is also part of a larger regional health management organization , sentara health system , which currently holds the dod contract for tricare through which approximately 40,000 enrollees eligible for the civilian health and medical program of the uniformed services ( champus ) receive health care services . eastern virginia medical school is a private school that does not own a hospital but provides human resources to sentara norfolk general hospital and other hospitals in the area . the school has nearly 600 students in its degree programs as well as 300 residents and fellows and 300 faculty members . the surgery staff at eastern virginia medical school currently provides and directs trauma services at sentara norfolk general hospital . general surgery residents from eastern virginia medical school and naval medical center portsmouth also rotate at sentara norfolk general hospital for trauma care experience . naval medical center portsmouth is a 360-bed facility that provides medical services to active duty navy , marine corps , army , air force , and coast guard personnel ; their families ; and other dod beneficiaries . the medical center is one of three major teaching hospitals in the navy with residency programs , including general surgery . the head of the department of general surgery at naval medical center portsmouth has specific responsibility for the demonstration program . under the program , a general surgeon from the medical center performs a 3-week rotation at sentara norfolk general hospital . the portsmouth official in charge of the program said that the program is operated at no cost to the government because the hospital is within commuting distance of the medical center . in addition , the portsmouth official said the absence of a surgeon from the medical center does not affect the center's patient workload because the general surgery department is well staffed .