however , we did not conduct work in the other regions . we conducted our review between september 1993 and july 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . this later turned out to be a critical problem . finally , the peace corps' senior management did not formally approve country program plans prior to their implementation . we were told that the peace corps' regional directors are ultimately responsible for ensuring the adequacy of country program plans in their regions and are given significant authority and autonomy to ensure that their programs are effectively managed . however , they often did not carry out this responsibility , and management oversight of the country programs we visited appeared to be minimal . for example , the peace corps sent small business development volunteers to uzbekistan despite the fact it had not developed a business program . in poland , the small business program designed and implemented in 1991 was not approved until 1994 . peace corps management officials told us that some newer programs required greater management support from washington than others , and in february 1993 , washington staff began playing a direct role in managing certain problem programs in the former soviet union . they said actions taken included delaying the entry of volunteers into some programs to give staff more time to prepare ; making staff changes ; and instituting initiatives to strengthen training , programming , and staff support . peace corps policy manuals require that programs be sufficiently staffed in order to properly plan volunteer assignments and support volunteers at their sites . however , the peace corps did not always provide adequate numbers of staff to open new posts and did not assign sufficient staff to countries once the programs were underway . compounding the problems caused by inadequate staffing was the short lead time the peace corps had to prepare for the arrival of the large number of volunteers assigned to the region . the peace corps' recruitment of staff for these new country entries was reactive . the peace corps' recruiting efforts largely consisted of sending announcements of vacancies to a few publications and foreign affairs associations . the peace corps also relied on former volunteers and staff from other countries to fill its staff positions . the quality of the staff was uneven in central and eastern europe and the former soviet union countries . the peace corps often assigned staff that had prior peace corps experience but did not have necessary language skills . also , some staff and consultants lacked the necessary cultural knowledge and technical skills . the peace corps' staff training was also inadequate . many of the staff we interviewed said they did not receive any training until after they started their assignments . in addition , staff we spoke with said that what training they received after they started their assignments was too general in nature and failed to prepare them for the particular challenges of their posts . many of the staff we met told us they had little knowledge of the local language and culture before they arrived , which they said significantly hindered their effectiveness .