however , no actions had been finalized . a permanent charter for the joint program office as called for by october 1994 is still not established . the jsims operational requirements document is still not approved . we are sending copies of this report to the chairmen , senate and house committees on appropriations , senate committee on armed services , and house committee on national security ; the secretary of defense ; the deputy secretary of defense ; the under secretary of defense for acquisition and technology ; the director , defense research and engineering ; and the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force . we will make copies available to others on request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5140 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report were charles j. bonanno , brenda s. farrell , raymond g. bickert , and colin l. chambers . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . the department does not believe that the jsims program has been stalled . dod said that ( 1 ) it deliberately established ambitious milestones in the jsims memorandum of agreement to serve as an action to move the project along ; ( 2 ) the jsims project has moved from a general consensus agreement , through stand - up of a transitional jsims joint program office , to the formation of a permanent joint program office ; ( 3 ) a systems definition for jsims was developed in an april 1995 meeting ; ( 4 ) the jsims operational requirements document is in final review ; and ( 5 ) the program officially entered the concept exploration and definition phase when it attained milestone 0 status during july 1995 . our assessment of the status of jsims is based upon documentation provided to us during our review . the various management groups responsible for development of jsims have conducted numerous meetings in an effort to bring about a consensus of what jsims constitutes . however , we believe that jsims has been stalled at a fundamental level as evidenced by the minimal progress since the signing of the june 1994 memorandum of agreement . at the conclusion of our review , there were indications that the program might be progressing . according to documents presented at the july 1995 jsims senior review board meeting , the estimated cost to develop jsims core and warfare functions is $416 million . the jsims core without the warfare functions will not achieve dod's joint training objectives . therefore , we believe it is important to identify all development costs . dod said that it could not substantiate the $40 million we identified that the services are planning to spend on alsp improvements . dod stated that $6.1 million is currently budgeted for alsp core support through fiscal year 1999 . dod acknowledged that all other funding for modifications in the alsp models is provided by the services or cincs but could not substantiate this figure . the $40 million figure was derived from documents and discussions held with service budget officials and is subject to change depending upon the services' priorities for spending .