they said they were unaware of the requirement . in johannesburg , the accountable officer was reconciling fees collected with services rendered , but was not conducting periodic unannounced cash audits as required in the consular management handbook . the accountable officer for passport operations at the u.s. embassy in mexico city also had not conducted periodic cash audits . automation upgrades and enhancements are the cornerstone of state's strategy to reduce the vulnerability of passport systems to fraud . planned efforts involve ( 1 ) installing a computer network to connect all domestic passport agencies and serve as a platform to allow state to verify the multiple issuance of passports , ( 2 ) enhancing its travel document issuance system so that the passport photo can be printed digitally , and ( 3 ) completing the upgrade of its travel document issuance system at all passport agencies . state had planned to have most of the improvements completed by december 1995 . however , only one major improvement , installation of a wide - area network , had been completed by that date . the other improvements , in addition to being dependent on the wide - area network for telecommunications , are also dependent on the completion of the upgrades to the passport production system . state's current goal is for full completion of these enhancements and upgrades by the end of 1996 . state indicated that completion of these upgrades was dependent upon the availability of funds . state installed the wide - area network to connect the passport agencies with each other as the telecommunications platform for the photo digitization and the multiple issuance verification initiatives . the multiple issuance verification system is expected to allow passport office employees to detect individuals applying at more that one office for multiple passports using the same identity — which state describes as one of the most prevalent forms of passport fraud . without such a system , there is no way for one office to know before issuance what applications are being processed by any other office . state is also developing a system to print a digitized passport photograph . according to state , a digitized photograph will make it easier to detect a substitution — another prevalent form of passport fraud . state spent about $4.1 million for these improvements in fiscal year 1995 and plans to spend an additional $22 million through fiscal year 1998 . state is using revenues from the machine - readable visa processing fees to fund these improvements . state has not completed the upgrade from the 1980 to the 1990 version of its travel document issuance system , which is used to enter data , process , and track the actual production of passports . systems in 9 of the 14 passport facilities have been upgraded . according to the consular bureau , the upgrade replaces an outdated minicomputer - based system with a more modern personal computer - based system , providing the interface needed to take advantage of the wide - area network and other new technologies . the conversion costs about $700,000 to $800,000 per office .