additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the navy is addressing the concerns raised by that report . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . in its comments on acquisition costs , we believe dod has used inappropriate comparisons that deviate from previous assessments . first , a lead ship cost comparison is not normally used because design , start - up , and other related costs are included that would not be included in follow - on unit ship cost comparisons . for example , the navy's estimate for the construction costs of the lead seawolf includes cost increases related to late and incomplete design drawings , late development and delivery of government - furnished equipment such as the bsy - 2 combat system , welding cracks , and problems with the torpedo doors . second , the navy used a fifth ship acquisition cost for comparison purposes on both the los angeles and arleigh burke class programs . this new unit will still be under development while the ship is being built . the technological challenges include the size of the unit and achievement of the necessary level of quietness . prototype testing will overlap with the construction of the lead ship , and if problems arise , extensive rework could be necessary . since the navy has no alternatives for this development , such rework could result in delayed delivery of the submarine to the navy . the propulsor ( propeller ) also presents a major technological challenge . while the propulsor is being designed for power , speed , and quieting efficiency , an optevfor early operational assessment noted that a full - scale model of the propulsor is needed to determine whether it will meet its quieting requirements . because of the concurrent development of the propulsor and the ship , however , the navy will have to select a final propulsor design before full - scale testing is complete . according to the program manager , the results of large - scale testing are promising , but meeting the propulsor requirements remains a definite technological challenge . another example of a potential problem involves the electronic warfare support measures ( countermeasure surveillance system ) . because of other navy priorities , funding for this program was reduced and the program had to be restructured to meet the needs of the nssn . according to navy program officials , the system will now use cots and existing systems to meet the performance and schedule requirements of the nssn . the photonics mast program has also been restructured because of a $10-million increase in cost .