these are listed below . ( app . ii provides detailed rule of law funding by region and country for fiscal years 1993-98. ) state's under secretary for global affairs has overall responsibility for coordinating rule of law programs and activities . in subsequent years , haiti continued to be the top recipient of rule of law funds in the region , receiving $35.5 million in fiscal year 1995 , $16 million in 1996 , and about $15 million in fiscal years 1997 and 1998 . most of this assistance was provided to develop and support a civilian national police force . to help illustrate what rule of law assistance was used for in the latin america and the caribbean region , we grouped rule of law assistance into one of six categories based on descriptions provided by the cognizant agencies . although we placed each program or activity into one primary category , many programs , usaid's in particular , had multiple purposes that could be identified with more than one category . figure 5 illustrates the distribution of rule of law assistance by these categories . ( app . iv defines the categories we used and provides funding levels by country and category. ) the largest rule of law category was assistance for criminal justice and law enforcement . about $199 million — 57 percent of the regional total for fiscal years 1993-98 — was dedicated to these activities . we included assistance to police , prosecutors , public defenders , and other host country agencies ( such as customs ) that take on law enforcement functions , as well as antinarcotics and antiterrorism assistance , in this category . almost every country in the region that received rule of law assistance had some criminal justice and law enforcement funding . haiti received the largest amount of such assistance — $72.5 million . other major recipients were el salvador ( $25.9 million ) , colombia ( $19.9 million ) , panama ( $11.2 million ) , and bolivia ( $9.8 million ) . virtually all of the assistance provided through justice and most of the funding provided by usaid and state was in this category . assistance for judicial and court operations was the second largest category , comprising $74.2 million ( 21 percent of the regional total ) . usaid provided 88 percent of the funding . assistance for civil government and military reform was the third largest category — $47.6 million ( 13.6 percent ) . we included assistance for governmental entities other than the courts and criminal justice and law enforcement systems in this category . the largest single element was $42.6 million provided by defense to haiti in 1994 . in addition , we included most of the military service training on topics such as civil - military relations and professional skills for maritime and military personnel . much less funding was devoted to the other categories — $22 million for democracy and human rights , $5.3 million for general and other activities , and $1.1 million for law reform . in the category of democracy and human rights , we included civic education activities , as well as some efforts that focused specifically on human rights , citizen participation , and related topics .