dennis a . de hart , evaluator - in - charge samuel s. van wagner , senior evaluator jean m. orland , senior evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we found them to be essentially the same . we then used the methodology to determine the cost - effectiveness of using tdy assignments for ship repairs . we assumed the average direct labor costs as fixed when a naval shipyard did not have adequate time to adjust its personnel to workload reductions . consequently , we compared only the average additional cost to the government of travel - related expenses to the average private shipyard staff - day rate for performing ship repairs . if the shipyard's travel - related costs were less than the private shipyard staff - day rate , we considered the use of tdy assignments to be cost - effective . however , when the shipyards had sufficient time to make needed personnel adjustments , we added the average naval shipyard direct labor costs to the average travel - related costs and compared this total amount to the average private shipyard staff - day rate . if a naval shipyard's total costs were more than the private shipyard's staff - day rate , we considered the use of tdy assignments not to be cost - effective . to obtain information on the cost components , we reviewed information generated by the shipyards' management information and financial systems . to determine the average staff - day rate for private shipyards , we contacted the office of the supervisor for shipbuilding at the naval sea systems command , which negotiates and administers ship repair contracts with the private sector . we found that the naval shipyards' systems did not specifically identify or summarize the amount of direct labor staff - days spent on tdy assignments , nor did they identify the reasons for the tdy assignments . we , therefore , developed a data collection instrument that would gather the desired information , using the best available shipyard data and estimates .