we did receive responses to our questionnaire . in july 1994 we asked the defense industrial supply center ( disc ) to complete the questionnaire for 110 insurance items , but disc did not respond to the request by the time our fieldwork was completed . we did not assess the reliability of these files . however , to validate insurance item data , we randomly sampled items that were not essential or exceeded authorized stock levels . the sample included 329 items from aso files and 110 items from disc files . we sent a questionnaire to the aso and disc item managers responsible for the sampled items . we asked the managers to validate and update the file information , provide opinions on the essentiality of the items and causes of excess stock buildups , and define the extent that excess stock was disposable . using this data from the aso managers , we projected the results to the universe from which the sample items were drawn at a 95-percent confidence interval . none of the disc item managers had responded to the questionnaire at the time our fieldwork was completed . we performed our review between february and september 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement on actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight not later than 60 days after the date of the report . a written statement also must be sent to the senate and house committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees ; the director , office of management and budget ; the secretary of the navy ; and the director , defense logistics agency . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5140 if you have any questions . the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's ( dod ) letter dated november 28 , 1994 . the item mission essentiality codes we used in our analysis are assigned to items to indicate their level of impact on the mission of applicable equipment in the event stocks are depleted . the military essentiality codes dod said we should have used are assigned to indicate the military importance of a part in relation to a higher component , equipment , or weapon . both sets of codes should provide the same indication of mission essentiality and be based on input from technical personnel . we analyzed the item mission essentiality codes because the aviation supply office's ( aso ) records showed these codes for 92 percent of the insurance items . we could not analyze the military essentiality codes because these codes were not shown on the records aso provided us for over 99 percent of the insurance items . after receiving our draft report , dod asked the navy to determine the distribution of military essentiality codes .