additional copies of reports are $2 each . a check or money order should be made out to the superintendent of documents . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . requirements are filled according to established priorities . joint staff officials stated that in the future , the lowest priority requests will not be met if filling them would exceed the usage limits agreed upon by the services and the joint staff unless there is a compelling need . this process will allow the joint staff not only to limit the use of capabilities in high demand , but also to identify any unmet requirements and the level of risk associated with not meeting these requirements . the air force has taken several steps to increase the number of u - 2 pilots . for example , it has reduced the commitment period for u - 2 pilots from 5 to 3 years because officials believe a shorter period will attract more candidates to the program . it also plans to increase the capacity of its pilot school . the air force expects to increase the number of pilots it can train from 14 to 24 a year — an increase of about 70 percent . the air force believes that if these initiatives are successful , and if u - 2 use is constrained , the u - 2 could reach its authorized pilot goal within 2 years . the air force faces unique challenges in attracting and keeping u - 2 pilots . it has not met its historical average for recruiting new candidates into the program in recent years and projects a net loss in pilots by the end of fiscal year 2000 . unlike other aircraft communities , qualified pilots are drawn from other aircraft such as b - 52 bombers and c - 130 transporters . these pilots volunteer to be trained to fly the u - 2 for a specified period . because of the high altitude at which the u - 2 flies , u - 2 pilots must pass extensive flight physicals to allow them to operate at altitudes that can exceed 70,000 feet . they are also required to wear full pressure suits much like those that astronauts wear , and the aircraft can be difficult to fly . air force officials said these conditions , along with high deployment rates , have contributed to a decline in the number of applicants . moreover , the number of applicants accepted has declined in recent years below the 50-percent historical average because it is difficult to find pilots with the aptitude required to master the difficult handling characteristics of the u - 2 . the deployment strain on the air force's specialized suppression aircraft — the f - 16cj — experienced between 1997 and 1999 should be reduced by using all f - 16cj capability throughout the air force . the f - 16cj is used to suppress enemy air defenses primarily by targeting air defense radars with sophisticated missiles . plans call for fielding a 10th active squadron in fiscal year 2007 . there are many challenges to increasing the supply of trained crews .