during such testing , some problems should be expected . however , enough realistic testing should be conducted for the services' independent testing agencies and / or dot&e to be able to certify to the decision authority that ( 1 ) the system's developmental testing is essentially complete and the basic results have been validated in an operational environment , ( 2 ) the system has clearly shown that it can meet the key parameters among its minimum acceptable performance requirements , ( 3 ) the system has clearly demonstrated the potential to fully meet all of its minimum acceptable requirements for performance and suitability without major or costly design changes , and ( 4 ) the system should be able to readily complete its remaining ot&e in time to support the planned full - rate production decision . comprehensive testing of a system's operational suitability features , such as supportability , may not be possible during early independent testing . however , the testing should be sufficient to reveal major suitability problems . other major contributors are listed in appendix ii . we will also make copies available to others upon request . this report was prepared under the direction of louis j. rodrigues , director of systems development and production issues , who may be reached on ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions . in fiscal year 1995 , the department of defense ( dod ) plans to spend over $79 billion for research , development , test , evaluation , and production of weapon systems . while dod has acquired some of the most technologically advanced and effective weapon systems , dod has often been criticized for not acquiring the systems in the most efficient manner . as weapon system programs progress through the phases of the acquisition process , they are subject to review at major decision points called milestones . the milestone review process is predicated on the principle that systems advance to higher acquisition phases by demonstrating that they meet prescribed technical specifications and performance thresholds . figure 1.1 illustrates the dod's weapon system acquisition process . at milestone 0 , a determination is made about whether an identified mission need warrants a study of alternative concepts to satisfy the need . if warranted , the program is approved to begin the concept exploration and definition phase . at milestone i , a determination is made about whether a new acquisition program is warranted . if warranted , initial cost , schedule , and performance goals are established for the program , and authorization is given to start the demonstration and validation phase . at milestone ii , a determination is made about whether continuation of development , testing , and preparation for production is warranted . if warranted , authorization is given to start the engineering and manufacturing development phase . also , approval of this phase will often involve a commitment to low - rate initial production ( lrip ) . at milestone iii , a determination is made about whether the program warrants a commitment to build , deploy , and support the system .