additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . we reviewed defense and commerce department documentation on the development of glx . we also compared the items on glx with the commerce control list items covered by advisory notes to confirm the method used to develop glx . we performed our review from march to october 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as agreed with your office , unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies to other congressional committees and the secretaries of defense , commerce , and state . we will also make copies available to other interested parties upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4383 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report were karen zuckerstein , david c. trimble , and john neumann . military applications for atm and sdh equipment are similar to civilian applications . these applications include sharing of intelligence , imagery and video between several locations , command and control of military operations using video - conferencing , and medical support and telemedicine between the battlefield and remote hospitals . when used in a military application , both types of equipment requires encryption devices to protect communications from interception . the department of defense buys such equipment “off - the - shelf” and is still testing it for potential military uses . according to defense officials , atm and sdh equipment will be beneficial to military functions , such as command and control , and will form the basis for future defense department communications networks . both atm and sdh equipment are considered to be advanced technologies in the telecommunications industry and are now increasingly deployed worldwide . the commerce department used the advisory notes from the commerce control list as a basis for what items were to be included under glx . currently , there is no guidance or criteria available to exporters on how much military involvement in a commercial entity is needed before it is considered a military end user . according to commerce department officials , an exporter is responsible for knowing its end user when exporting under glx ( or civ ) . an exporter is encouraged to come to the commerce department for an end - user check if there are any abnormal circumstances in a transaction that indicate the export may be going to an inappropriate end user .