vi ) . title vii of the tariff act of 1930 , as amended , provides the most common means of dealing with antidumping issues . under title vii , private parties can petition the department of commerce and the itc on behalf of a u.s. industry to determine whether a class or kind of merchandise is being sold in the united states at “dumped” prices and whether a u.s. industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury by reason of such dumped imports . if the agencies find that both dumping and injury or threat of injury exist , commerce then calculates the amount of duties imposed on each importer to offset the price difference between the u.s. price and the normal value of the imported merchandise . title vii of the tariff act of 1930 , as amended , also provides for the imposition of countervailing ( or equalizing ) duties whenever a government or public entity provides certain subsidies for the manufacture , production , or export of articles subsequently imported into the united states and a u.s. industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury by reason of such subsidized imports . as in the case of antidumping law , petitions are filed with commerce and the itc , and countervailing duties are imposed if commerce finds a subsidy and the itc finds that a u.s. industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury by reason of imports of such subsidized imports . under section 332 of the tariff act of 1930 , as amended , the itc has broad authority to investigate matters pertaining to u.s. customs laws , foreign competition with domestic industry , and international trade relations . most itc investigations under section 332 are conducted at the request of ustr or the house committee on ways and means or the senate committee on finance . section 22 of the agricultural adjustment act of 1933 , as amended,authorizes the president to impose fees or quotas on imported products that undermine any usda domestic commodity support or stabilization program . since 1995 , such actions may be applied only against imports from non - wto countries . sections 201 to 204 of the trade act of 1974 , as amended , authorize the itc to conduct investigations concerning whether an article is being imported into the united states in such increased quantities as to be a substantial cause of serious injury , or the threat thereof , to the domestic industry producing a like or directly competitive article . if the itc makes an affirmative determination , it recommends a remedy to the president , who makes the final decision as to whether to impose a remedy and , if so , in what form and amount . remedies generally take the form of increased tariffs and import quotas . sections 301-309 of the trade act of 1974 , as amended , commonly referred to as “section 301,” give the president broad discretion to enforce u.s. trade rights granted by trade agreements and to attempt to eliminate acts , policies , or practices of a foreign government that violate a trade agreement or are unjustifiable , discriminatory , or unreasonable and burdensome or restrict u.s. commerce .