additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . dod's comments are included as appendix i . in responding to the legislative requirement , we primarily relied on our prior work on defense contractor restructuring activities . as part of our prior work , we reviewed information prepared during dod's certification process , including the contractor's restructuring proposal , dcaa audit reports , negotiation memorandums , and other pertinent information to determine the amount of restructuring savings and costs expected for each of these business combinations . to determine the amount of restructuring costs paid and estimated savings realized , we reviewed dod's november 1997 and march 1998 reports to congress on defense industry restructuring . to determine the feasibility of developing a methodology for assessing restructuring savings on individual contract prices , we reviewed restructuring activities at 10 contractor business segments , including at least 1 segment from each of the 7 business combinations . we generally selected those business segments with the largest projected amount of restructuring savings . in assessing whether restructuring savings could be traced to contract prices , we tried to compare the overhead rates that were in effect before restructuring with the rates that were in effect after restructuring . we also examined contract - related documents to determine if direct costs were less than before restructuring . also , we requested that contractor officials identify comparable items that dod purchased before and after restructuring . we accepted the items the contractors identified and did not make an independent evaluation to determine whether they identified all available comparable items . we compared the prices dod paid for these items before and after restructuring to determine if the prices had been affected by restructuring and other factors . in addition , we determined whether contracting officers had included downward - only reopener clauses in fixed - price contracts negotiated before the contractors had adjusted their forward pricing rates to reflect the impact of restructuring . for those contracts containing such clauses , we determined whether contracting officers had exercised the clauses and , if so , the amounts by which the contracts' prices were reduced . we discussed the results of our analyses with officials from the business combinations , dod , dcmc , and dcaa . we performed work in september 1998 to update some of the information included in our prior reports . the work was carried out in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the commander , dcmc ; the director , dcaa ; and the director , office of management and budget . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . defense contractor restructuring: benefits to dod and contractors ( gao / nsiad - 98-225 , sept. 10 , 1998 ) .