ii. ) instructional staff at the school can customize segments of the courses to incorporate case studies and practical exercises relevant to latin america . school officials told us that they consider this case study an excellent illustration of issues related to professional military behavior , command and control , and changes in u.s. military attitudes and acceptance of the principles of human rights . they said that incidents in which latin american militaries have been involved , such as the el mozote massacre of hundreds of peasants in el salvador in 1981 , are also discussed . courses at the school are taught by u.s. and latin american military members as well as some civilian instructors . the school requires that instructors possess the appropriate skills and military background in such areas as logistics , infantry , engineering or helicopter operations . all instructors must also pass a special human rights instructor program before teaching any course . instructors from latin america are involved with all of the courses in the curriculum and work with u.s. instructors to develop and prepare instructional materials and teach segments of the courses . the school identifies the requirements for each foreign instructor position , including rank ; branch qualifications , such as combat arms or airborne ; and other prerequisites , such as graduation from a command and general staff officer college . the school sends these requirements to the u.s. embassies in latin america to solicit nominations of foreign military members that meet the requirements . like the process used to nominate students , the foreign militaries identify prospective instructors , who are subject to approval by u.s. officials at the embassies . officials at the school said that the latin american instructors have become increasingly important over the past several years . we conducted our review from november 1995 to june 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we plan no further distribution of this report until 15 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretaries of defense and state and appropriate congressional committees . we will also send copies to other interested parties upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4128 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . the u.s. army established the latin america center - ground division in the panama canal zone to provide instruction to u.s. army personnel in garrison technical skills such as food preparation , maintenance , and other support functions , with limited training for latin americans . u.s. army renamed the institution the u.s. army caribbean school - spanish instruction and identified a secondary mission of instructing latin american military personnel . increased latin american interest in u.s. military training led to the elimination of english language instruction to focus on instructing latin american personnel . the institution became the u.s. army school of the americas , with spanish declared the official language of the school . the school relocated to its current location at fort benning , georgia , due to a conflict between u.s. and panamanian officials regarding the operation and command of the school .