missions to . we changed the footnote to read “russian space agency contract.” 16 . we did not change the order of reasons for contract growth . see comment 12 for discussion of russian space agency contract . our estimate of civil service personnel costs includes an allocation of all elements of the research and program management budget — personnel and related costs , travel , and research operations support — to the station program . according to a nasa official , the agency's estimate only allocates personnel and related costs to the station program . since the station program benefits from all elements of the research and program management budget , we believe that it is appropriate to allocate all of those costs to the program . we modified the report to incorporate this suggestion . a crew return vehicle is required for space station operations . the x - 38 program is focused on demonstrating a concept for station crew return . therefore , we believe those costs are directly related to station development . we changed the report to reflect nasa's current plans for modifying space shuttle columbia . we modified the report to read “ . over 90 launches by nasa and its international partners.” 22 . we disagree . we believe a “delay” in the seven person operational capability is a constraint to the station program . see comment 20 . we revised the report to reflect information in the final cost assessment and validation task force report . see comment 8 . see comment 9 . we believe report language accurately reflects the rebaselining of the prime contract performance measurement reporting system . we modified the report to incorporate nasa's suggestion . we modified the report to incorporate nasa's suggestion . we identified the independent cost team as nasa's cost assessment and validation task force earlier in the report . see comment 8 . vijay barnabas the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we continue to be concerned . the program has used , or identified specific uses for a significant portion of its available reserves , with almost 6 years left before the last assembly flight is scheduled to be launched .