the system also included separation payments . current personnel levels for all of the services are based on that assessment . however , future changes in personnel levels are possible . all of these temporary programs are scheduled to expire in 1999 . vsi and ssb are targeted programs for overstrength or oversubscribed fields , careers , and military occupational specialties . individuals with 6 to 20 years of service are eligible for vsi and ssb . the tera program allows voluntary retirement of members with 15 years of service in personnel categories subject to the discretion of the services . some senior dod officials indicated they would like to have these temporary authorities made permanent because they provide benefits for separating personnel and control over potential losses of critical personnel . some officials indicated that they did not want tera after the drawdown because they believed it would result in a constant stream of requests and undermine the concept of the 20-year commitment . the selective early retirement boards permit the services to exercise authority to select retirement - eligible officers to retire earlier than normal . this program was used to separate 10,420 officers from 1992 to 1995 . assessments of the value of the military retirement system in force management depend on the characteristics of the desired force . one key aspect of desired force characteristics is the optimal length of military careers . the military retirement system implicitly assumes that the optimal career length is the same for all military occupations and that career length should be relatively short due to the high physical demands of military duties . however , some analysts contend that , although some military occupations undoubtedly call for young and vigorous personnel because they entail physically demanding work under harsh conditions , many other occupations do not require exceptionally vigorous duties . furthermore , in today's more technologically and politically complex military environment , capabilities that peak later in life than physical capabilities , such as experience , knowledge , and judgment , may be more important in many military occupations than vigor . therefore , the optimal career length is likely to vary by military occupation category , with some that are longer than 20 or 30 years ( eg , acquisition ) and some that are shorter ( eg , infantry ) . one of the strongest arguments for longer careers for senior military leaders is the increased education and joint operational experience requirements of the modern career . one of our roundtable participants strongly advocated lengthening military careers for senior officers and shortening careers for other officers . under such a proposal , each service would establish a general career length for officers that would be shorter than the current length , possibly ranging from about 12 years for the army to about 17 years for the navy . beyond that point , only a small percentage of officers would be promoted to the next rank , and the career length expectation for those personnel could be greater than 35 years . considerable uncertainty exists in the defense community about the size of the future force and its composition .