this radar provides space surveillance support as a secondary mission . the national science and technology council estimated that about 118,000 objects 1 centimeter and larger were orbiting the earth . however , dod's surveillance network cannot routinely detect and track 110,000 ( 93 percent ) of the objects that are estimated to be between 1 and 10 centimeters in size . the national research council report stated that the risk of the space station colliding with untracked debris could be lowered if more objects were tracked . the report mentioned that debris from about 0.5 to 20 centimeters in diameter was of most concern to the space station because , within this range , the debris may be too large to shield against and too small to ( currently ) track and avoid . because nasa has no location information about these relatively small sized objects , it is requiring dod , in the near term , to routinely detect , track , and catalog all space objects that are 5 centimeters and larger and have a perigee of 600 kilometers or less . beginning in the 2002-2003 time frame , when the space station is to be completed , nasa will require dod to detect , track , and catalog objects as small as 1 centimeter . dod agrees that achieving the ability to detect and track objects 5 centimeters in size would be an intermediate step to meeting nasa's needs . however , dod stated that achieving the capability to detect and track objects 1 centimeter in size would be technically challenging . the importance of the requirement to detect and track 1 centimeter space objects is linked to the effect of critical collisions between such objects and the space station . nasa estimates a 19-percent probability of critical collisions with objects larger than 1 centimeter during a 10-year period . although not all collisions would be catastrophic , nasa estimates a 5-percent probability that such collisions would cause a catastrophic failure , resulting in the loss of a module or a crew member . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . since the former soviet union launched its first sputnik satellite 40 years ago , the number of manmade space objects orbiting the earth — active and inactive satellites and debris generated from launch vehicle and satellite breakups — has increased dramatically . in 1995 , a national science and technology council report estimated the number of space objects to be over 35 million . although nearly all of these objects are thought to be smaller than 1 centimeter , about 110,000 are estimated to be between 1 and 10 centimeters , and about 8,000 are larger than 10 centimeters . only the approximate 8,000 objects are large enough , or reflect radar energy or light well enough , to be routinely observed by the department of defense's ( dod ) existing space surveillance sensors . about 80 percent of these 8,000 objects are in low - earth orbits , and the remainder are in geosynchronous and other orbits . the increasing amount of space debris creates a hazard to certain spacecraft , especially large ones like the planned multibillion dollar international space station , which will operate in low - earth orbits .