this did not occur . as will be discussed in chapter 5 , workloads were generally transferred to other depots owned by the same service or to the private sector . although we share dod officials' concern about the reliability of depot maintenance data and the adequacy of management information systems , we do not believe these long - standing and well - documented problems should preclude dod from conducting future competitions . dod had already taken numerous actions to enhance the credibility and fairness of the competitions before it canceled its competition program in may 1994 . in addition , other actions can be taken to further improve the competitions and ensure their fairness . many of the actions dod has taken to improve public - public competitions were summarized in our september 30 , 1993 , correspondence to the chairman , subcommittee on defense , senate committee on appropriations . these actions include ( 1 ) developing a cost comparability handbook that , among other things , identifies the adjustments that should be made to public depots' bids as a result of differences in the services' accounting systems and ( 2 ) directing the defense contract audit agency to certify that successful bids include comparable estimates of all direct and indirect costs . the correspondence also identified additional actions that could be taken to further improve the competitions . these include ( 1 ) ensuring that defense contract audit agency auditors receive the technical support they need to properly evaluate the depots' bids and ( 2 ) requiring the agency to conduct incurred cost audits to verify that the depots could perform the work for the bid amount . in addition to these dod - wide actions , some depots have independently improved the quality and accuracy of their maintenance databases , systems , and processes , including cost accounting . for example , one of the basic problems that we and others have pointed out with the air force's accounting system is that actual costs are accumulated at the maintenance shop level rather than at the job level . because of this condition , a shop that performs both competed and noncompeted work could offset losses on its competed workloads with profits from its noncompeted workloads . however , at several depots , this deficiency was significantly mitigated by creating shops that worked only on competed workloads . the ogden air logistics center has made a particularly noteworthy effort to overcome the deficiencies in its management information systems . at our recommendation , the center commander implemented a broad - based financial management improvement program that included developing and implementing the depot maintenance business area policies and procedures handbook . this handbook addresses financial management policies , procedures , and responsibilities ; internal controls ; and other key areas . defense contract audit agency officials reviewed drafts of the handbook and worked with center officials to refine the policies and procedures . so far , the new policies and procedures have been implemented for competition programs and the entire aircraft directorate . according to defense contract audit agency officials who recently audited the center's aircraft directorate , the current and planned controls address previously identified internal control weaknesses .