dod concurred with our recommendations . dod noted that , although study assumptions are generally based on military service doctrine , dod must be free to analyze changes to that doctrine in the interest of enhancing joint capability . however , dod did not agree with our finding that the ila's recommendations are not supported by the study's analysis . dod stated that the study used computationally derived data , along with additional analysis and military judgment , to develop its recommendations . dod cites service acquisition programs , input from theater commanders , and substitution of one type of intratheater asset for another as examples of the additional analysis considered in developing the requirements and recommendations in the ila . dod points to the study's recommendation to use excess hets in place of 34-ton line haulers as being based on service acquisition programs and theater commander input . the ila does not link its requirements to its recommendations . rather , its recommendations merely support the army's acquisition plans with no explanation of the disconnect between those plans and the study's requirements . in discussing our draft report , agency officials acknowledged that the joint staff had difficulty linking the army's fiscal year 2003 acquisition program to the ila requirements and that , for this reason , the study's reliance on the acquisition program is not clearly explained . furthermore , joint staff officials told us during our review that the decisions reached by ila working groups concerning tradeoff assessments and the airlift tactical unit moves analysis were not documented . without an explicit link in the ila between the study's requirements and recommendations , and without a means of reviewing the factors or additional analyses that led to the final recommendations in the study , we have no basis on which to concur that a link exists . to determine whether the ila's analysis and recommendations were appropriately linked , we reviewed the ila , its catalogues of data and assumptions , and other information supporting the study ; theater command input to the ila ; army and air force doctrine and procurement plans for tactical wheeled vehicles and airlifters ; information on intratheater mobility in operations desert shield and desert storm and operation joint endeavor ; the 1997 and 1998 air mobility master plans ; rand's 1997 documented briefing , “should c - 17s be used to carry in - theater cargo during major deployments ? ” ; and other relevant documents . we reviewed our prior reports on operations desert shield and desert storm , pls , hets , and c - 17 . we visited the tactical wheeled vehicles training facility at fort eustis , virginia . we discussed the ila's assumptions , analysis , and recommendations with officials from the following organizations: joint staff , washington , d.c. ; office of the assistant secretary of defense for strategy and requirements , washington , d.c. ; office of the under secretary of defense for policy for program analysis and evaluation , washington , d.c. ; u.s. central command , macdill air force base , florida ; u.s . the ila did not incorporate the potential contribution of several lift assets that could assist in meeting intratheater lift requirements .