is commensurate with the work accomplished . .” the statutory exceptions to this policy apply conditions or restrictions to the transaction . for example , a written determination is required from the head of an agency , or his or her designee , that the use of advance payments is in the public interest . these policies are implemented in the federal acquisition regulations system . this system consists of the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , which is the primary authority , and agency acquisition regulations that implement and supplement the far . the department of defense's ( dod ) implementing regulation is the defense federal acquisition regulation supplement ( dfars ) . in addition , each of the military services' acquisition organizations has issued supplemental guidelines for use in implementing policies and procedures in the far and the dfars . according to the far , contracting officers normally should reject supplies and services that do not conform to contract specifications . however , far section 46.407 ( nonconforming supplies or services ) provides exceptions for those circumstances ( such as for reasons of economy or urgency ) in which accepting such supplies or services may be in the government's best interest . this section addresses only situations when the government has decided to accept items with permanent nonconformances and not require a contractor to correct the deficiencies after delivery . in these situations , the far recommends that the contract be modified to reduce the price or provide other consideration to reflect that the items are less than were specified in the contract . the far and the dfars do not provide guidance for withholding payment for work to be performed after delivery in situations where the government conditionally accepts nonconforming or incomplete work . moreover , within the military acquisition community , no consistent way has been developed for determining whether payments should be withheld or how to determine the amount to withhold . the dod director of defense procurement told us that a contracting officer should withhold from payment the estimated cost and profit for work to be done by the contractor after delivery . however , air force and army acquisition officials told us that while the cost and profit of the remaining work should be a consideration , the amount withheld , if any , should be left to the discretion of the contracting officer . air force supplemental guidance includes a standard contract clause allowing contracting officers to use their discretion in determining the amount to be withheld . the army provides no supplemental guidance to the far for use in conditionally accepting items and establishing a withhold amount . at the naval sea systems command and the naval air system command ( navair ) procurement and contracting officials agreed that amounts withheld should directly relate to the anticipated cost of work to be performed by a contractor after delivery . however , contract clauses that the two commands use give a contracting officer authority to withhold a lesser amount . from 1981 through 1992 , the air force materiel command's ( afmc ) aeronautical systems division supplements provided for a standard contract clause entitled “correction of supplies accepted with deficiencies,” which called for withholding 10 percent of the price when conditionally accepting items .