we agree with dod in part . our analysis shows that infrastructure savings that have occurred have been applied toward new infrastructure requirements , but not to weapons procurement or modernization in any appreciable amounts . dod expressed concern that it may not be able to accelerate the procurement of programs that are already in the defense program if congress directs that additional funding be used to acquire new programs with large out - year funding requirements . the full text of dod's comments are included as appendix ii . to evaluate the major planning assumptions underlying dod's fiscal year 1996 fydp , we interviewed officials in the office of the dod comptroller , the office of program analysis and evaluation , office of environmental security , base closure and utilization office , and the congressional budget office . we examined a variety of dod planning and budget documents , including the fydp and associated annexes . we also reviewed the president's fiscal year 1996 budget submission ; the fiscal year 1996 concurrent budget resolution ; our prior reports ; and pertinent reports by the congressional budget office , the congressional research service , and others . to calculate the amount of infrastructure funding for fiscal years 1995 through 2001 we used the infrastructure definitions and categories provided by dod . results of our infrastructure analysis were provided to cognizant dod officials within the office of program analysis and evaluation for validation and comment . department officials stated the analysis was correct on the basis of the definitions and categories established in 1994 . however , they also stated they were redefining some infrastructure activities and categories that may change the results . dod would not provide us with the details supporting these new categories during our review so we were unable to evaluate them . to determine whether the fydp submission complies with the law , we compared its content with the requirements established in section 221 of title 10 of the united states code and section 1005 of the defense authorization act for fiscal year 1995 . we also reviewed references to the reporting requirement in various legislative reports to clarify congressional intent . our work was conducted from march to august 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are providing copies of this report to appropriate house and senate committees ; the secretaries of defense , the air force , the army , and the navy ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also provide copies to other interested parties upon request . if you have any questions concerning this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-3504 . these reductions were made primarily in the procurement account . the largest changes from one year to the next in the 1996 fydp occur during the last 2 years of the plan when the budget is projected to increase by about $10 billion from 1999 to 2000 and by another $10.4 billion from 2000 to 2001 . this represents about a 1-percent real increase after inflation for those years . according to the secretary of defense , the 1996 fydp emphasizes readiness and quality - of - life programs .