detecting liquid explosives . faa is developing two different electromagnetic devices for screening bottles and other containers . a development issue is processing speed . these devices may be available within 2 years . the cost is projected to be between $25,000 and $125,000 each . although a number of commercially available trace devices could be used on passengers if deemed necessary , passengers might find their physical intrusiveness unacceptable . in june 1996 , the national research council , for example , reported that passenger - screening devices may pose a number of health , legal , operational , privacy , and convenience concerns . faa and other federal agencies are developing devices that passengers may find more acceptable . faa estimates that the cost to provide about 3,000 of these devices to screen passengers would be about $1.9 billion . a number of trace devices in development will detect residue or vapor from explosives on passengers' hands . two devices screen either documents or tokens that have been handled by passengers . these devices should be available in 1997 or 1998 and sell for approximately $65,000 to $85,000 each . another five devices under development use walk - through screening portals similar to current metal detectors . three will use trace technology to detect particles and vapor from explosives on passengers' clothing or in the air surrounding their bodies . projected selling prices range from approximately $170,000 to $300,000 . one of these devices will be tested at an airport in the latter part of 1996 , and another device may undergo airport testing next year . two other walk - through portals based on electromagnetic technology are in development . rather than detecting particles or vapor , these devices will show images of items concealed under passengers' clothing . prices are projected to be approximately $100,000 to $200,000 . screening cargo and mail at airports is difficult because individual packages or pieces of mail are usually batched into larger shipments that are more difficult to screen . if cargo and mail shipments were broken down into smaller packages , some available technologies could be used . for example , the electromagnetic device available for checked baggage will be tested for screening cargo and mail at a u.s. airport . although not yet commercially available , two different systems for detecting explosives in large containers are being developed by faa and other federal agencies . each system draws vapor and particle samples and uses trace technology to analyze them . one system is scheduled for testing in 1997 . in addition , faa is considering , for further development , three nuclear - based technologies originally planned for checked - bag screening for use on cargo and mail . these technologies use large , heavy apparatuses to generate gamma rays or neutrons to penetrate larger items . however , they require shielding for safety reasons . the price is about $65,000 . these technologies are not as far along and are still in the laboratory development stage rather than the prototype development stage . if fully developed , these devices could cost as much as $2 million to $5 million each .