additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we still believe that this goal is very aggressive . dod acknowledges that this goal is stringent and the army has not had good experience in the past with false removals on other aircraft . additionally , as noted in the report , army materiel systems analysis activity said the risk associated with achieving this requirement remains high . we changed the section heading to emphasize the high risk . gary l. billen robert d. spence lauri a. bischof michael w. buell karen a. rieger the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . dod approved the proposal in march 1995 . according to the program office , boeing's plan to complete the testing calls for it to be conducted concurrently . if major problems occur in any one of the testing phases , there may not be enough time to fix the problem and complete all testing before first flight . configuration management is the discipline of applying technical and administrative direction and surveillance to ( a ) control the flow of information between organizations and activities within a project ; ( b ) manage the ownership of , and changes to , controlled information ; ( c ) ensure information consistency ; and ( d ) enable product release , acceptance , and maintenance . the part of configuration management used to report software problems and changes among the contractor team and subcontractors has shortcomings that put software development at risk . in its november 1994 monthly assessment report , the defense plant representative office observed that the lack of a common problem reporting system made proper handling of software related changes difficult . furthermore , the report noted that this situation could adversely impact scheduled first flight of the comanche . as of february 1995 , the contractor team still did not have a common , automated database available to track problem change reports . thus , the contractor team , as well as subcontractors , did not have visibility over changes made to software . maintainability requirements are important to achieving lower operating and support costs and wartime availability goals .