according to u.s . forces command planners , the enhanced brigades that are not required to achieve mission success in the war fight are considered to be strategic reserve that can either be used for occupational forces once the enemy has been defeated or for other missions . other roles would be to replace active forces stationed overseas or engaged in peacekeeping operations should the replaced forces be needed for a regional conflict . the guard has a wide range of state missions . these missions include the defense of states or other entities from disorder , rebellion , or invasion ; emergency and disaster relief ; humanitarian assistance ; and community support activities . in crisis situations , the governors primarily use the guard to supplement civil agencies after those agencies have exhausted their resources . according to guard officials at the state level , the state expects the local authorities to respond first , followed by county , and then state resources . if the crisis exceeds the state's civil capabilities , the guard can be called on for added support . for example , needs far exceeded the state's civil agencies' capabilities after hurricane andrew devastated south florida . therefore , the governor called up almost 50 percent of florida's army and air guard personnel for such tasks as providing temporary shelters , removing debris , distributing food and water , and providing security . for situations beyond a state's capabilities , the governor can ask the president to declare a federal emergency . when this declaration is made , the federal emergency management agency becomes the coordinating agency between state and federal agencies . for example , florida's immediate assistance needs after hurricane andrew exceeded the capacity of the state's resources , including its guard forces . as a result , the governor requested and received a presidential disaster declaration that entitled the state to obtain federal funding and assistance from federal agencies and the active military . the federal government has added several domestic initiatives to the guard's federally funded state missions . for example , newly acquired initiatives include drug interdiction and counter - drug activities , drug demand reduction programs , medical assistance in underserved areas , and the civilian youth opportunities program . although federally funded , the state governors authorize missions like these under the control of authorized guard officials . given the concerns for potential hardships to guard members , their families , and their employers , most state guard leaders plan to rotate guard members used in state missions lasting longer than 7 days . for example , in both the midwest floods of 1993 and hurricane andrew in 1992 , guard personnel were rotated , which resulted in the use of a greater number of personnel , but for shorter durations . guard officials at the state level said that general soldier skills , such as discipline and following a chain of command , are often all that are needed to satisfy state missions . in the specialized skills areas , they said that support skills and equipment such as engineering , transportation , medical support , aviation , and military police are most often needed .