other properties are being marketed . nineteen additional closures are planned for 1996 as cost - saving measures . it does not seem prudent to close posts as cost - saving measures and then continue to hold and maintain post property at government expense . in zanzibar , the consulate was closed in 1979 , but rather than selling the consul general residence , the embassy in tanzania kept the property and has used it predominantly for recreational purposes and occasionally for official purposes . in 1987 , the house was renovated at a cost of $108,000 . in 1991 , the state inspector general recommended that the embassy make a recommendation to the state department regarding the residence's disposition . according to the inspector general , the embassy spent $20,000 in 1990 for maintenance and personnel costs and used it 137 nights for official and personal use . the inspector general report indicated that the island of zanzibar has several adequate hotels that could be used by travelers . it also questioned the likelihood that the united states would reopen a post in zanzibar and therefore need such a residence . the embassy suggested in 1991 that the residence be retained for at least 3 more years in anticipation of higher property values . meanwhile , the embassy undertook what it termed a “modest” property refurbishment to enhance the residence's value and its utility to u.s. personnel on official travel in zanzibar . according to office of foreign buildings operations ( fbo ) , $23,000 was allotted in 1992 to enhance the value of the property . in early 1995 , the inspector general again visited zanzibar . according to inspector general officials , maintenance and salaries relating to the residence were $32,000 in 1994 . the residence was used 122 nights for recreation and 36 nights for representational purposes . in alexandria , egypt , the consulate general was closed in 1993 ; however , state officials retained the consulate general residence , with an estimated value of over $1 million , in hope that the post would be reopened . state officials attempted to justify its retention on economic grounds , such as using it as a residence for a u.s. information agency representative . the inspector general questioned such retention as an “apparent lack of concern for the financial loss being incurred by the u.s. government.” state officials then said that when the ambassador used the residence , state would save $20,000 in lodging costs and that the spacious residence is ideal for representational and trade promotion events . bahuio amb . r&r residence ( continued ) . state holds and maintains some properties where posts have been closed . in tangier , morocco , in september 1988 , state approved closing of the consulate , but state retained the consulate compound , which contained a principal officer residence and an office building . the estimated value of these facilities is greater than $2 million . voice of america has been using some of the facilities . in 1990 , the embassy raised the issue of selling the facilities , but actions to sell the property have evolved slowly . for example , in july 1992 , the embassy submitted its third request to fbo for guidance .