this is being done during operation joint endeavor . a major purpose of the program is to detect diseases and nonbattle injuries before they become major outbreaks and thereby limit the services' capabilities to carry out their missions . the weekly reports are categorized into 15 different areas such as respiratory problems , orthopedic injuries , and unexplained fevers . miscellaneous / administrative visits can also be reported to track immunizations , prescription refills , physical examinations , laboratory tests , and follow - up visits . the data are summarized into theater - wide illness and injury trends so that preventive measures can be identified and forwarded to appropriate theater / field commanders to alert them to any abnormal trends or to actions that should be taken . dod officials believe the predeployment assessment of environmental health hazards , the environmental sampling , and the medical surveillance monitoring done during operation joint endeavor have enabled better tracking and medical troop surveillance than that available during the gulf war . in addition , they believe the capabilities now available through usachppm and the army laboratory , capabilities that were not available during the gulf war , have greatly improved dod's ability to monitor and track environmental threats and exposures . military medical surveillance should include the identification of changes in the health status of servicemembers during and after a deployment . baseline information on the status of servicemembers' health before they deploy is highly desirable in determining whether their health status changed during a deployment . predeployment and postdeployment medical assessments , including blood samples , provide for a comparison from which postdeployment epidemiological analyses can be done . collecting and maintaining a centralized database of such medical assessment data also facilitate such analyses . during the gulf war , the absence of data on servicemembers' health , including both baseline health information and postdeployment health status information , greatly complicated the epidemiological research done by the institute of medicine and the presidential advisory committee following the war . dod's medical surveillance plan did not require the collection of baseline health status information on servicemembers who deployed during operation joint endeavor . rather , the services were required to follow their existing service requirements for ensuring that all personnel were medically fit for deployment . initially , in developing the medical surveillance plan , dod officials considered collecting a predeployment blood sample for all deploying servicemembers . however , this approach was not followed , according to dod officials , because ( 1 ) dod already had blood samples that had been drawn during the services' periodic testing for the human immuno - deficiency virus ( hiv ) , ( 2 ) many servicemembers had already deployed when the collection was being discussed , and ( 3 ) the collection of blood samples would have been logistically difficult . dod officials considered the blood samples drawn for the hiv testing to be acceptable baseline samples . our review , however , found that predeployment blood samples were not available for many servicemembers who deployed under operation joint endeavor and that many of the blood samples , in the repository for servicemembers who deployed , were quite old .