of austria ) . stewart & stevenson subcontracted with steyr to design and develop fmtv prototypes based on the design of a truck steyr produced for the austrian army . army officials said that since the army had specified the material to be used in 20 of the areas , it agreed to pay for necessary changes in these areas to improve the fmtv trucks' corrosion protection . the army also agreed to pay a portion of the cost of correcting the corrosion problems in the remaining 40 areas because the contractor maintained that the test specified in the contract indicated the effects of 15 years of corrosion even though the contract only required trucks with 10 years of corrosion protection . the army was unable to disprove the contractor's claim . the army and the contractor concluded that using galvanized ( zinc coated ) steel to produce the cabs may be the only way to meet the 10-year corrosion protection requirement . they also believed that galvanization would likely provide more than 10 years of corrosion protection . because the galvanized cab has the potential to protect against corrosion beyond the contract requirement , the army agreed to share the cost of the cabs . the army and the contractor modified the fmtv contract to specify the use of galvanized steel for fmtv cabs and of other materials to correct the corrosion problems discovered in the contract - specified corrosion test . the modifications set a ceiling of $7 million on the army's share of costs . the contractor produced 3,751 trucks with galvanized cabs under the first production contract . army project officials said that the army is designing a new corrosion test to determine the number of years of protection the new design will provide . they also said that the corrosion protection enhancements and the corrosion test of these enhancements will be included as requirements in future fmtv truck production contracts . the contractor produced 2,491 trucks after mclaughlin improved its procedures to address corrosion problems found on the first 4,955 trucks and before trucks with galvanized steel cabs were produced . these 2,491 trucks have not been tested for corrosion and are not covered under the agreed upon corrosion warranty covering the first 4,955 trucks produced . the army's decision to award a $1.2-billion fmtv contract to a company that was not experienced in truck production , did not have truck production facilities , and was not affiliated with an experienced producer , was not consistent with its plans for a low - risk acquisition strategy . further , the army contract contained an aggressive production schedule , considering an inexperienced contractor , that further added to the risks . the combination of inexperience and an aggressive production schedule were major contributors to the contractor's production problems and schedule delays . the army changed its plans to terminate the final year of the 5-year fmtv production contract when the congress provided additional funding to continue the program . instead of terminating the final year , the contract was extended 2 additional years with the original final year's production quantities spread over the 3-year period . the contract extension added an estimated $85 million to the original contract price .