data not available . given the recent congressional interest in the export of medicine to cuba , we have included data reported to the united nations by cuba's major trading partners on their export of medicines and pharmaceuticals . we also include u.s. census data of u.s. exports of medicine and pharmaceuticals to cuba . part 515 . ofac believes that the restrictions referred to in section 102 ( h ) include the exercise of licensing authority . specifically , ofac refers to 31 c.f.r . § 515.201 , which prohibits remittances to cuba “except as specifically authorized by the secretary of the treasury . by means of regulations , rulings , instructions , licenses , or otherwise.” this encompasses the authority to amend the cacrs to modify license requirements . thus , ofac believes that its licensing authority allowed it to change the family remittance regulations as a reasonable means of adjusting the terms of the embargo . it is clear that the president's broad foreign affairs authority , as well as that under section 5 ( b ) of the trading with the enemy act , allows the executive branch a great deal of discretion in making changes to embargo restrictions . we believe that ofac has the authority to make the family remittance changes under its general licensing authority , which was included in the codification of the embargo under section 102 ( h ) . moreover , section 112 of helms - burton specifically addresses the reinstitution of general licenses for family remittances . this section expressed the sense of congress that prior to such reinstitution , the president should insist that the cuban government take steps to foster economic freedoms for small businesses in cuba , among other conditions . congress further suggested that if a general license was reinstituted , the administration should continue to require specific licenses for amounts over $500 . in our view , section 112 clearly indicates that , even after section 102 ( h ) of helms - burton codified the embargo in effect on march 1 , 1996 , the administration retained the authority to reinstitute a general license for family remittances . in their comments on this report , both ofac and the department of state noted that the administration carefully considered the sense of congress , but determined that it was important to institute the changes promptly after the pope's visit to cuba in january 1998 . this was deemed necessary to expand the flow of humanitarian assistance to cuba . the comments specifically stated the view that the issue of family remittances was a matter “subject to presidential discretion in weighing the humanitarian purpose of allowing u.s. residents and citizens to support family members in cuba against the resulting flow of hard currency to cuba.” nevertheless , because these changes will likely result in increased transfers of currency to cuba , they do not appear to further the general purpose of the embargo to limit such transfers . the u.s. embargo of cuba has been in place for over 36 years . under the embargo , the u.s. government has formulated regulations that balance policy objectives of the embargo with humanitarian needs of cuban - americans with family ties to cuba .