nasa agreed with our recommendation . nasa said that it had consistently taken the position that the flat funding cap , while a fiscal necessity , was inconsistent with a normal funding curve for a developmental program . nasa added that the flat funding profile resulted in the deferral of substantial reserves to later years , instead of being available in the program's middle years . nasa said that the station's financial reserves were not intended to cover the unanticipated costs of the russian contingency activities , but rather were largely intended to protect against u.s. development uncertainty . in response to nasa's comments , we added more information to the report , including information on the status of the program and the origin of the funding caps . however , the question of what the station's financial reserves were largely intended to cover is not relevant to our assessment , which focused on whether the funding cap was an effective cost control mechanism . moreover , the central theme of our report is that funding requirements have been rising and additional funds may be needed . we do not suggest what the source of those funds should be . to obtain information for this report , we interviewed officials in the iss and space shuttle program offices at the johnson space center , houston , texas , and nasa headquarters , washington , d.c. we also interviewed contractor and dcmc personnel in huntsville , alabama , and houston . we reviewed pertinent documents , including the prime contract between nasa and boeing , contractor performance measurement system reports , dcmc surveillance reports , program reviews , international partner agreements , independent assessment reports , and reports by nasa's office of safety and mission assurance . we performed our work from january to july 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the nasa administrator ; the director , office of management and budget ; and appropriate congressional committees . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .