not applicable . according to some observers , the most important thing that developed countries can do to help food - insecure countries is to open their own markets to developing country exports . market access is important not only in primary commodities but also in clothing , textiles , footwear , processed foods , and other products into which developing countries may diversify as development progresses . yet , according to the international food policy research institute ( ifpri ) and the world bank , the way developed countries are implementing the uras is adversely affecting the ability of developing countries to improve their food security and may jeopardize their support for further trade liberalization . u.s. government officials state , however , that because of the uras , most of the relatively few remaining barriers are being progressively eliminated . a state department official further noted that the united states and the european union have a number of preferential arrangements that favor developing countries and allow most agricultural imports . one study , by ifpri , concluded that a large number of developing countries have liberalized foreign trade in food and agricultural commodities in response to structural adjustment programs and the recent uras , but oecd countries have not matched their actions . ngos expressed particular disappointment about not being allowed to make prepared statements in cfs meetings until after government delegates have spoken and said if they were to make the effort of participation , they needed to be assured of a say in decision - making and to know that ngo positions could at least be reflected in cfs reports . environment for civil society organizations and building dialogue with governments and how civil society's views could be better taken into account given the intergovernmental nature of fao . while specific quantities of certain commodities from developing countries still receive preferential treatment , oecd countries have been reluctant to open their domestic markets to developing countries' exports of high - value commodities such as beef , sugar , and dairy products . in addition , the secretariat drafted its own paper on how the ngos' role could be enhanced in cfs and invited the cfs bureau to approve the paper for use at the june 1998 meeting . notwithstanding the positive steps taken by the secretariat and cfs' april 1997 decision , cfs did not seriously consider the issue in 1998 . for example , the cfs bureau , a small executive committee , did not approve the secretariat's paper for use at the june 1998 cfs session , and the issue was not included in the provisional agenda for the meeting . at the opening of the session , canada , with support from the united states , proposed that the provisional agenda be amended to include a discussion of the role of civil society . however , rather than permitting debate on the proposal , the cfs chairman announced that he had decided to seek to satisfy ngos' interests by holding informal discussions with them . in ifpri's view , this reduces benefits to developing countries and may make continued market liberalization unviable for them .