iii. ) we also visited closing installations and environmental cleanup design and construction management commands to determine how cost data is developed by each of the services . ( see app . ii. ) to determine transferability and reuse , we reviewed brac and environmental laws , dod and epa headquarters policies and guidance to the military services , and environmental cleanup and reuse programs at brac installations . we also reviewed data developed by the services to identify uncontaminated property that would be available for quick transfer . we identified progress and plans to address problems during discussions with dod and epa headquarters , dod design and construction management , and closing base officials , as well with epa regional officials . in addition , we observed training sessions on dod's fast track cleanup program , reviewed data in installations' bcps , and visited a number of these installations . furthermore , we attended meetings of the defense environmental restoration task force in austin , texas ; philadelphia , pennsylvania ; and charleston , south carolina . we also attended several public hearings during visits to installations , including the california military base reuse task force , installations' cleanup advisory board meetings , and a hearing on cleanup remedy selection . we visited the california environmental protection agency , sacramento , california , and discussed specific issues with environmental officials of other states . as requested , we did not obtain written agency comments . however , we discussed the report's contents with dod and epa officials and incorporated their comments where appropriate . we performed the review between february 1994 and january 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . congress , dod , and epa have taken actions over the past several years to address a number of important matters relevant to resolving environmental cleanup issues at bases that are being closed and realigned . however , problems still remain with determining accurate cleanup costs , timing appropriations with cleanup needs , prioritizing available cleanup funds , and protecting the government's interests when leasing or transferring property . as reported in its fiscal year 1995 brac budget justification document , dod's total estimate for cleaning up environmental problems at 123 closing and realigning installations and activities was about $4 billion . however , more recent data developed by dod in april 1994 shows that estimates for just 84 installations totaled about $5.4 billion , and costs are likely to go beyond that amount as more complete data becomes available . the brac accounts were established to be the exclusive source of funds for environmental restoration projects related to base closures . the intent was to preclude the cleanup actions from competing with other sources of funding for environmental cleanup such as the dera . dod's brac budget estimates for cleanup cover 6-year periods ; thus , the estimate for the 1988 round spans fiscal years 1990 through 1995 ; the estimate for the 1991 round spans fiscal years 1992 through 1997 ; and the 1993 round spans fiscal years 1994 through 1999 . brac budget justification documents are to address the total financial impact of realignment and closure actions .