( app . i describes all seven initiatives. ) this initiative is a materiel management productivity aid for dod catalogers . when dod introduces a new supply item into its inventory , the item is listed in a catalog provided to the services and dla . currently , catalogers use paper technical drawings , specifications , vendor catalogs , guidebooks , procedural manuals , and regulations to complete cataloging steps such as writing a brief description of the supply item , using drawings , and assigning it a stock number . cataloging tools on - line , a dla system , enables the cataloger to electronically access reference documents , simultaneously compare technical data with drafted descriptions , and automatically check for errors . catalogers using this automated aid are expected to create catalog entries much faster and more accurately than is currently done . jlsc projects that the 10 new sites receiving the cataloging tools on - line system will save about $71.7 million over the next 8 years through the elimination of manual processes , reduced rejection rates of transactions , and better availability of and access to cataloging information . this depot maintenance initiative is intended to reduce the amount of money maintenance depots spend for hazardous materials such as paint thinner , oils , and chlorine . currently , the depots spend more than $300 million each year to buy hazardous materials used in the repair and maintenance of end items . officials acknowledge that a significant portion of these materials is wasted . in 1992 , the air force implemented the depot maintenance — hazardous material management system at its ogden air logistics center to provide information about who received hazardous materials ; which and how much they received ; and when , where , and how the materials were used . with this information , ogden managers identified wasteful practices , such as workers receiving more material than needed for the job . in addition , they found that workers were storing excess material in their lockers and that stored materials were being improperly sealed . depot management subsequently changed the methods for handling hazardous materials . for example , materials are now issued only in the amount needed . as a result , ogden reduced the amount of hazardous materials purchased in 1992 by nearly 39 percent , or a $7.7 million net cost savings . jlsc plans to install the depot maintenance — hazardous material management system at 27 maintenance depots and projects that they will save between $83.3 million and $202.3 million over a 6-year period . as of september 1993 , the system had been installed at seven sites . in october 1992 , the acting dod comptroller ( responsible for reviewing the justification for any requests for capital budget funding ) expressed concern that jlsc's cim approach would not produce the cost savings needed to help offset significant defense budget reductions . he favored an approach where jlsc would quickly select and implement standard information systems . by doing this , the comptroller hoped that dod could transition to a standard logistics system within a reasonable period of time at an affordable cost .