, employment ) . dod gains access to this information through the national agency checks , which are used for granting security clearances to enlistees . these national agency checks are initiated by military entrance processing station personnel for all enlistees soon after they enter the delayed entry program and are employed as unpaid members of the reserves . this information is presented in appendix i . military enlistees must meet basic dod and military service entrance qualification standards on age , citizenship , education , aptitude , physical fitness , dependency status , and moral character . screening to determine whether applicants meet these standards or merit being granted a waiver begins with a recruiter's initial contact with a potential applicant and continues through their entrance into basic training . in deciding whether to grant a moral waiver , the services employ the “whole person” concept: they consider the circumstances surrounding the criminal violations , the age of the person committing them , and personal interviews . as figure 1 shows , the services differ in both the way they categorize criminal offenses and the criteria they use for requiring moral waivers . in general , however , the services require moral waivers for convictions or adverse adjudications for criminal offenses as follows: ( 1 ) “felonies” — such as murder and grand larceny ; ( 2 ) “non - minor ( serious ) misdemeanors” — assault and petty larceny ; ( 3 ) “minor misdemeanors” — discharging a firearm within city limits and removing property from public grounds ; ( 4 ) “minor non - traffic” — disorderly conduct and vandalism ; ( 5 ) “serious traffic” — driving with revoked license and failure to comply with officer's directions ; and ( 6 ) “minor traffic” — speeding and driving without a license . the services , except for the army , also grant moral waivers for preservice drug and alcohol abuse . none of the services grant waivers for certain offenses , such as the trafficking , sale , or distribution of illegal drugs . appendix i provides detailed information about how often and for what reasons the services granted moral waivers to enlistees during the fiscal years 1990 through 1997 period . overall , dod's defense manpower data center ( dmdc ) data for this 8-fiscal year period shows the following: moral waivers accounted for 62 percent of all waivers granted and represented 13 percent of all individuals enlisted ; although annual dod - wide enlistments fluctuated between about 162,000 and 223,000 during this period , the rate of granting moral waivers consistently declined from 17.5 percent to 7.8 percent of all enlistees — a total decrease of over 60 percent ; of the moral waivers granted , non - minor ( serious ) misdemeanors and preservice drug and alcohol abuse categories accounted for over 75 percent , minor non - traffic and traffic offenses for about 20 percent , and felonies committed either as an adult or juvenile about 3 percent ; and the number of moral waivers granted in all categories decreased , but felony and non - minor misdemeanor waivers increased as a percentage of total moral waivers granted .