most of these returns occurred in the federation . unhcr believes that these figures very likely understate actual numbers of minority returns in many areas of bosnia because many people returned spontaneously to their prewar homes , that is , they were not part of a return program organized by unhcr or they did not register with the local authorities once they had returned . appendix vi provides more information on total returns of bosnia's refugees and displaced persons in 1996 and 1997 . approximately 79 percent of these returns were to bosniak - controlled areas , 17 percent to bosnian croat - controlled areas , and 3 percent to bosnian serb - controlled areas . most of the people that have returned to minority areas are elderly . according to unhcr , younger people with families are not returning to areas controlled by another ethnic group for fear of personal security and lack of employment opportunities . in many cases , minority returns took place under very difficult conditions and with strong international support in strategically important or otherwise contentious areas such as brcko , stolac , jajce , and doboj , areas with limited minority returns as recently as june 1997 . as minority returns increased , however , a large number of returning refugees added to the number of displaced persons in bosnia who could not return to their prewar homes across ethnic lines . while about 120,000 refugees returned to bosnia in 1997 , december 1997 unhcr and ohr reports indicate that about 50 percent of them , particularly those returning to bosniak areas , did not go back to their original homes . instead , they had to relocate to other areas inside bosnia because their prewar homes were in areas controlled by another ethnic group . according to a december 1997 report by unhcr and the commission on real property claims of displaced persons and refugees ( hereafter referred to as the real property commission ) , the “relocation” taking place inside bosnia by refugees and displaced persons includes ( 1 ) passive relocation — the normal case for displaced persons — where the displacement of individuals or groups becomes a de facto permanent condition , although the decision to relocate is not freely made and does not respect property rights of original owners ; ( 2 ) hostile relocation , which involves the deliberate placement of groups of people in housing belonging to other ethnic groups to secure control over territory and prevent minority return ; and ( 3 ) voluntary relocation through the sale or relocation of property , which occurs with the consent of both parties ( that is the original owner and the displaced person ) . a certain degree of voluntary relocation was expected due to the rural - urban labor migration that accompanies the transition from a planned to a market economy . specifically , president plavsic had just started to move away from the more extreme sds leadership in pale . during this time , plavsic openly argued that these sds leaders , led by karadzic , were enriching themselves through corruption and not complying with dayton ; as a result , plavsic argued , the serb people were being denied reconstruction assistance .