additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . it also subcontracts for the production of parts . the subcontractors may be responsible for all aspects of part production or mcdonnell douglas may furnish materials or complete required work . the hinge ( see fig . 1 ) is aluminum , about 4 inches long , 2 inches wide , and ranges from about 1 / 16 of an inch to 1-3 / 8 inches thick . the long beach division , which assembled the air conditioning inlet door for initial production , purchased 14 of these hinges from a subcontractor in 1988 for use on production aircraft at $30.60 each . it had also paid the vendor $541 for first article inspection and $2,730 for reusable special tooling . these costs , however , would not have been incurred on future orders . in 1992 , mcdonnell douglas transferred the air conditioning inlet door assembly work to its st. louis division and that division made the hinge for production aircraft and for the spare part order . the estimated cost for the spare hinge was $1,745 , and , with overhead , profit , and warranty factors , the air force paid $2,187 for it . the fact that the subcontractor had made the hinge from a special casting while the st. louis division machined the hinge from bar stock could be one cause of the higher price . we identified 23 parts — 21 different cargo door hooks and 2 different hinge assemblies — where mcdonnell douglas had previously furnished material to a subcontractor who produced the parts at much lower costs . information on previous purchase costs and mcdonnell douglas manufacturing costs are included in appendix ii . details on one of the door hooks follow . the air force paid $12,280 for one of the hooks . the hook ( see fig . 2 ) is made of steel and is about 7 inches high , 3-1 / 2 inches wide , and about 4-1 / 2 inches thick . for the early production aircraft , the long beach division had furnished material valued at $715 to an outside vendor in 1992 who manufactured this hook for $389 ( exclusive of the material value ) . after initially using hooks for production aircraft provided from the long beach division's inventory , the st. louis division made them starting with production aircraft number 12 . for the spares order under contract - 2109 , the st. louis division estimated “in - house” manufacturing costs ( exclusive of material costs ) at about $8,842 . mcdonnell douglas officials said that the primary reason for moving various work from the long beach division to the st. louis division was to recover from being behind schedule and that sufficient time was not available to procure parts from vendors .