we concluded that it did not . although we did not draw any conclusions about the agribusiness partnerships project as a whole , our analysis casts doubt on whether the project can have a systemic impact if the individual partnerships are not having an impact . ( see comments 29 and 30 for additional discussion. ) it is too early to know whether usaid's prediction concerning the outcome of ongoing activities in the energy sector will result in significant sector reform . many of these projects are just starting and must overcome many obstacles . for example , in our september 1994 report on nuclear safety , we reported that there are no guarantees that the international assistance effort will result in safer reactors or expedite the closure of the riskiest reactors . in fact , in the absence of a commitment to close down the reactors , the assistance may encourage their continued operation . we noted that donor countries face formidable challenges in promoting the closure of the soviet - designed reactors because the countries operating them depend on the nuclear power to meet their needs for domestic energy and export income . we agree that the new evaluation system is promising in that it should provide an improved basis to evaluate usaid's programs in the nis . however , since the first report is not due until november 1995 , it is too early to know whether the system will fulfill its promise . the value of the system will depend on the indicators selected , the reliability of the data , and the subjective judgments of usaid officials preparing the reports . for the system to have credibility , usaid will have to be able to identify shortcomings as well as successes . we have modified the report to reflect this information . we were able to reconcile obligations and expenditures in the usaid financial report with other usaid documentation . accordingly , we have deleted the examples from the report . our draft report included information on the work of the consuls general . we have modified our report to update the information on increased site visits . although market forces played a role in the limited use of some of the centers , the lack of local support as well as other factors also caused the low activity levels at some centers . more importantly , it is questionable whether usaid should spend funds on activities without a market unless it has a strategy to create demand for the product it is financing . we visited only one site ( in siberia during february ) because of the limited amount of time we had in country . vorkuta can be reached by plane in the winter . usaid can visit the sites at other times during the year . we believe that three site visits — two occurred after we began our audit — in 31 months is inadequate for monitoring purposes . day - to - day contacts with pier staff are important ; however , they do not substitute for site monitoring or provide usaid with an objective basis for evaluating the project's success . the accomplishments noted in our report are those that have had the greatest impact .