the environmental impact . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 301 ) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the cost and manpower implications . the extent and timing of potential costs and savings , including the number of years , beginning with the date of completion of the closure or realignment . the economic impact on communities . we did not independently determine their reliability . the current and future mission requirements and the impact of operational readiness of dod's total force . the availability and condition of land , facilities , and associated airspace at both the existing and potential receiving locations . the ability to accommodate contingency , mobilization , and future total force requirements at both the existing and potential receiving locations . the ability of both the existing and potential receiving communities' infrastructure to support forces , missions and personnel . the congress did not challenge the overall brac recommendations . the air force has begun the implementation of the closure and privatization of newark afb / agmc . implementation of the newark afb / agmc closure through privatization is still in the early phases , with many details yet to be worked out . in general , the air force has developed a three - pronged approach to implementing brac's decision . first , four systems , representing about 3 percent of agmc's existing depot maintenance workload , will be transferred to other air force depots . second , ownership of the newark afb / agmc property and facilities will be transferred to a local reuse commission . the commission is to lease space to one prime guidance system repair contractor that will provide depot maintenance work , one prime metrology contractor that will perform calibrations and author calibration manuals , and the remaining organic metrology program management contingent . while privatization - in - place is the goal , based on a strategy option announced in the commerce business daily , contractors may elect to move workload to other facilities . hypothetically , this option could result in all workload moving to other contractor locations — should the winning contractor ( s ) demonstrate that moving workload to other locations would provide the best value to the government .