( continued ) . gao has issued the following products related to military base closures and realignments: military bases: closure and realignment savings are significant , but not easily quantified ( gao / nsiad - 96-67 , apr . our recommendations were made in that context . we believe establishing time frames for negotiated sales is a useful management tool to move negotiations along and measure progress , while at the same time leaving flexibility should it be needed . for example , if the creation of jobs and quickly and efficiently disposing of property is a primary goal , then it seems to us that placing reasonable time frames for negotiations can help to move the process along and is appropriate . we recognize that renting unoccupied housing will not work at all bases and have modified the recommendation to do that where practical , such as in the case of fort ord . in addition , the intent of the recommendation is for the government to rent the property until decisions are made on how to dispose of the property . therefore , if the local reuse authority obtains the property , there is already a revenue stream in place , which was the case at fort ord . dod's comments are presented in their entirety in appendix i . the authority under this legislation has expired . property disposals resulting from base closures and realignments are governed by various base closure and realignment laws and other laws relating to the disposal of surplus government property , homeless assistance , and environmental concerns . once property is no longer required by a federal agency to discharge its responsibilities , the property is declared excess to that agency and then offered to other federal agencies to satisfy their requirements . if no other agency has a requirement for the property , it is declared surplus to the federal government . at that point , the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 authorizes disposal through a variety of means such as public or negotiated sale and transfers to states and local governments for public benefit purposes such as education , public health , recreation , airport , wildlife conservation , and historic monuments . in addition , the base closure legislation authorizes surplus real property from closing bases to be transferred to local redevelopment authorities under economic development conveyances for economic development and job creation purposes . to use this authority , however , requires a showing that economic development and job creation cannot be accomplished under established sales or public benefit transfers . as shown in figure 1 , local reuse authorities generally seek surplus property under one of the public benefit transfer authorities first because these can be no - cost acquisitions , then through economic development conveyances because these can be no - cost or no - initial cost acquisitions , and lastly through negotiated sale because they can negotiate the terms and do not have to compete with other interested parties . any surplus property that remains is available for sale to the general public . ( see app . ii for a more detailed discussion of the laws and regulations affecting the base closure process. )