home and robins . however , according to estimates from air force officials , these savings would have to be reduced by $26 million to cover the cost of relocating the c - 130 unit at dyess and by $70 million for military construction costs at dyess to accommodate the additional 18 b - 1s . thus , the net potential savings are estimated at $208.6 million . this option could produce other savings that are not shown in table i.4 . for example , reducing the b - 1 operating bases to two could help ease the shortages in b - 1 support equipment and mobilization kit spare parts reported by b - 1 operating units and reduce future expenditures for b - 1 support equipment and spare parts . converting dyess from an active to a reserve component base could also produce an undetermined amount of savings from reduced permanent and costly base infrastructure — such as family housing and base medical care facilities — necessary to support full - time active duty personnel and their families . moreover , by placing additional b - 1s at dyess and ellsworth , the air force could take advantage of unused capacity at those locations . air force reserve and air national guard recruiters concluded that recruiting for this option at dyess would be difficult but not impossible . they estimated an additional six to eight recruiters would be needed for about 2 years to recruit the required personnel . the cost for these additional recruiters is relatively minor and was not deducted from the savings shown above . establish a reserve component unit of 38 b - 1s at dyess air force base by reducing the active duty unit at dyess from 36 to zero b - 1s and adding 2 more b - 1s to dyess from robins . convert dyess from an active to a reserve component base . increase the active duty unit at ellsworth from 24 to 36 b - 1s by reducing the active duty unit b - 1s at mt . home from 6 to zero and the reserve unit b - 1s at robins from the remaining 6 to zero . move an active duty c - 130 unit at dyess to another ( unspecified ) location . no change to the reserve component unit at mcconnell . table i.5 shows the number of b - 1s at each base under the air force's announced plan and under our option 5 . the congressional budget office estimated that this option could save $217.7 million in operational expenses . additionally , $43.3 million in military construction funds planned for fiscal years 1999-2003 could be saved by removing the b - 1 units from mt . home and robins . however , according to estimates from air force officials , these savings would have to be reduced by $26 million to relocate the c - 130 unit at dyess and $5 million to construct a squadron operations facility at ellsworth to accommodate an additional operational unit . therefore , net potential savings under this option are estimated at $230 million . this option could produce savings that are not shown in table i.5 .