ii. ) the department of state orally concurred with the report . to examine the status of the f - 2 program , we reviewed documentation and interviewed officials from the office of the secretary of defense for international security affairs , the office of the deputy under secretary of the air force for international affairs , the f - 16 program office at wright - patterson air force base , the defense security assistance agency , and the defense technology security administration . we also interviewed officials at the departments of commerce and state . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . these principles were reaffirmed in 1976 and 1981 . in 1983 , japan signed a bilateral agreement with the united states to allow , on a limited basis , the transfer of japanese military technology to the united states . the agreement recognized the imbalance of technology flows between the two countries and permits the transfer of japanese military technology to the united states on a case - by - case basis . the agreement also reaffirmed japan's policy that , in principle , dual - use technology can freely flow between the two countries . japanese technologies transferred to the united states for the f - 2 program are subject to this agreement . japan's decreasing military procurement budget has led some industry representatives to consider asking the japanese government to relax its ban on exporting military systems and components to the united states . for example , in 1995 , the defense production committee of keidanren , japan's largest industry association , released a statement alluding to a desire to relax japan's restrictions on military exports to the united states . nonetheless , some experts believe that the long - term goal of japan's defense industry is to export subcomponents to support u.s. programs such as the f - 22 aircraft , but that public sentiment will likely prevent the japanese government from relaxing the ban . current plans for monitoring implementation of the production agreements do not provide a means to determine whether u.s. companies actually receive approximately 40 percent of the f - 2 production work by the end of the program . therefore , we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the defense security assistance agency , as the lead u.s. agency for the f - 2 program , to collect sufficient data to determine the value of production work received by u.s. companies at the end of the program . this can be accomplished by collecting data from lockheed martin , general electric , and a selection of the smaller contractors involved in this program . collection of such data will allow the defense security assistance agency to assess the soundness of the production phase approach to workshare allocation and tracking for use in future cooperative programs .