ii . reports concerning public - private competitions for the depot maintenance workloads at the closing san antonio and sacramento depots ( section 359 ) the act adds section 2469a to title 10 of the united states code , which provides for special public - private competition for workloads at these two closing depots . it also requires us to issue reports in four areas . first , the secretary of defense is required to submit a determination to congress if dod finds it necessary to consolidate workloads into a single solicitation . we must report our views on the dod determination within 30 days . second , we are required to review all dod solicitations for the workloads at the san antonio and sacramento centers and report to congress within 45 days of the solicitations' issuance regarding whether the solicitations provide “substantially equal” opportunity to compete without regard to performance location and is otherwise in compliance with applicable laws and regulations . third , we must review all dod awards for the workloads at the two closing air logistics centers and report to congress within 45 days of the contract award on whether ( 1 ) the procedures used complied with applicable laws and regulations and provided a “substantially equal” opportunity to compete without regard to performance location ; ( 2 ) “appropriate consideration was given to factors other than cost” in the selection ; and ( 3 ) the selection resulted in the lowest total cost to dod for performance of the workload . fourth , within 60 days of its enactment , the 1998 defense authorization act requires us to review the c - 5 aircraft workload competition and subsequent award to the warner robins air logistics center and report to congress on whether ( 1 ) the procedures used provided an equal opportunity for offerors to compete without regard to performance location , ( 2 ) are in compliance with applicable law and the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) , and ( 3 ) whether the award results in the lowest total cost to dod . iii . report on the navy's practice of using temporary duty assignments for ship maintenance and repair ( section 366 ) the act requires us to report by may 1 , 1998 , on the navy's use of temporary duty workers to perform ship maintenance and repair at homeports not having shipyards . the 1995 base realignment and closure ( brac ) commission recommended closing the sacramento and san antonio air logistics centers and transferring their workloads to the remaining depots or private sector commercial activities . in making these recommendations , the commission considered the effects on the local communities , workload transfer costs , and potential effects on readiness and concluded that the savings and benefits outweighed the drawbacks . the commission's report noted that given the significant amount of excess depot capacity and limited dod resources , closure is a necessity . further , closing these activities would improve the use of the remaining centers and substantially reduce dod operating costs .