( app . i shows the key physical features of the arsenal. ) structures with high levels of contamination , such as agent residues , may be treated to reduce the contamination before they are placed in the landfill . structural debris that is uncontaminated or has low levels of contamination will not be disposed of in the landfill ; it will be consolidated in the other major basin , basin a , and capped . regarding off - site contaminated groundwater , the parties agreed to continue operating existing groundwater treatment systems at the arsenal's boundary , where the water will be treated to meet colorado's groundwater standard of 8 parts per billion of dimp . the army and shell will also supply clean water to residents living near the arsenal's boundaries . the parties agreed in concept on a $2.1-billion cleanup , but until the record of decision is finalized , the cost and time frame estimates remain uncertain . the cleanup estimate reported to congress just prior to the june settlement called for $2.3 billion in appropriated funds , in addition to shell's $500-million share , for a total of $2.8 billion . according to army officials , the $2.8 billion represented a reduction from a $3.6-billion estimate prepared just 2 months earlier . the army did not have a detailed analysis at the time of our fieldwork that explained how the conceptual agreement reduced the estimate to $2.1 billion . the army expects to complete its analysis for the may 1996 record of decision . the army's projected cost estimates and cleanup dates have changed significantly since 1984 . the $2.1 billion estimated for the conceptual agreement is 10 times greater than the best case estimate released a decade ago . the 1984 projections of a record of decision by 1990 and cleanup by 2000 are now estimated for 1996 and 2012 , respectively . the cost and completion schedules recently established could be affected by numerous uncertainties . budget limitations that reduce the scope or extend the life of the cleanup , cleanup complications , and evolving standards could drive up costs and extend time frames . in july 1994 , we reported army officials' concern that stricter state standards could increase cleanup costs at the rocky mountain arsenal by at least $1 billion . solid waste was disposed of in the trenches and pits . the man - made lakes were used to provide process and cooling water to facilities within the south plants area . ( see fig . the initial stage of the cleanup program is an installationwide study to determine if sites are present that pose hazards to public health or the environment . available information is collected on the source , nature , extent , and magnitude of actual and potential hazardous substance releases at sites on the installation . the next step consists of sampling and analysis to determine the existence of actual site contamination . information gathered is used to evaluate the site and determine the response action needed . uncontaminated sites do not proceed to later stages of the process . remedial investigation may include a variety of site investigative , sampling , and analytical activities to determine the nature , extent , and significance of the contamination .