“part of the problem was accounting policy . …each year , inventories of old spare parts were increased in value to reflect their latest acquisition price ( the normal commercial practice is to deflate , not inflate , the value of long term assets ) . many supply managers who faithfully disposed of unneeded inventory were surprised at the end of the year to see their total inventory value increase . as a result , they were subject to great pressure to further reduce inventory levels . .the new spares were needed but funding restrictions prevented purchase of these parts for several years.” overall , the effect of increasing prices can be demonstrated by noting that the air force's $32.6 billion of inventory at latest acquisition cost is revalued to $18.3 billion to reflect estimated historical costs . realandpersonalproperty – audit tests of real property transactions , additions , deletions , and modifications that occurred during fiscal year 1999 indicated that dod continues to lack the necessary systems and processes to ensure that its real property assets are promptly and properly recorded in its accountability databases . for example , army auditors reviewed about $408 million in real property transactions recorded during fiscal year 1999 and determined that $113 million of those transactions should have been posted in prior fiscal years . army auditors also identified $43 million in unrecorded real property transactions.in addition , recent audits by the military service auditors have continued to find that while dod regulations require periodic physical inventories and inspections — a critical control in safeguarding assets — they are not always performed as required . air force auditors reported that real property personnel did not perform required inventories at 34 of 99 installations audited in fiscal year 1999 . to illustrate the benefit of physical inventories , while implementing the navy's new accountability system , the number of assets recorded in the accountability database at one marine corps location alone increased by over 35 percent as result of wall - to - wall inventories . in addition , because dod does not have the systems and processes in place to reliably accumulate costs , it is unable to account for several significant costs of its operations , including its facilities and equipment . comprehensive and reliable asset financial information is necessary for determining the full cost of operations and can be useful for anticipating the need for additional budgetary resources . an analysis of reported asset balances and related depreciationcan provide additional information to review specific budget requests . for example , the navy reported that 85 percent , or approximately $1.2 billion of its $1.4 billion of depreciated equipment reported on its fiscal year 1998 financial statements , was fully depreciated . if navy's financial information accurately reflected asset accountability and utilization periods , this information could be used as a factor in analyzing navy's funding requests . specifically , if the navy's fiscal year 1998 information were accurate , it would indicate that most of the navy's equipment is at or beyond its anticipated utilization period . this type of information could help support a funding request or , absent such a request , could be used to question whether operations would be impaired by the lack of needed capital equipment .