these systems will not be equipped with lasers . production funds are projected to be included in the fiscal year 2001 budget for the dircm laser upgrade . production of atircm is to begin in april 2001 . socom officials maintain that because of their urgent need they cannot wait for the laser - equipped atircm . however , the difference in the time frames for beginning production can be misleading . dircm is scheduled to go into production before operational testing begins , while the atircm is not scheduled to begin production until operational testing is completed . if both dircm and atircm production begin immediately after their respective operational tests , dircm's production is delayed until april 2000 and atircm is moved up to january 2001 . as a result , the systems will start production within 9 months of each other . additionally , dircm , with a laser upgrade , is projected to be available in 2001 , about the same time as atircm with a laser . the army is developing atircm and the united kingdom with socom is developing dircm to work on a variety of aircraft , including some that are the same or similar . ( see table 1. ) for example , the united kingdom plans to use the dircm system on the ch - 47 chinook helicopter while the army plans to use atircm on the chinook . by varying the size of the turret , the united kingdom intends to use dircm on aircraft of a wide range of sizes , from its very large , fixed - wing c - 130s to small rotary wing aircraft such as the lynx . although the army currently has no plans to install atircm on fixed - wing aircraft the size of c - 130s , it too will be placing its system on a wide range of aircraft from the very large ch - 47 heavy lift helicopter , to the small oh - 58d helicopter . if development of both systems is successful , therefore , the army and the united kingdom will prove that atircm and dircm provide redundant capability for many aircraft . in addition to those socom and army aircraft identified as platforms for dircm or atircm , there are many potential air force , navy , and marine corps aircraft that are not yet committed to either system . these include large fixed - wing aircraft of the air force , as well as 425 future marine corps v - 22 aircraft and the navy's sh - 60 helicopters . dod's plans to acquire infrared countermeasure capability may not represent the most cost - effective approach . while we recognize socom's urgent need for a countermeasure capability in the near term , we believe that dod can satisfy this need and meet the army's needs without procuring two separate systems . specifically , proceeding with procurement of the first 15 dircm systems beginning in july 1998 appears warranted .