both nasa and jpl have revised their policies . jpl issued new guidance on june 9 , 1994 , that severely restricts off - site use of property . they also initiated a recall of equipment not meeting the new conditions . under the new criteria , equipment loans , including overnight use of a portable computer , is not allowed without meeting a critical need test and obtaining the approval of a division manager . the number of equipment items on loan dropped 88 percent from 4035 ( valued at $7.6 million ) in september 1993 to 451 items ( valued at $760,000 ) by october 1994 . nasa's property manager at jpl believes there will be a reduction in the future procurement of new computer equipment , in part as a result of the returned equipment being available for use at jpl . nasa's loan policy , issued july 18 , 1994 , allows for mission - essential home loans of 30 days , or up to 180 days after signing a loan agreement in which the employee assumes responsibility for the equipment . both loans can be renewed once and require approval by the property custodian , immediate supervisor , and the division director / chief . loan renewal requests beyond 360 days need approval by the center director or director of operations for nasa headquarters . we also recommended that nasa require jpl to review and improve its property control system , and evaluate and revise its procedures for keeping track of inventory , including equipment located at caltech . in response , jpl formed advisory groups to study and address property control issues , and established a deadline of december 31 , 1994 , for the groups' recommendations to be implemented . nasa requested jpl conduct a wall - to - wall property inventory , which is now underway . all equipment has been scanned , both at jpl and caltech , and nasa identification tags have been placed on all jpl equipment at caltech . nasa's property manager noted losses are much lower at this point in the inventory than they were when property was last inventoried in 1992 . then , 12,000 items were not located after initial scanning , compared to 3,593 this time . the reasons for the differences will not be known until the 1994 inventory is complete . subsequently , nasa requested an audit of food and beverage costs for fiscal years 1989 , 1990 , and 1993 . this report is expected to be completed by january 1995 . our final recommendation — that jpl identify and dispose of obsolete or excess equipment — will be addressed by one of the jpl advisory groups in coordination with the nasa management office . this is more than the $13.1 million fee paid for the last year of the previous contract . justifying and paying fee is an issue for all ffrdcs , not just jpl . nasa officials believe that jpl is the only ffrdc receiving a fee linked to performance and intend the $12 million performance - based fee as a strong incentive . if the incentive award fee concept is successful at jpl , performance - based fees could be considered for other ffrdcs that receive fees .