additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . there are similar program elements in the four budget activities . for example , base operations is a program element that is in most budget activities . therefore , by grouping similar program elements , it can be determined how much was budgeted and obligated for a particular function . in performing our analysis , we placed all the program element codes into the following four categories: combat forces and support of the forces , training and recruitment , management and command activities , and base support . for each of these four categories , we listed the budgeted and obligated amounts . see appendixes ii and iii for a complete listing of the program element codes that comprise each of these four major categories . for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 , funds requested for combat forces and support of the forces ranged from $3.6 billion to $4.5 billion for the army . during the same period , the amount of o&m funds the army obligated for these program element codes ranged from $3.2 billion to $4.2 billion . for the air force , funds requested for combat forces and support of the forces ranged from $4.7 billion to $5.1 billion and the amount obligated ranged from $5 billion to $5.3 billion . as shown in table 3 , the amounts obligated have increased slightly during the 3-year period , but , at their highest level , still only represent 21.5 percent of the army's and 26.8 percent of the air force's total o&m obligations . as shown above , over the past 3 years , the air force obligated about $700 million more for its combat forces than was requested . in contrast , the army obligated about $900 million less than the amounts requested.the fact that the army did not obligate all the funds that it requested for its combat forces means that the amount initially requested for combat forces was probably used to fund other o&m programs . training and recruiting are essential elements in maintaining a ready force . the rationale for these categorizations was the services' program element definitions as well as definitions developed by ida , the office of program analysis and evaluation , and the joint chiefs of staff ( jcs ) . the ida and office of program analysis and evaluation divided the services' program elements into two broad classes — defense missions and infrastructure . defense missions were defined as those activities that produced the expected outputs of the department of defense as well as activities that directly support the mission by deploying with combat forces . both the ida and the jcs defined infrastructure as those activities that are operated from a fixed location . all program elements were then placed in the appropriate category even though the program element may have been categorized differently in the service's budget document . for example , all program elements related to environmental activities were included in the base support category .