platform: helicopter . mine threat: near surface moored contact mines . program start date: fiscal year 1998 . date of estimated completion of research & development phase: fiscal year 2004 . current status: fiscal year 1998 , demonstration of lethality against key mine types . programmed funding ( fiscal years 1998-04 ) : $65 million . program description: the explosive neutralization advanced technology demonstration , as a group of four subsystems , is intended to demonstrate the capability to neutralize anti - invasion mines in the surf zone and craft landing zone . two of the subsystems will consist of line charges and surf zone array , which are to be launched from an air cushion vehicle and propelled by new rocket motors for extended range and increased stand - off . these two subsystems will also have a third subsystem , a fire control system , for accurate placement of explosives . the fourth subsystem , the beach zone array , will consist of a glider and an array system . the glider , an unmanned , unpowered air vehicle , will be released by an air deployment vehicle . the glider will approach the beach by means of a global positioning system guidance and control system . to detonate and clear mines , it will deploy the array of nylon webbing and shaped charges over a predesignated target . platform: unmanned air vehicle . mine threat: anti - invasion mines in the surf and craft landing zones . program start date: fiscal year 1993 . date of estimated completion of research & development phase: fiscal year 2005 for the line charges , surf zone array , and fire control system and fiscal year 2009 for the beach zone array . current status: demonstration of fieldable prototype of the beach zone array scheduled for fiscal year 1998 . funding ( fiscal years 1993-97 ) : $63.7 million . programmed funding ( fiscal years 1998-03 ) : $87.8 million . two examples of mine warfare programs that have been in the research and development phase for many years without advancing to procurement are the aqs - 20 , a mine - hunting sonar , and the airborne mine neutralization system . the following tables illustrate the changes , including the recent series of internal department of defense ( dod ) increases and decreases , to these programs' funding . the changes depicted in table ii . 1 resulted in a delay in the aqs - 20 schedule . such measures have been developed within the mcm community . for example , the time required by a tactical commander to clear a certain area of mines with and without various capabilities could be used in making individual program decisions . likewise , there are mean times between repairs and average supply delay times to gauge reliability and supportability for the mcm and mhc ships . in the past , the dod staff has not been willing to challenge navy decisions regarding the content and adequacy of its mcm program . instead , it focused on analyzing the consistency of the program from year to year . consequently , dod has been able to certify annually that the budget contains adequate resources for the program .