light gsm . this module is housed in a light weight multipurpose shelter , a standard integrated command post shelter variant , mounted on a high mobility multi - purpose wheeled vehicle . it is to provide the light / contingency forces a c130 drive - on / drive - off joint stars capability . the light gsm has a prime and support vehicle , each with a trailer / generator in tow . it is supposed to be able to operate on the move , receive unmanned aerial vehicle imagery and intelligence reports , and incorporate electronic map backgrounds . the army plans to acquire a total of 10 light gsms . common ground station ( cgs ) . the cgs system is to provide light gsm functionality with the addition of the integration of secondary imagery data . further enhancements are expected and are to be achieved through post - award modifications to the contract . two versions of this ground station are being contemplated ( i.e. , a light and heavy cgs ) . the light cgs will be patterned on the light gsm two - vehicle configuration . the heavy cgs is to be a track - mounted system , intended to provide the heavy forces a high speed , cross - country / off - road gsm . it is to be integrated into a bradley fighting vehicle variant . integration of the cgs capability into a tracked vehicle is part of the preplanned product improvement initiatives and will not be included in the fiscal year 1996 cgs contract award . initial cgs fielding is planned for fiscal year 1998 . no production is planned . medium gsm . this module provides enhancements to the interim gsm capability . its development stemmed from a department of defense ( dod ) decision that was made in fiscal year 1989 to restructure the army joint stars gsm program . the medium gsm enhancements include a downsized electronic suite , an enhanced man / machine interface with extensive built in test / built in test equipment capabilities , and the ability to simultaneously display and analyze data from multiple sensors . the army acquired 12 medium gsms . the army currently anticipates the acquisition of 73 cgs systems . the following are gao's comments on dod's letter dated january 24 , 1996 . while the cgs contractor has prior experience developing and producing ground stations , those ground stations have undergone limited testing and demonstrated disappointing results . among its previous work , the cgs contractor developed and produced the two immediate predecessor gsms to the cgs , the medium and light gsms . as we stated in our report , based on the results of a limited user test of the medium gsm , the army operational test and evaluation command stated that the medium gsm consistently demonstrated the potential to be operationally effective and the potential to be operationally suitable .