section 124 . while the jiatf - south was designated as a jiatf , it did not have a formally approved jiatf organization structure until march 16 , 1998 . before then , it had been operating as a part of the operations group at the u.s. southern command . the jiatf - south intelligence directorate provides tactical and operational intelligence support to the jiatf - south counterdrug mission . the intelligence directorate conducts an analysis of source zone illicit drug targets and is responsible for integrating the efforts of several nations in the counterdrug effort . jiatf - south products include daily and weekly intelligence summaries and forecasts , monthly reports on tat activities , briefings to jiatf - south operational elements , the quarterly source region cocaine movement assessment , and a link analysis of drug - trafficking organizations . as of october 1 , 1997 , the jiatf - south intelligence directorate had 19 personnel assigned of the 35 authorized . there were 17 analysts and 2 management personnel . the office of naval intelligence ( oni ) counterdrug division's mission focuses on detecting and monitoring illicit drug activities in the transit zone ( from the shore of the source country to the u.s. shore ) . the division satisfies goals 4 and 5 of the counterdrug strategy , with emphasis placed on detection and monitoring activities . oni conducts its counterdrug intelligence activities under the statutory authority of 10 u.s.c . sections 124 and 371 , et seq . the counterdrug division provides strategic and tactical maritime intelligence primarily to federal law enforcement and dod counterdrug agencies . with the exception of the staff assigned to the coast guard intelligence coordination center or detailed to other organizations , all of oni's counterdrug intelligence analysts are assigned to the counterdrug division of the civil maritime analysis department . oni provides reports and access to maritime databases that support law enforcement's interdiction efforts . for example , oni produces hidden compartments , which provides information , photographs , and plans for various concealment methods on known smuggling vessels , and the maritime drug smuggler's handbook , which provides information on smuggling groups and their associated vessels . oni also maintains a database on ships over 100 gross tons and recently began maintaining a section of the database on vessels under 100 gross tons , as these vessels are most often used in drug - smuggling . oni also provides extensive on - scene maritime intelligence support to latin america tactical analysis teams and regional law enforcement agencies that are working cases involving international maritime drug transshipments . as of october 1 , 1997 , 27 of the 29 authorized intelligence positions in the oni counterdrug division were filled . four were imagery analysts who worked at the coast guard intelligence coordination center , 1 person was assigned to the director if central intelligence crime and narcotics center , 1 was assigned to the el paso intelligence center , and the 21 remaining staff worked at oni . the tactical analysis teams' ( tat ) mission is to serve as conduits for timely , geographically focused tactical and operational counterdrug intelligence analyses for u.s. embassy country teams , dod theater staff , host nations , and u.s. law enforcement agencies .