further testing is planned . the army's test and experimentation command , under the auspices of the operational test and evaluation command , conducted two operational tests during 1991 to assess the performance of the candidate metal detectors in a field environment . short of war , operational testing is the most realistic way of assessing a system's effectiveness and suitability for fielding . however , the operational tests had several shortcomings that complicate the assessment of the comparative performance of the two detector candidates and the baseline an / pss - 11 against low - metallic mines . in the first test , the schiebel detector found 3.4 percent of the low - metallic targets , compared with 24.2 percent for the an / pss - 11 . because the foerster detector was not included in the first test and the low - metallic targets were excluded from the second test , the foerster was not tested against these low - metallic targets and no comparison could be made . the foerster detected twice as many of the lowest metal content targets present at the beginning of the second test , but the army concluded the targets were not representative of the higher metallic content soviet mine and ruled them invalid . as performance against higher metallic targets was equal , price became the deciding factor in the procurement decision . the first operational test of the detector candidates was conducted during march 20-28 , 1991 . prior to this test , the army had screened 12 different commercial detectors and had eliminated all but one because of ( 1 ) technical , performance , or production shortcomings or ( 2 ) high prices . two foerster candidates were among the detectors eliminated on the basis of price . thus , the schiebel was the only detector forwarded for operational testing with the baseline an / pss - 11 detector . this test included four target types: metal - clad training m - 15 and m - 16 mines , the m - 14 pin , and the pmn - 6 striker pin . given that the hollow aluminum tube described in the specification was not used in the test , the m - 14 pin was the only low - metallic target . the results of the test are shown in table 1 . it is strongly recommended that the government not purchase this mine detector as a replacement for the an / pss - 11 at this time . rather , another survey should be conducted to identify candidate mine detectors that meet military specifications outlined in the test and evaluation master plan . further technical and operational testing should result in a more suitable replacement mine detector . against mines with small metallic content ( i.e. , the m - 14 and the pmn - 6 ) , the an - 19 / 2 fell considerably short of the ps requirement . .indeed , its performance during test was distinctly inferior to that of the an / pss - 11 under the same conditions , although the an / pss - 11 itself did not meet the ps requirement either .