sec . 635 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) , ( b ) ) ; provide loans only in circumstances in which there is a reasonable assurance of repayment ( 12 u.s.c . sec . 635 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ) ; seek to reach international agreements to reduce government - subsidized export financing ( 12 u.s.c . sec . 635 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ) ; and supplement and encourage , but not compete with , private sources of capital ( 12 u.s.c . sec . 635 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ) . the eximbank operates under a renewable congressional charter that expires on september 30 , 1997 . the eximbank's activities and policies are overseen by its board of directors . the board , or appropriate designees , is responsible for approving support for individual transactions and making determinations of reasonable assurance of repayment . prior to 1992 , the budget did not measure the true costs of federal credit programs at the time of commitment . the federal credit reform act of 1990 ( p. l. 101-508 , nov. 5 , 1990 ) aimed to improve the budgeting of federal credit programs and requires government agencies , including the eximbank , starting in fiscal year 1992 , to estimate and budget for the total long - term costs of their credit programs on a net present value basis . congress funds the eximbank's estimated credit subsidy costs ( hereafter referred to as “subsidy costs” ) through the annual appropriations process . subsidy costs arise when the estimated program disbursements by the government exceed the estimated payments to the government , on a net present value basis . administrative expenses receive separate appropriations and are reported separately in the budget . the act changed the budget treatment of credit programs so that their costs can be compared more accurately with each other and with the costs of other federal spending . ( see app . executive branch agencies are required to calculate the subsidy costs of foreign loans and guarantees using annually updated ratings and risk premiums provided through the office of management and budget's ( omb ) interagency country risk assessment system ( icras ) . under this approach , each sovereign borrower or guarantor is rated on an 11-category scale ranging from a through f - - , although the eximbank limits support to those rated in the top eight categories ( a through e - ) . generally speaking , a and b - rated markets are considered “low risk” ; c , c - , and d markets are considered “medium risk” ; and d - , e , and e - markets are considered “high risk.” in the future , many discretionary federal government programs , including the eximbank's programs , are projected to face increased budgetary constraints . the house committee report ( 104-600 , may 29 , 1996 ) accompanying the 1997 foreign operations , export financing , and related programs appropriations bill ( h.r .