the specialist corrected the demilitarization code . according to officials at the five disposal offices visited , miscoded items account for 25 percent of their property management workload . they explained that , because of constant employee turnover , receiving personnel must be continually trained to screen for incorrect codes . also , potentially miscoded items have to be reported to the defense reutilization and marketing service , and items with military technology requiring demilitarization must be stored apart from other items . miscoding can have a significant impact on the disposal office workload . for example , the kaiserslautern drmo had a backlog of 29 semi - truck trailers full of material waiting to be processed for disposal . officials stated that time spent on miscoded items significantly affected their ability to process the backlog and that more trailer loads of material were being received daily . drmos also inadvertently offered to sell some parts with military technology intact because drmo personnel made errors in consolidating parts having military technology implications with parts not having these implications . this occurred when several single items were accumulated together and offered for sale as a batch lot . although the batch lot was recorded as having no military technology implications , some individual parts in the lot contained protected military technology . for example , a batch lot of 42 weapons parts available for sale to the public at the kaiserslautern drmo contained 7 parts with military technology that should have been destroyed ( see fig . drmo personnel subsequently removed the military technology items from the batch lot . drmo supervisors stated that action would be taken to educate personnel on the required content of batch lots and that supervisory checks of batch lot contents would be made periodically to ensure that no parts with military technology are included in future batch lots . in our october 1997 report , we recommended that dod improve the accuracy of assigned demilitarization codes by providing its personnel with guidance on selecting appropriate demilitarization codes that includes the specific details necessary to make appropriate decisions . dod agreed with our recommendation and stated that it would work with the military services and the defense logistics agency to determine the feasibility of departmentwide use of a worksheet that provides personnel with the specific details necessary to make prudent decisions on selecting the appropriate demilitarization codes . however , as of may 1998 , dod had not started using a worksheet departmentwide . because dod has had long - standing problems with the accuracy of assigned demilitarization codes , in 1993 the defense reutilization and marketing service developed a program for disposal offices to identify and prevent items with military technology from being sold . however , the disposal offices continued to sell parts with military technology intact because personnel often did not update their data systems with corrected codes . under the program , disposal office personnel check the assigned demilitarization code . however , the officials discovered that , when the part is demilitarized in this manner , it can be welded back together and used as it was originally intended . the drmo personnel then began cutting off all of the feeders' appendages , which rendered the part unusable .