the army is testing these tires . however , the weapons manager has not been provided funds to buy them . although recurring maintenance problems are reported , availability data reported by using units to marine corps and army weapons system managers indicate that the m198 fleet has a high availability rate . the availability rate reported by army users from january 1989 through august 1995 averaged about 93 percent . during the same period the availability rate reported by marine corps m198 units averaged 89 percent . army artillery unit officials said that the m198 could have relatively high equipment availability rates and recurring maintenance problems at the same time . if a problem can be repaired within 24 hours , it is not reflected in equipment readiness reports . our examination of one active army battalion's maintenance records ( june 1993 to march 1995 ) showed that seven of its 24 m198s had problems that rendered them inoperable for more than 10 days . of the seven , two were inoperable for 30 and 39 days , respectively . however , according to the maintenance officer of this battalion , a majority of the problems were fixed within 24 hours . there is no consistent view regarding the state of the m198 . some users of the m198 believe that these weapons will not last until a new howitzer is fielded in fiscal year 2002 . officials of the army's 18th field artillery brigade expressed concern that the howitzer may not last its expected 20-year service life without a significant life - extension or product improvement program . some of the more serious problems have been resolved . according to the marine corps and army weapon system managers , solutions have been identified for most of the other problems , but funds have not been provided to make the fixes . data compiled from marine corps and army equipment readiness reports indicate that despite these problems , the availability of the m198 has not been substantially affected . although some units reported availability dropping below 70 percent in some instances , this condition was usually corrected within a few months . in 1994 , a joint marine corps and army team of experts visited five major active duty marine corps and army artillery units to identify and quantify the problems with the m198 howitzer , as reported by using units . this team found 15 recurring problems . the most serious recurring problems reported were the following: trunnion bearings were worn or had disintegrated . worn or disabled bearings affect the alignment of the gun tube and the accuracy of projectiles fired from the howitzer . improper alignment could cause projectiles to miss the target and could endanger friendly troops . when firing the howitzer with the maximum powder charge , cracks were discovered in the towers of the upper carriage . these towers hold the gun tube in place . if the cracks in the towers are too severe , the gun tube could back up too far during recoil and injure the crew . travel locks crack and sometimes break when the m198 is being towed . if the locks were to break completely during movement of the m198 , the gun tube could fall to the ground .