we agree . overseas allowances and benefits are authorized by statute for u.s. federal civilian employees stationed in foreign areas . there are two purposes for granting allowances and benefits to u.s. staff employed overseas . first , they can serve as reimbursement for extraordinary living costs to prevent employees from being financially penalized for working overseas . second , they can serve as recruitment and retention incentives . benefits and allowances provided to foreign service employees working overseas include free housing and utilities , hardship post payments , danger pay , cost - of - living allowances , education allowances , and separate maintenance allowances . these benefits and allowances offer one potential area for cost reduction efforts . according to the director of state's office of allowances , the only comprehensive and recent review of foreign service benefits and allowances was conducted in 1994 by a private firm under contract to usaid . in a january 1995 memorandum to the director general of the foreign service , usaid's deputy assistant administrator for human resources noted that this study found that ( 1 ) the foreign service compensation package was somewhat below that received in the private sector ; ( 2 ) the foreign service benefits package was comparable to the private sector , except for retirement where the government is more generous , and ( 3 ) foreign service allowances were comparable to the private sector except for housing allowances where the private sector generally deducted a home - country norm from the housing allowance so that employees do not get free housing overseas . usaid's consultant concluded that by paying only for excess housing costs , private industry , without any apparent disruption to programs , avoided substantial costs that the government pays . the consultant further concluded that usaid employees' benefits of receiving essentially free housing and utilities amount to about 12 to 15 percent of their base pay . we also noted that canadian foreign service officers are expected to contribute to a portion of their overseas housing costs based on ottawa housing costs and on their salary levels and household sizes . likewise , australian foreign service officers are expected to contribute toward their overseas housing costs based on a published schedule . the director of state's office of allowances noted that other countries , such as japan , france , and germany , also have a rent - share arrangement with their employees . like the united states , however , other countries such as great britain and ireland , fully reimburse overseas housing costs — up to a set limit . the administrative section at overseas posts is generally headed by an administrative counselor or officer who is assisted by several foreign service officers who manage administrative subunits and oversee a staff comprised mainly of fsns . in response to budget pressures , state could increase its use of fsns to replace foreign service specialists working in senior support positions . employment of fsns is less costly than employment of foreign service officers because fsns do not receive the benefits and allowances payable to foreign service employees and generally are paid lower salaries than foreign service employees .