the savings estimates could change . a dod official told us that , after receiving more detailed information from its components , dod reduced its projected annual recurring savings as of fiscal year 2004 from $2.5 billion to $2.3 billion . this savings figure was still under review when we completed our fieldwork and osd had not yet decided whether to revise its savings goals or its timetables for achieving them when we completed our review . the projections of competition savings that dod provided to congress in fiscal year 1998 appear overstated . the projections did not adequately consider investment costs related to performing a - 76 cost studies . in addition , the competitions will likely take longer to complete than estimated . both of these factors will affect how quickly dod components will begin to realize net savings from the competitions . dod components have expressed concerns about their ability to meet the savings goals . dod is working to improve these estimates for its fiscal year 2000 budget request . much like base realignment and closure actions , competitions have up - front investment costs that need to be considered when estimating net savings . in competitions , these investments involve study costs , personnel separation costs , and , in the case of the army , the costs of substituting civilians for military personnel . once these investment costs have been offset by program savings , net savings can begin to accrue on an annual recurring basis . however , the officials also said that osd only agreed to a reduction of about 10,600 positions . additionally , the air force proposed reengineering various functions to achieve additional savings of about $700 million , about $116 million more than was planned to have been saved with the competitions . as previously noted , marine corps officials have indicated that they do not believe they can meet their savings goals with the number of positions currently planned for competition . the officials said that the marine corps plans to increase the number of positions to be competed from 5,000 to about 6,200 . one difficulty the services are likely to face as they try to identify more competition candidates is the continuing reduction in personnel caused by other ongoing defense reform efforts , cuts mandated by the quadrennial defense review , or other initiatives . reductions are also planned as a result of legislative requirements . these other ongoing defense reforms could limit the number of positions ultimately available for competition under the competitive sourcing program . various service officials pointed to extensive reductions in base operating support budgets in recent years and expressed concern about the additional reductions that are expected in addition to cuts associated with competitions . they expressed concern about their ability to absorb further reductions “out of hide” should they miss their competition savings goals . recently , officials in all of the services have voiced concerns about their ability to meet the savings goals established by osd and the resulting effects , especially considering that the savings have already been taken out of future years' operating budget estimates .