they concurred with our findings and recommendations . we made technical corrections in several areas to address their comments . dod's response is included in appendix i . subsequent to dod's response , the deputy under secretary of defense ( logistics ) , in a memorandum dated december 5 , 1997 , established an annual process for reporting public and private sector maintenance costs as required by the fiscal year 1998 defense authorization act , which amended 10 u.s.c . the secretary's memorandum also provided new guidance to more clearly define the types of workloads that are to be included in future workload allocation reports , and the defense components that should be reporting . this should lead to more accurate and consistent reporting of public and private sector workload allocations . we reviewed osd's analysis of public and private sector depot maintenance workload distribution and accompanying reports prepared by the army , the navy , the marine corps , the air force , and the defense logistics agency . we also reviewed pertinent dod , osd , and military department directives , regulations , and publications to determine how dod , osd , and the military departments define depot maintenance work . we drew extensively from our prior work concerning the public and private sector workload mix . we also reviewed preliminary results of ongoing audit work being conducted by the u.s. army audit agency and a study of depot maintenance software activities being conducted by the logistics management institute . from each of the military departments and osd , we obtained and reviewed pertinent correspondence and back - up documentation supporting osd's public and private sector workload report . back - up documentation included budget exhibits , computerized worksheets , and summary reports . we did not independently assess the accuracy of the data contained in back - up documentation . we interviewed officials and examined documents at osd , army , navy , marine corps , and air force headquarters , washington , d.c. ; the army materiel command , alexandria , virginia ; the air force materiel command , dayton , ohio ; the naval sea and air systems commands , arlington , virginia ; and the national security agency , fort meade , maryland . to determine if defense agencies and organizations received depot maintenance funds that were not included in osd's analysis of public and private sector depot maintenance workload distribution , we selected several defense agencies and nontraditional depot maintenance commands . at the selected agencies and commands , we interviewed officials to determine the extent of maintenance funding received and the distribution between the public and private sectors . these activities included the u.s. transportation command , the military traffic management command , the air mobility command , the military sealift command , the national security agency , the defense intelligence agency , and the national imagery and mapping agency . we conducted our review from may to august 1997 , and except where noted , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .