additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . this requirement may be waived for classified programs . dod and army officials told us that at the july 1989 milestone i , the decision point for starting a new acquisition program , the longbow apache weapon system was a classified radar program and did not meet the monetary threshold for a coea . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . according to these officials , the army was not required to do a coea . by the december 1990 milestone ii , the program was unclassified , and the program met dod's criteria for requiring that a coea be conducted , including the monetary threshold . despite dod guidance , the army did not complete and submit an adequate coea . in may 1994 , noting that an appropriate coea had not been conducted for milestones i or ii , dod again directed the army to conduct a longbow apache coea for milestone iii to compare alternative approaches to satisfy the army's need for a heavy division attack helicopter . according to a dod official , the army plans to complete the coea in august 1995 . while dod originally intended that the army evaluate the comanche as an attack alternative to the longbow apache , the army subsequently convinced dod that it should exclude from the coea any analysis of the comanche as an attack alternative . the army's stated position was that the comanche ( 1 ) was a high - value asset that would not be used as an attack helicopter in a heavy division and ( 2 ) would not be available for the attack role until after 2006 , and , therefore , would not meet the army's attack requirement at the turn of the century . according to dod officials , the comanche alternative was excluded from the longbow apache coea because it would not meet the army's near - to mid - term heavy attack helicopter requirement . the dod and army positions on the availability of the comanche seem to contradict dod's own guidance for developing a coea . this guidance requires that ( 1 ) a wide range of alternatives be considered , including conceptual systems and ( 2 ) all reasonable options should be represented , including even doubtful alternatives , in order to establish their merit . moreover , the program schedule shows that low - rate initial production and full - rate production for the comanche are planned for 2004 and 2006 , respectively .