the shuttle is an extremely complex system . the program employs thousands of people and launching a shuttle requires that 1.2 million separate procedures be accomplished correctly . qualitative ratings are usually based on the judgments of experts after they consider such things as test and operational experience , analytical results , trends , and other reported data . nasa follows a formal review process in certifying the shuttle for flight . the certification of flight readiness process is a step - by - step activity designed to certify the readiness of all components of the vehicle assembly and all aspects of mission support . the flight preparation process begins with project milestone reviews including ( 1 ) element acceptance , ( 2 ) payload readiness , ( 3 ) software readiness , and ( 4 ) project preflight readiness reviews . these reviews are chaired by nasa project managers and the contractors formally certify the flight readiness of the hardware and software . the next step in the process is the program milestone reviews . these reviews are held to assess the readiness for mating the external tank and solid rocket booster , orbiter and external tank , and ferrying the orbiter atop the shuttle carrier aircraft when required . these reviews are chaired by the manager of launch integration and each shuttle element manager certifies that it has satisfactorily completed the manufacture , assembly , test , and checkout of the elements , including the contractor's certification that design and performance are up to standard . the final step in the flight preparation process is the flight readiness review . this review is held about 2 weeks prior to launch and is chaired by the associate administrator for space flight . all shuttle elements , safety and mission assurance , center directors , and senior representatives from the major contractors participate in this review . at the end of the flight readiness review , all organizations must certify that the mission is ready for launch . the associate administrator for safety and mission assurance is also an active participant . the safety and mission assurance organization holds parallel reviews to assess safety issues related to the planned launch . the safety and mission assurance organization participates in all phases of the flight preparation process . two days before a scheduled launch , a mission management team holds a review to assess flight readiness . its agenda includes close out of any open work , close out of any flight readiness review action items , discussion of new or continuing anomalies , and an updated briefing on anticipated weather conditions at the launch site and at abort landing sites in different parts of the world . the mission management team meets every day after the launch – 2 day review up to the conclusion of the mission . figure 1.1 illustrates nasa's flight preparation process . nasa's safety organization provides an independent channel for assessing shuttle flight safety . each center's safety organization participates in the element acceptance reviews as well as the flight readiness review and the mission management team . participation in these reviews provides the opportunity for nasa's safety organization to express any residual concerns about the safety of an upcoming mission .