we found few . throughout europe and asia , u.s. computer subsidiary officials stated that their competition is primarily other u.s. computer subsidiaries and , to a lesser extent , japanese companies . in addition , although requested , commerce did not provide documentary evidence to confirm its asserted capabilities of india's hpcs and uses . commerce stated that worldwide availability of computers indicates that there is a large installed base of systems in the tens of thousands or even millions . commerce further stated that license requirements will not prevent diversion of hpcs unless realistic control levels are set that can be enforced effectively . while we agree , in principle , that increasing numbers of hpcs makes controllability more difficult , as our recommendation in our companion report suggests , a realistic assessment of when an item is “uncontrollable” would require an analysis of ( 1 ) actual data , ( 2 ) estimated costs of enforcing controls , and ( 3 ) pros and cons of alternatives — such as revised regulatory procedures — that might be considered to extend controls . commerce did not perform such an analysis before revising export controls in 1995 . in addition , although we requested that commerce provide documentary evidence for its statement that there is a large installed base of hpcs in the millions , it did not provide such evidence . commerce stated that most european governments do not enforce u.s. export control restrictions on reexport of u.s. - supplied hpcs . we agree that at least those european governments that we visited hold this position . however , although requested , commerce provided no evidence to support its statement that the government of the united kingdom has instructed its exporters to ignore u.s. reexport controls . the following is gao's comment on dod's letter dated july 16 , 1998 . dod provided one set of written comments for this report and for a companion report , in which we discuss our analysis of the basis for the 1995 executive branch decision to revise export controls for hpcs . we addressed dod's comments relevant to this report on page 8 . hai tran the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone .