we did not evaluate the effectiveness of these efforts . modifying laws and regulations that must be considered when performing environmental cleanup at closing bases could ease the severity of requirements and help reduce costs . however , the benefits of modifying certain aspects of existing laws and regulations may not be achieved without tradeoffs . for example , easing cleanup standards and associated requirements may increase environmental risk and create unacceptable danger to human health and the environment , thereby increasing public resistance and dissatisfaction . dod has supported a number of proposed legislative and administrative changes that would reduce the cost of environmental cleanup and expedite the closure process . many of these have been debated by the congress in the past and are still under consideration . in this regard , dod supports efforts to improve the remedy selection process by using realistic site - based risk assumptions and foreseeable future land uses in the decision - making process . according to navy environmental officials , emphasizing site - based risk assumptions over specific cleanup standards has the potential for reducing costs . further , dod supports wider use of generic or presumptive remedies in certain cases to reduce lengthy study time and cost . dod also supports legislative revision as to what constitutes an uncontaminated parcel and further clarification that such parcels be excluded from placement on the national priorities list . this revision would reduce cost and allow more expedited transfer of uncontaminated property . epa has indicated its support for many of dod's proposals , but state officials and private representatives we talked to were more skeptical . changing regulatory requirements can have a significant impact on costs , as illustrated by recent changes being recommended in california's approach to remediating contamination resulting from leaking underground fuel storage tanks . in late 1995 , a report by the department of energy's lawrence livermore national laboratory , california , concluded that , where soil conditions were favorable , natural processes , rather than other cleanup actions , could be relied on to clean up petroleum contaminants left by leaking underground fuel storage tanks . the report estimated that traditional cleanup costs had been averaging $150,000 , thereby prompting state water control board officials to recommend the use of natural processes for cleanup of those sites where contamination was deemed to be of low risk . if these same procedures were used at dod facilities where favorable soil conditions existed , costs could be reduced . at norton air force base , the air force has spent about $5 million to remediate about 20,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil at former underground storage tank sites . air force officials estimate that about 20 percent of the cleanup may not have been needed and could have been left to natural processes . at pease air force base , officials estimated that about $2.5 million was spent to clean up fuel contaminated soils around 10 pumphouses . figures 3 and 4 show underground tank removal operations at pease air force base . at mare island naval shipyard , navy officials estimate that about 50 underground storage tanks and about 42,000 feet of abandoned underground fuel lines require cleanup at an estimated cost of $26.9 million .