no limit . 15 years . expropriation , war , inconvertibility , breach of government commitments . domestic german entities . no restrictions . no limit . 15 years.expropriation , war , inconvertibility , breach of government contracts . persons and entities existing in japan . no restrictions . $500 million per project . 15 years.expropriation , war , inconvertibility , bankruptcy after 2 years of operation . persons or business beneficial to canada . no restrictions . no limit . 15 years . expropriation , war , inconvertibility . persons or entities domiciled in italy . developing countries only . no limit . 15 years . expropriation , war , inconvertibility , natural catastrophe . persons and entities carrying on business in united kingdom . no restrictions . no limit . 15 years extendable to 20 . expropriation , war , inconvertibility , breach of contract by host government . u.s. citizens and entities and foreign entities 95% owned by u.s. interests . developing countries only . $200 million per project . 20 years . expropriation , war , inconvertibility , breach of contract by host government . opic data as of september 30 , 1996 . the following are gao's comments on opic's letter dated august 6 , 1997 . the points that opic highlights are there own interpretation of our analyses . several points discussed by opic , such as the health of their reserves , filling a commercial void and the impact of its activities on u.s. employment , are not our specific conclusions . no restrictions . rather , the report provides factual information and our analysis of the trends in private sector investment , the public sector's role in emerging markets , opic's portfolio and risk management strategy , and issues to be addressed if opic were not reauthorized . information in the report on opic's risk management strategy is not restricted to a discussion of how opic limits exposure in any one country or sector . the report also includes a discussion of opic's pre - approval review process and underwriting guidelines . appendixes iv and v contain information on the application , approval , and monitoring processes for the insurance and finance programs . although the report notes that the larger finance projects tend to be less risky than smaller projects , we do not agree that the same is necessarily true for opic's insurance projects . financing involves commercial risks that well - capitalized and experienced private participants have greater influence in mitigating . however , political risk insurance only covers actions taken by governments — actions that are less within the control of the private sector . the report discusses only the recent growth in privately provided political risk insurance . the extent to which the private market capacity for political risk insurance would be affected by changes in demand for property / casualty coverage is not certain . we recognize that opic has in some cases pursued the risk mitigation options discussed in the report . however , we believe that the private sector's current high level of interest in investing in emerging markets has created opportunities for opic to further reduce portfolio risk through greater use of the options presented .