provide quality service 2 . mtmc's “draft request for proposal summary , reengineering the dod personal property program,” dated june 24 , 1996 , as clarified in dod correspondence , position papers , and white papers distributed to the working group members over the period of the working group meetings held through september 16 , 1996 . the “joint industry proposed alternative plan to mtmc's re - engineering of the domestic and international personal property programs,” dated june 24 , 1996 , and signed by the presidents of the four moving industry carrier associations — american movers conference , the household goods forwarders association of america , the national moving and storage association , and the independent movers conference — as revised in an american movers conference and household goods forwarders association of america document entitled “industry alternative pilot plan for mtmc's domestic and international personal property program,” dated october 25 , 1996 . since mtmc and industry could not agree on a single approach to the pilot test , we analyzed the two approaches . as discussed with your office , we agreed to use the source proposals described above as the basis for analyzing the pilot test approach . the program goals were those developed at the june 10 , 1996 , working group meeting and agreed to by a september 16 , 1996 , dod and association - signed document entitled transcom / mtmc / industry reengineering personal property working group consensus list . our analysis was based on the review of the proposals ; examination of the transcribed record of the working group meetings ; review of correspondence of both sides relative to the two proposals , points of clarification , and statements of disagreement ; reference to our prior reports and findings on the subject area ; research and analysis of the applicable procurement statutes and dod and the general services administration transportation procurement and traffic management regulations ; analysis of data related to the moving industry and small business affairs , not necessarily discussed at the working group meetings ; and follow - up discussions with officials in dod and the moving industry who attended the working group sessions . our analysis of the reengineering initiative was conducted between june and november 1996 . since agreement could not be reached on a mutually acceptable proposal to pilot test , we began assessing in october 1996 , the separate dod and industry proposals . our assessment of the specific proposals was conducted during a 30-day period as specified in the house and senate reports accompanying the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1997 . our review was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of defense ; the commander - in - chief , u.s. transportation command ; the commander , mtmc ; the american movers conference ; the household goods forwarders association of america ; the national moving and storage association ; the independent movers conference ; and the military mobility coalition . we will also make copies available to others upon request .