the trucks passed both tests . the army test data in tables 1 through 3 reflect the test results that supported the army's decision to proceed to full - rate production . this data shows that all models of the truck met their ram requirements during the tests . however , there were different results for some models according to the analysis performed by the defense director , operational test and evaluation ( dot&e ) . for systems that are ready to enter full - rate production dot&e is required to independently assess the system's operational test and provide a report of that assessment to congress . dot&e's assessment does not enter into the army's full - rate production decision . dot&e's results are included in tables 1 and 2 . dot&e's assessment of the operational test resulted in a general reduction from the army's test results . as can be seen in tables 1 and 2 , all fmtv models met or exceeded their reliability and availability requirements using the army operational test results . based on the dot&e data , however , the dump and tractor models did not meet their reliability requirement , and the dump , tractor , and wrecker models did not meet their availability requirement . dot&e noted that the fmtv family reliability would probably be a better measure of the reliability of the dump and tractor models because they had no failures of model unique subsystems and the failures that occurred did not appear to be directly related to the models' missions . using the family reliability for the dump and tractor models , dot&e concluded that all models met their reliability requirements . dot&e also noted that the operational tempo during the test was increased 20 percent above the normal wartime operational tempo and concluded that the increased operational tempo would cause more failures during the test and decrease the trucks availability . because of the increased operational tempo during the test , dot&e concluded that the dump , tractor , and wrecker models should be considered to have adequate availability and , therefore , all models met their availability requirements . in addition , all models met or nearly met their performance requirements , and the army was willing to accept this level of performance as satisfactory . the army has agreed to accept fmtv models , which do not fully meet four contractual performance requirements — external air transport , speed - on - grade , full - load cooling , and interior noise requirements . the contract requires all fmtvs to be externally air transportable — lifted by helicopter — without damage . however , in 4 of 17 lift tests , the fmtv windshield cracked . army officials believe that a slightly different rigging during external transportation and a thicker windshield the contractor proposes to install should correct the cracking problem . we conducted our review between august 1994 and august 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days from its issue date , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier .