does not include benefits administration . time and attendance processing the input of employee time cards into the payroll system . travel and entertainment accounting overseeing and processing expense reports and cash advances . cash advances approve and disburse cash advances ; resolve cash advance problems . expense reports verify that expense reports meet guidelines ; approve expense reports ; prepare payments ; resolve travel expense problems ; distribute travel and entertainment expenses . ( continued ) travel and entertainment ( t&e ) card administration oversee issuance of t&e cards , monitor use of t&e cards . financial budgeting and forecasting establishing long - term and short - term financial plans , budgets , and forecasts . the focus is on developing detailed financial budgets and controlling actual expenses by comparing them to an historical budget . external / consolidated reporting reporting consolidated financial information as dictated by generally accepted accounting principles , securities and exchange commission regulations , and statutory , subsidiary , and international reporting requirements . banking and cash management the activities involved in the handling of cash flows and bank relations for noninvestment accounts . cost accounting calculating product or service fixed , variable , and semi - variable costs . developing allocation schemes and analyzing cost variances . financial analysis and management reporting analyzing financial and operational information to assess , interpret , and predict business performance to support management decisions . evaluating capital investment decisions . gathering , evaluating , and presenting financial , operating , and contractual information about proposed business transactions for internal management . tax planning examining tax issues for the corporation to optimize tax effectiveness of management decisions . treasury and trust management the activities associated with securing funds to meet the corporation's cash flow needs and investing any excess funds . neal gottlieb , auditor - in - charge adrienne friedman , senior auditor lenny moore , auditor the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . a few organizations have outsourced parts of their operations for many years . recently , however , interest in more widespread use of outsourcing has increased dramatically .