additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . dod is seeking to contract out more of its depot maintenance requirements . the expectation is that increased competition for dod's depot maintenance work will produce substantial savings . in march 1996 , dod issued regulations directing that new systems and major upgrade programs “shall maximize the use of contractor provided , long - term , total life - cycle logistics support that combines depot - level maintenance along with wholesale and selected retail materiel management functions.” dod's approach to assuring product quality and fair prices for depot maintenance work that is contracted out to the private sector where competition is limited is through contract management and oversight requirements . this includes on - site inspections and record keeping and reporting requirements . the military services manage and oversee depot maintenance contracts with assistance from the defense contract audit agency ( dcaa ) and the defense contract management command ( dcmc ) . dcaa provides accounting and financial advisory services in connection with negotiating , administering , and closing out contracts . dcmc is dod's principal contract oversight agency , which provides assistance ranging from evaluation of contractors' proposals to on - site monitoring of contractors' day - to - day operations . dod is implementing the preference for the acquisition of commercial items established in the federal acquisition streamlining act of 1994 ( fasa ) . dod expects that commercial products and services , which are subject to competitive market forces , will result in high - quality products and services at a lower cost . greater reliance on commercial products and services , if done in a competitive environment , should shift much of the quality assurance and cost control responsibility to the contractors and , thereby , reduce management and oversight required by dod contract administration personnel . previously , we recommended that the secretary of defense require the development of a detailed implementation plan for improving the efficiency and effectiveness of dod's logistics activities , to include depot maintenance . we recommended that the plan establish time frames for identifying and evaluating the most cost - effective solutions and identify required resources for accomplishing cost - reduction initiatives . in response to that recommendation , dod has stated that a specific plan for improving the efficiency and reducing the cost of dod's logistics programs , including depot maintenance , is not needed because the qdr and dri provide an overall strategic plan and strategy for reducing dod's infrastructure . while we agree that the qdr and the dri provide strategic guidance , our work illustrates the need for more specificity in implementation plans related to individual business activities , such as depot maintenance . dod is streamlining and reengineering its traditional contract management and oversight organizations — including those in its buying activities , dcaa , and dcmc . these initiatives are in their early stages of implementation as they relate to depot maintenance contracting . a number of factors unique to contracting for depot maintenance repair and maintenance workloads create challenges to dod's efforts as it implements new contracting approaches .