the clarification has been incorporated . dod's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix iv . as agreed with your offices , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date unless you publicly announce its contents earlier . stop - - if you answered no to question 1 above , please do not continue but return this request in the enclosed envelope . please do not forward to the business unit that does your billings and maintains your accounts receivable . however , please provide the address for the business unit that maintains your accounts receivables so we can verify that the unit has been included in the initial mailing of this data request . the business unit for which the information is being requested is ( please make any corrections needed to business unit identification ) : person to be contacted if additional information is needed: 2 . ( july as of date used:_____________________ ) 2 . what is your business unit's current policy or practice regarding notifying dod when your records indicate an error has been made in paying an invoice or progress payment request ? ( briefly describe below or attach your response to this form. ) list the most recent annual gross dollar amount of contract billings to dod by your business unit . provide a list of the dod contracts to which the above overpayments and underpayments apply . ( attach the list to this form. ) please attach any additional information or specific comments and issues concerning your dod contract payment experiences that you believe we should consider . thank you for your prompt response . please retain any work sheets or records used to prepare this response . we reviewed over $84 million in overpayments on eight contracts to determine why the overpayments were made and to evaluate the efforts of the dfas center in columbus , ohio , to recover the overpayments . most of the overpayments were outstanding more than 180 days , and one was outstanding about 7 years . overpayments occurred mostly because prior progress payments were not properly considered when paying invoices . in general , the root of the problems could be traced to errors in the government's payment record . for each example , we attempted to identify the dates the overpayments occurred , the reason they occurred , the date the center was notified of them by the contractor , and the date the money was recovered . where these dates could not be clearly determined , we estimated the dates using available records and / or interviews with the government and contractor personnel involved . contract f33657-89-c - 0082 with hughes missile systems , tucson , arizona the dfas center overpaid this contract by about $24.7 million in january 1994 because an invoice was paid without fully liquidating progress payments . the contractor notified the center of the overpayment in april 1994 , about 3 months after the invoice was paid incorrectly . the center and contractor agreed to eliminate the $24.7 million overpayment by a setoff to other contractual debts rather than by a cash collection . to collect by contract setoff , the center did not pay $24.7 million of other payment requests .