this report contains recommendations to you . as you know , as the head of a federal agency , you are required under 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement on actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight no later than 60 days after the date of this report . a written statement must also be submitted to the senate and house committee on appropriations with an agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of this report . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant , u.s. marine corps ; and the director , office of management and budget . if you or your staff have questions on this report , please call me on ( 202 ) 512-5140 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix vii . the department of defense ( dod ) spends about $8 billion annually to provide housing for families of active - duty military personnel . in fiscal year 1997 , $5 million was appropriated for the dod military unaccompanied housing improvement fund . about $100,000 from this fund was used to pay for an air force study on developing privatized unaccompanied housing projects . because it represents a new approach to improving military housing , we reviewed the implementation of the military housing privatization initiative to ( 1 ) measure progress to date , ( 2 ) assess issues associated with privatizing military housing , and ( 3 ) determine whether the initiative is being integrated with other elements of dod's housing program . we performed work at hrso and the dod offices responsible for housing management and housing allowances . we also performed work at the air force , the army , the navy , and the marine corps headquarters offices responsible for implementing the initiative and at the omb office responsible for reviewing privatization agreements . at each location , we interviewed responsible agency personnel and reviewed applicable policies , procedures , and documents . to measure implementation progress and assess issues associated with privatizing military housing , we reviewed dod's and the services' implementation plans , compared the plans to progress made , and explored reasons for differences . we discussed potential barriers and concerns about the privatization initiative with dod and service officials to obtain their views and to determine how they were dealing with the concerns . we also reviewed estimated cost savings from the initiative and examined the assumptions and estimates the services used in preparing life - cycle cost analyses for proposed privatization projects at fort carson , colorado , and lackland air force base , texas . in addition , we visited navy privatization projects at corpus christi , texas , and everett , washington , that were implemented under a previous initiative to test the use of limited partnerships to improve housing in the navy . at each site , we toured the new housing units , reviewed occupancy statistics and rental costs , and discussed with local service officials their views of the initiative .