dod concurred with both of our recommendations . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix i. dod also provided technical comments that we incorporated in this report where appropriate . we reviewed and analyzed dod , air force , abl program office , and contractor documents and studies regarding various aspects of the abl program . we discussed the abl program with officials of the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) ; the office of the under secretary of defense ( acquisition and technology ) ; the air combat command ; the abl program office ; the air force's phillips laboratory ; and the abl contractor team of boeing , trw , and lockheed martin . we also discussed selected aspects of the abl program with a consultant to the abl program office . we conducted our review from september 1996 to august 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the congressional committees that have jurisdiction over the matters discussed and to the secretary of defense ; the secretary of the air force ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will make copies available to others on request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report were steven kuhta , ted baird , suzanne macfarlane , and rich horiuchi . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . it is caused by temperature variations in the atmosphere . these variations distort and reduce the intensity of the laser beam . optical turbulence can be measured either optically on non - optically . optical measurements are taken by transmitting laser beams from one aircraft to instruments on board another aircraft at various altitudes and distances . non - optical measurements of turbulence are taken by radar or by temperature probes mounted on balloons or on an aircraft's exterior . the air force's abl program office has not determined whether non - optical measurements of turbulence can be mathematically correlated with optical measurements .