we found data that were not supported by documentation . at the u.s. army central command ( arcent ) , for example , officials that provided data for taa in 1992 had not maintained documentation that would show how the data were developed . this lack of documentation reduces assurance that the data are valid and can cause problems during future updates if key personnel change . for example , u.s. army , korea , officials told us that they did not know how data on the korean theater had been developed because there were no files or individuals who could explain the prior year's validation process . we found that while the army sought consistency and accuracy in the logistical data update process , no organization ensured that a reasonable methodology was used by the commands and schools nor that studies or supporting models used to develop the data were valid . we found that neither cascom nor dcslog had overseen the validation process . according to a dcslog official , dcslog has not routinely reviewed the methodology used by various proponents who submit factors and data to the process . this official stated that only if a factor looked unusual would it generate an inquiry back to the proponent to ask how that factor was developed . cascom officials stated that they had no regulatory requirement to review the methodology of proponents who developed logistical data . the army's revised regulation governing the development and validation of logistical data for the taa process is an improvement . the revised regulation requires cascom to examine the afpda to ensure data consistency , adherence to doctrine , necessity , identification of sources , and rationale of methodology . it also specifies time frames for the afpda updates , thus putting the commands and schools on notice when the data validation will be required . cascom officials stated that they have not yet defined their role regarding overseeing the update of afpda data . therefore , cascom had not told the commands and schools what will be required of them . we believe that cascom should establish procedures that would specify how commands and schools are to validate and maintain all logistical data in the afpda . specifically , major commands , army component commands , and schools should be directed to ensure that their data are based on sound analytical studies and assumptions and that the methodological bases for those data and assumptions are documented . moreover , cascom's guidance should specify what cascom will require from commands and schools to exercise its oversight responsibility . according to dod , cascom is already developing procedures to improve the update process and should complete a review of the adequacy of existing data by the end of 1996 . according to army regulations , theater - specific data are best obtained from army components most familiar with the region and involved in the theater war - planning process . however , we found that the current level of participation by army component commanders does not ensure that data and assumptions used by taa are similar to data that component commands use to develop their war plans .