ii ) . as shown in figure ii , about 64 percent of the nato activities in which the six nations are participating involve joint exercises , training , standardization and interoperability , communications , and civil emergency planning . examples of such activities include exercises on naval peacekeeping in hostile environments , staff studies on the practicalities of conducting out - of - area multinational peacekeeping air operations , staff meetings on tactical communications interoperability , seminars on command and control systems , training in nato operational terminology , search and rescue and explosive ordinance disposition working parties , and discussions of nato reconnaissance and surveillance procedures related to peacekeeping . the remaining 36 percent of the activities involve 13 other pfp cooperation areas . nato expects partners to fund their participation . nato views partners' level of participation in pfp activities as an important indicator of their interest in joining nato and , according to dod officials , has structured pfp as one means of helping partners become better integrated with nato members . in july 1994 , the u.s. president announced the warsaw initiative , a u.s. bilateral program designed to ( 1 ) facilitate the participation of partner states in exercises and interoperability programs , ( 2 ) promote interoperability with nato , ( 3 ) support efforts to increase defense and military cooperation with pfp partners , and ( 4 ) develop strong candidates for nato membership . the departments of state and defense jointly fund and administer the initiative . the department of state funds equipment transfers and training , while dod supports partners' participation in joint exercises and nato - pfp interoperability projects . also , the department of state and dod provide training and advice through the international military education and training ( imet ) program and the joint contact team ( jct ) program and donate excess defense articles . the department of state and dod agencies programmed about $308.6 million in fiscal year 1995-97 funds to support these efforts in 23 pfp partner states . the department of state's programs are funded through the 150 international affairs budget function and account for about 48 percent of these funds . the dod programs are funded through the 050 national defense budget function and account for about 52 percent of the funds . to facilitate nato expansion , the president and congress enacted the nato participation act of 1994 and the nato enlargement facilitation act of 1996 , which authorized the president to establish security assistance programs for poland , hungary , the czech republic , slovenia , and any other countries the president believes have made progress in achieving pfp goals . copies will be provided to others upon request . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4128 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . during fiscal years 1995-97 the department of defense ( dod ) programmed almost $7.3 million to support u.s. interoperability programs in the six countries included in our review , including about $7.2 million for the following programs .