as such , deobligations are being reported inconsistently . the dd 2139 database lacks documentation defining the database's structure , critical data fields , and procedures for data entry , all of which makes the data highly questionable . for example , no written procedures exist for querying the database for the total dollar value of foreign subcontracts awarded . third , subcontracts performed in the united states , which should not be included in this database , were . finally , in our attempt to match entries from the dd 2139 database with the subset of information on foreign subcontracts found in the defense contract management district international database , we found subcontracts that should have been in the dd 2139 database but were not . taken together , these findings represent a significant degradation of the value of the information . if dod plans to use the data , and a recent directive by the under secretary suggests that it will become more important , the integrity of the data needs to be enhanced . our analysis showed that these problems are directly attributable to the lack of controls and procedures for periodically verifying compliance with the reporting requirement and the lack of procedures for managing and using the database . dod stated that it already maintains the most complete database on foreign subcontracting and that periodically verifying compliance would be too costly . having the most complete database does not address the value of the data contained in it . in addition , periodically verifying compliance with the reporting requirement could be accomplished as part of contracting officers' routine oversight responsibilities . dod agreed that there are no written procedures for managing and using the dd 2139 database , but stated that none are needed . dod guidance , however , states that database managers must have written documentation to maintain their systems . having written procedures for managing and using the database , such as controls for data entry and verification , are important to ensuring the reliability , accuracy , and usefulness of the information contained in the dd 2139 database . dod's written comments and our evaluation of them are discussed in appendix ii . we interviewed the contractors to determine whether they reported the foreign subcontracts to the office of foreign contracting and discussed reasons for not reporting . we also interviewed officials from several defense companies , dcmc representative offices , and program offices . we discussed with company officials their processes for tracking foreign subcontracts and compliance with the dd 2139 reporting requirement . we obtained supplier lists for two defense programs and surveyed several subcontractors about the dd 2139 reporting requirements and corresponding regulations . with dod officials , we discussed their procedures for monitoring subcontracts , including subcontractor performance , and for reviewing and approving requests for duty - free entry of foreign imports . to assess dod's management of data on foreign subcontract procurements , we reviewed dod's dd 2139 database for fiscal years 1990 through 1997 , which was the only automated data available during our review . we performed various programming queries to examine the database structure and critical fields .