nasa agreed with our recommendations . nasa officials stated that they appreciated our effort to review ciesin . ( see app . ii for nasa's comments. ) ciesin generally agreed with the report and elaborated on various points discussed in the report . ( see app . iii for ciesin's comments. ) our methodology included examining applicable laws , regulations , and policies ; interviewing ciesin and federal agency officials ; reviewing plans , contract files , and financial and program reports ; and accessing and testing ciesin's databases . specifically , we discussed the nature of ciesin's mission and its past , present , and potential future activities with ciesin officials . also , we obtained documentation of its funding sources from ciesin and the federal agencies involved . the material reviewed included federal awards audit reports , audited financial statements , defense contract audit agency reports , and nasa and department of agriculture inspector general reports . global change research program . federal agency officials we spoke with said such an examination would be useful in identifying the products relevant to the needs and priorities of the global research community . nasa's award to ciesin for the sedac was not competed . nasa based its justification for other than full and open competition on the belief that the award of a sole - source contract to ciesin for the sedac was statutorily authorized and , therefore , was an appropriate exception to the competitive requirements set forth in the competition in contracting act . however , we believe that the award to ciesin was not directed by statute . the comptroller general has held that language in congressional committee reports and other legislative history about how funds are expected to be spent do not impose legal requirements on federal agencies . only the language of the enacted law imposes such requirements . in evaluating ciesin's future funding level and building requirements , we discussed future funding plans for ciesin with federal agency officials , obtained information on ciesin's ongoing and planned activities , and discussed the funding levels needed to perform the sedac mission with nasa headquarters and goddard space flight center officials . further , we reviewed documents associated with the establishment and negotiation of the sedac contract , visited ciesin's main operating facilities , and obtained information on current and planned staffing levels from ciesin officials . we discussed nasa's role in overseeing work on the human dimensions of global change with nasa , national science foundation , and office of science and technology policy officials . we also reviewed documents and held discussions with national science foundation and ciesin officials related to ( 1 ) the national science foundation's approach to carrying out congressional direction to establish hdgc centers or a consortium and ( 2 ) the relationship of such centers to ciesin activities .