additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . this mwo had been ongoing for 15 months . aviation personnel said this occurred because at least some portion of the components stored at the depot had not been modified to the new configuration . one program sponsor told us his office was not required to buy initial spare parts or modify parts located at depots when they modified equipment in the field . however , the army's interim operating instructions require program sponsors to ensure all necessary integrated logistical support parts items are addressed . furthermore , according to army regulation 700-18 , ordering initial spare parts is part of the total integrated logistical support package for systems and end items . this regulation , which does not specifically refer to modifications , requires program sponsors to coordinate logistical support requirements with all agencies and activities concerned with initial materiel support for weapon systems and equipment . according to army headquarters officials , both the interim guidance and the regulation require program sponsors to provide initial spare parts and to modify spare parts , but neither may be clear enough to ensure that all program sponsors do it for modifications . in addition , army headquarters officials told us that when the army materiel command used configuration control boards , comprised of technical and administrative representatives , to ensure the mwos were complete and conformed with army policies and procedures , the need to buy spare parts was part of the approval process . the army materiel command lost this quality control when the reviews were decentralized to the program sponsors . army personnel at the four locations we visited told us that they had to take additional measures to support their equipment because they had experienced problems obtaining spare parts . they stated that if spare parts were not available , they took components from mwo kits . for example , the only way to obtain spare parts for the new fuel control panels — part of the apache attack helicopter fuel crossover modification — was to take them from kits that were needed to modify other apache helicopters . in addition , they had obtained parts outside the normal supply system by fabricating parts locally and by buying parts directly from contractors with local funds . these activities have led to higher costs and reduced efficiencies at units we visited . in reviewing 73 mwo cases , we attempted to determine whether the army had properly phased out old spare parts and added new items to its supply system to support newly modified equipment . because the army does not have an automated list of major components in mwos , we encountered difficulties in trying to make this analysis and could not identify a significantly large number of the major components . we compared information on those major components that we could identify with the army's budget justification report and inventory records and found many irregularities .