we did not independently verify the data . we performed our work between january and august 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . in commenting on a draft of this report , dod , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , gsa , and the office of federal procurement policy generally agreed with our findings . dod stated that facnet use will continue , even if a current congressional amendment repeals its mandated use . dod noted that it is incorporating ec into its business practices within the simplified acquisition threshold . dod believes agencies' procurement officials should be allowed to determine for their agencies those classes of contracts not suitable for facnet . nasa stated that it advocates a strategy that recognizes the variety of users , situations , and transaction types and moves to match them with the appropriate ec technology . nasa noted that the challenge remains to offer alternatives to agencies and their end users that provide attractive and cost - effective reasons for moving forward from a non - ec environment . nasa stated that it is working with other agencies committed to developing a coherent strategy and implementation approach that takes advantage of the internet , including moving toward a “single face” environment for advertising business opportunities . both gsa and the office of federal procurement policy expressed concern about the lack of comprehensive ec data . gsa stated that for the past 2 years the electronic commerce program office had been requesting monthly data from agencies on their facnet and non - facnet ec activities and , as the draft report noted , the response had not been good . gsa indicated that it had recommended to the office of federal procurement policy that ec statistical information be collected as part of the overall procurement data collection done through the federal procurement data system . the office of federal procurement policy stated that to ensure more accurate and timely data on ec activities , it planned to modify the federal procurement data system to collect ec statistical information . the office of federal procurement policy and gsa are working to get the change incorporated into the federal procurement data system by fiscal year 1999 . nasa's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii . dod , gsa , and the office of federal procurement policy provided oral comments . agency suggestions to improve the technical accuracy of the report have been incorporated in the text where appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to the director , office of management and budget ; the secretary of defense ; the administrators for gsa and nasa ; and other officials at the agencies included in our review . copies will also be made available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-4587 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . that strategy and implementation approach remain to be completed .