additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . dod's comments are reprinted in appendix i . we have incorporated dod's technical comments as appropriate . to determine whether the navy area theater ballistic missile defense program has met its milestones to date and its remaining schedule appears realistic , we interviewed agency officials and analyzed pertinent program cost , schedule , and requirements documentation . we analyzed the status of the program , the various factors that led to the 2-year slippage in the program schedule , and the technical risks that remain . to determine whether the tests being conducted or planned will be adequate to demonstrate the system's capabilities before production begins , we interviewed agency officials and analyzed pertinent test plans and schedules . we examined how many flight tests will be conducted before deployment of the uoes system , whether planned tests would realistically measure the system's performance , the risks associated with a compressed operational test schedule , and the risks associated with beginning low - rate initial production before conducting any system level operational tests . we interviewed responsible agency officials at the following locations: the office of the secretary of defense , headquarters , bmdo , and the office of the director , operational test and evaluation , in washington , d.c. ; the navy's program executive office ( theater air defense ) , program office for standard missile and vertical launching systems , and program office for the aegis weapon system , in washington , d.c. ; and the navy's operational test and evaluation force in norfolk , virginia . we conducted our work from september 1996 to august 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as you know , the head of a federal agency is required by 31 u.s.c . 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the senate committee on governmental affairs and the house committee on government reform and oversight not later than 60 days after the date of this report . a written statement also must be submitted to the senate and house committees on appropriations with the agency's first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the director of the bmdo ; and the secretaries of the army , the navy , and the air force . we will also make copies available to others on request . figure 2 displays the current testing and production schedule .