we agree . our point in the report was that the plan contains areas that could be strengthened , making it more useful to the congress . in discussing the strengths of nasa's performance plan , our report recognizes that the plan provided good linkage between strategic goals and the goals in the performance plan and that performance measures were generally objective , quantifiable , and useful for assessing progress . however , our report also clearly states that nasa's plan could provide a clearer picture of intended performance across the agency and does not fully portray how nasa's strategies and resources will help it achieve the plan's performance goals . the report also states that nasa's plan does not clearly explain how program activities relate to the budget ; and that there is no crosswalk to facilitate an understanding of the relationship between the specific program activities in the budget and the goals and measures in the performance plan . as stated in our report , nasa is in agreement to merge the budget justification and performance plan process in an effort to provide a crosswalk showing the relationship of performance targets to program activities and resources . in commenting on measures for major management challenges , nasa recognizes that the plan does not include measures to improve the management challenges we address . ( 3 ) to what extent does the agency's performance plan provide confidence that its performance information will be credible ? we conducted our work between december 1997 and april 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as requested , we plan no further distribution of this report until 7 days after its issue date . at that time we will send copies to the director of the office of management and budget , the administrator of nasa , and appropriate congressional committees . we will also make copies available to other interested parties on request . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4841 . the major contributors to this letter are listed in appendix ii . the following are gao's comments on nasa's letter dated april 24 , 1998 . responding to the issues raised in this report , nasa concludes that it has complied with the requirements of gpra . while these management issues may be addressed in other management documents , such as the chief financial officer's five - year plan , chief information officer's information technology implementation plan and implementation planning documents being developed by the office of procurement , to which nasa alludes , we did not review these documents ; neither does the performance plan include reference to them . referencing these documents in the plan would have been useful in providing specific sources for obtaining a more comprehensive understanding of the importance of these issues . we continue to believe that an acknowledgement of major management challenges and associated corrective actions would make the plan more useful for purposes of the results act . in addressing the issue of resource requirements to achieve performance , nasa correctly restates our concern that the plan only addresses funding requirements for fiscal year 1999 at the enterprise level .