the bradley test will not use any fbcb2 software . as with the abrams , command and control functionality will not be tested until the fbcb2 initial operational test and evaluation in october 1999 . for fbcb2 operational testing , both abrams and bradley platforms will use embedded battle command software version 3.1 . officials from both the abrams and bradley offices highlighted the development of the interface between their intravehicle digitized systems and the fbcb2 software as a concern . our assessment of the army's arguments follows . the army digitization program provided $47.6 million for fbcb2 research , development , test , and evaluation activities through fiscal year 1996 . the funds used were to buy fbcb2 prototype hardware and software used in the advanced warfighting experiment at the national training center . army officials stated that these funds were obligated prior to the establishment of the fbcb2 acquisition program and thus should not be included in this cost estimate . we found that the army had included these funds in its total life - cycle cost estimate and , while the source of the funds was the digitization program element , the explanation to the congress in appropriate descriptive summaries shows the funds were needed for activities related to the development of fbcb2 hardware and software . therefore , we believe these funds should be included in the derivation of the fbcb2 research , development , test , and evaluation cost estimate . our analysis shows that $2.8 million in fiscal year 1997 funding and $1.9 million in fiscal year 1998 funding were specified for fbcb2 platform ( shown as applique in table 1 ) integration activities and obligated by abrams and bradley program managers . army officials stated that a new army regulation requires that all platform - related costs be identified as part of the total platform cost and that these funds were given to and obligated by the abrams and bradley program offices . the first operational test will be the limited user test scheduled for the last quarter of fiscal year 1998 . its main objective is to test new hardware and software developed since the conclusion of the task force xxi advanced warfighting experiment . the new version of the fbcb2 computer is called “applique +.” one limitation of the test is that only “appliqued platforms” — the abrams m1a1d and the bradley m2a2 operation desert storm configurations — will be used . however , the army obtained these funds from the warfighter rapid acquisition program on the basis that they would be used to provide an improved design that was not part of the original fbcb2 budget . additionally , when requesting these funds , the army stated that , without this funding , fbcb2 would be at risk of not meeting its fiscal year 2000 deadline . in our opinion , since these funds were specifically requested , used , and obligated for fbcb2 , they should be considered part of the total research , development , test , and evaluation cost estimate . our analysis also shows that $7.8 million in fiscal year 1997 and $7.7 million in fiscal year 1998 were requested to complete system engineering and integration work on the tactical internet .