not stated . offset activities must be placed with a qualified united kingdom defense manufacturer . such companies are listed in a central registry and are from various regions of the country . most agreements specified that offset credit would only be granted for work with recognized united kingdom defense contractors . offset activities must be new and consist of products not previously purchased , products purchased from new suppliers , or new contracts for existing business valued at over $50,000 . several recent agreements specified that offset credit would be granted only for new business or an increase in business . offset proposals commonly submitted at time of contract tender for approval . no other mention of oversight . several agreements required regular reporting of offset activity progress . staff to review offset credit . singapore uses offsets to build its capability to produce , maintain , and upgrade its defense systems . it has required offsets on an ad hoc basis since the mid - 1980s , but has recently begun to consistently demand offsets . singapore's official policy requires all major purchases to be offset with a 30-percent offset performance goal . all the offset arrangements we reviewed emphasized defense - related projects . these arrangements required producing components for the weapon system being purchased or establishing a singaporean firm as a service center for a weapon system . singapore seeks technology transfer and training , and most offset agreements include multipliers or provide credits in excess of contractor costs for highly desired projects . for example , manufacturing technology transferred for one weapon system was valued at several times the cost to the company to provide it . generally , companies that had offset agreements with singapore considered the requirements manageable . table ii.1 summarizes singapore's offset guidelines and agreements . assist the ministry of defense in building up singapore's capabilities to provide necessary maintenance , production , and upgrade capability to support equipment and systems the ministry has procured . to be accomplished through technology transfer , technical assistance , participation in research and development , and marketing assistance . consistent with the guidelines . all “major” purchases of equipment , material , and services ; however , the guidelines do not provide a specific threshold . all the agreements we reviewed were for sales valued at over $5 million . direct offset is preferred but indirect offset is acceptable . most included a mix of direct and indirect offset transactions . at least 30 percent of main contract value , expressed as a goal . ranged from 25 percent to 30 percent . some agreements provided multipliers for activities such as technology transfer ( valued at up to 10 times the cost ) , training , or technical assistance . permitted banking in most agreements . 10 percent of unfulfilled obligation . 3 to 5 percent of unfulfilled obligation . concurrent with the duration of the main contract up to a maximum of 10 years , plus a 1-year grace period . agreements are generally consistent with the guidelines . generally not stated . firms owned by the ministry of defense are given first preference on bidding for work with u.s. contractors . agreements are generally consistent with the guidelines .