we disagree . conversions do not necessarily have to counteract plans to reduce the size of government . for example , dod currently plans to reduce civilian end strength by 26 percent between fiscal year 1993 and 2001 . if dod reduced civilian end strength by about 25 percent ( rather than 26 percent ) , it would have enough civilian authorizations to replace the 9,500 officers that we identified in this report . third , dod stated that the minimum military strength mandated by congress is an impediment to conversion . however , conversion of support positions from military to civilian status would not affect military capability , but merely lower the cost of getting support work done , freeing up funds that could be used to enhance modernization . as stated earlier , achievement of savings depends on elimination of the military authorizations freed up by conversion rather than reassigning to meet other needs . ( 3 ) does any law require that the position be staffed by a military person ? ( 4 ) is the position needed to support the normal rotation of servicemembers deployed overseas or afloat to assignments in conus ? as shown in table 2 , our criteria generally agreed with dod's . outside experts reviewed our criteria . the experts suggested modifications to the criteria , which we adopted . these officials believed that our criteria , as modified , adequately identified military to civilian conversion candidates . to apply our criteria , we judgmentally selected 37 career fields in the army , the navy , and the air force and , using our criteria , evaluated officer positions in those activities planned to be on the service personnel rolls at the end of fiscal year 1996 . we applied our criteria by comparing military position classifications contained in relevant service manuals to position classifications contained in the department of labor's dictionary of occupational titles . where we found corresponding positions in each , we proceeded to our second question . to answer our second question , the services provided us with the information specifying the number of positions in each career field scheduled to deploy to a theater of operations in a contingency . we also considered all positions assigned to naval vessels or installations outside conus to be deployable and thus military essential . next , we interviewed service officials to determine whether any laws required positions in our selected career fields to be staffed by active duty personnel . finally , we used service rotation policy factors or related information to determine how many positions must be reserved as military to maintain sea to shore or overseas to conus rotation opportunities . the number of positions left after asking these four questions and excluding positions from further consideration became the number of positions that we believe are candidates for conversion . we did not validate the need for any of the positions evaluated . for purposes of our analysis , we accepted all positions shown on personnel rolls for fiscal year 1996 as needed . we also did not attempt to determine whether converted positions should be staffed by federal civilian employees or contractors .