title 10 u.s.c . 2464 requires the secretary of defense to identify core logistics activities and to maintain them within dod depots unless the secretary specifically waives that requirement . title 10 u.s.c . 2466 — referred to as the “60 / 40” rule — states that no more than 40 percent of the depot maintenance funds made available in a given fiscal year may be spent for depot maintenance conducted by nonfederal personnel . title 10 u.s.c . 2469 provides that dod - performed depot maintenance and repair workloads valued at not less than $3 million cannot be changed to performance by another dod activity without the use of merit - based selection procedures for competitions among all dod depots and that such workloads cannot be changed to contractor performance without the use of competitive procedures for competitions among private and public sector entities . dod has requested relief from the last two provisions and from other statutes affecting competition and privatization . for example , the department provided congress a list of statutory encumbrances to privatization , including: 10 u.s.c . 2461 , which requires studies and reports before conversion to 10 u.s.c . 2465 , which prohibits contracts for performance of firefighting or security guard functions ; section 8050 of the dod appropriations act for fiscal year 1996 , which permits public - private competition , but requires certification that bids include comparable estimates of costs from public and private sector bidders ; section 317 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1987 , public law 99-661 , which prohibits the secretary of defense from contracting for the functions performed at crane army ammunition activity or mcalester army ammunition plant ; 10 u.s.c . 4532 , which requires that the army shall have supplies made by factories and arsenals if it can do so on an economical basis ; and 10 u.s.c . 2305 ( a ) ( 1 ) , which specifies that in preparing for the procurement of property or services to be acquired , the secretary of defense shall specify the agency's needs and solicit bids or proposals in a manner designed to achieve full and open competition . in may 1996 , dod proposed a provision that would allow the secretary of defense to acquire by contract from the private sector or any nonfederal government entities those commercial or industrial type supplies and services necessary or beneficial to the accomplishment of dod's authorized functions , notwithstanding any provision of title 10 or any statute authorizing appropriation for or making dod appropriations . “it is the sense of congress that there is a compelling need for the department of defense to articulate known and anticipated core maintenance and repair requirements , to organize the resources of the department of defense to meet those requirements economically and efficiently , and to determine what work should be performed by the private sector and how such work should be managed.” section 311 also directed the secretary of defense to develop a comprehensive policy on the performance of depot - level maintenance and repair for dod that maintains the core capability described in 10 u.s.c . 2464 and to report to the senate committee on armed services and house committee on national security .