title 10 u.s.c . 2464 provides for a “core” logistics capability to be identified by the secretary of defense and maintained by dod unless the secretary waives dod performance as not required for national defense . titles 10 u.s.c . 2469 affect the extent to which depot - level workloads can be converted to private - sector performance . title 10 u.s.c . 2466 prohibits the use of more than 40 percent of the funds made available in a fiscal year for depot - level maintenance or repair for private sector performance: the so - called “60 / 40” rule . title 10 u.s.c . 2469 provides that dod - performed maintenance and repair workloads valued at not less than $3 million cannot be changed to performance by another dod activity without the use of “merit - based selection procedures for competitions” among all dod depots and that such workloads cannot be changed to contractor performance without the use of “competitive procedures for competitions among private and public sector entities.” while each statute has some impact on the allocation of dod's depot - level workload , 10 u.s.c . 2469 is the primary impediment to privatization without a public - private competition . the competition requirements of 10 u.s.c . 2469 have broad application to all changes to the depot - level workload valued at not less than $3 million currently performed at dod installations , including the army depots at red river and letterkenny . the statute does not provide any exemptions from its competition requirements and , unlike most of the other laws governing depot maintenance , does not contain a waiver provision . further , there is nothing in the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 — the authority for the brac recommendations — that , in our view , would permit the implementation of a recommendation involving privatization outside the competition requirements of 10 u.s.c . the determination of whether any single conversion to private - sector performance conforms to the requirements of 10 u.s.c . 2469 depends upon the facts applicable to the particular conversion . dod has not yet finalized its privatization plans for either the letterkenny or red river depot nor , as of the date of this report , has dod informed us how it plans to comply with the statutory restrictions in these proposed conversions . it is unclear whether the planned conversions will comply with the requirements of existing law . we recommend that the secretary of defense direct the secretary of the army to take the following actions . develop required capability in military depots to sustain core depot repair and maintenance capability for army systems and conduct and adequately document a risk assessment for mission essential workloads being considered for privatization . use competitive procedures , where applicable , to assure the cost - effectiveness of privatizing army depot maintenance workloads . evaluate the cost - effectiveness of consolidating all of the letterkenny tactical missile workload at the tobyhanna depot , including an assessment of the fixed cost savings impact on the workload currently maintained at tobyhanna .