the upgraded missile is the aim - 9x . as a part of the alternative evaluation process before starting the aim - 9x program , the services considered acquiring one of the modern foreign missiles such as the russian aa - 11 , the israeli python 4 , or the british asraam as an alternative to developing a new u.s. missile . dod determined , however , that none of these missiles was able to meet all of the u.s. requirements . the services conducted an evaluation of the asraam , including a 6-month foreign comparison test that included firing the missile from a u.s. f - 16 aircraft . the asraam is electrically and physically compatible with u.s. aircraft and uses the same infrared sensor as the aim - 9x . the evaluation , however , showed that asraam does not meet all of the u. s. performance requirements . also , the evaluation showed that , because of the additional time and cost that would be needed to upgrade , test , and integrate asraam for u.s. aircraft , it offered no advantage over the proposed aim - 9x missile . during the 2-year aim - 9x concept development phase , the services analyzed user needs , current and future threats , and available technology to determine the requirements for the new missile . the resulting aim - 9x system requirement has five key performance parameters: the ability to operate during the day or at night ; the ability to operate over land and at sea in the presence of infrared countermeasures ; weight , size , and electrical compatibility with all current u.s. fighters and the f - 22 ; the ability to acquire , track , and fire on targets over a wider area than the aim - 9m ; and a high probability that a missile launched will reach and kill its target . the analyses showed that user requirements could be met and that technical risk could be reduced , by modifying the existing aim - 9m and developing a new targeting / cueing system . the aim - 9x missile is planned to have increased resistance to countermeasures and improved target acquisition capability over the aim - 9m . it will have a new infrared seeker , a tracker to interpret what the seeker sees , a streamlined missile body , and rocket motor thrust vectoring for improved maneuvering . it will be carried on all u.s. fighter aircraft , including the f / a - 18 , f - 15 , f - 16 , and f - 22 . the aim - 9x missile development program is designed to balance the requirements for a more capable short - range missile with the users' limited resources and the need to field the new missile as soon as possible . key elements of the approved development plan are strategies to reduce technical risk and incentives to lower cost and ensure schedule performance . by early 1999 , when the aim - 9x missile design is expected to be finalized and flight tests are underway , a more accurate assessment of the program status can be made . technology problems are often the cause of cost growth and schedule delays in development programs .