the results can be dramatic . in the first 4 months of fiscal year 1996 , veterans' affairs exceeded by almost 200 percent the number of card purchases it had made in all of fiscal year 1995 . card use is also growing at the department of the army , which has the largest agency card program . in the first 10 months of fiscal year 1995 , the army more than doubled its fiscal year 1994 card purchases , from over 310,000 to over 701,000 . according to army data , that number could increase to almost 1.4 million if the army were to make 80 percent of its micropurchases with the card . the emphasis in the purchase card program has been on using the cards to allow staff in program offices to make simple purchases . at the same time , however , there have been concerns that placing the cards in the hands of program staff would lead to increased abuse . we found no evidence of increased abuse . in fact , with the controls required by the purchase card contract and some tools that agencies have developed , purchase card use can be closely monitored . the purchase card contract requires that agencies have certain specified procedures in place before any purchase cards can be issued to agency staff . for example , agencies must have procedures to identify , by name , those persons who are authorized to use cards ; set spending limits for cardholders and offices , including single purchase limits and monthly limits ; approve purchases and ensure funds are available before goods or services are bought ; and reconcile and approve cardholder statements . agencies may add other management and financial controls they deem necessary . also , agencies have recently been able to obtain rmbcs electronic data that identify purchases by cardholder , approving official , date , dollar amount , merchant type , and merchant name . those agencies in our review that have begun using this electronic data are finding that the card leaves a trail that is more complete and easier to follow than traditional paper records . in addition to these procedural controls , agencies have another safeguard against fraudulent use of the card by unauthorized individuals — they can dispute any purchases they find questionable . in such cases , the contract requires rmbcs to issue a credit against that purchase until the dispute is resolved . one organization that has used the electronic data is the postal service . postal inspection service officials developed surveillance software that allows them to analyze thousands of card transactions from a remote location with limited manpower . they are able to analyze transactions by cardholder , approving official , dollar amount , date of purchase , vendor name , vendor type , vendor city , and other attributes . at the recommendation of the inspection service , the surveillance software is being made available to appropriate postal service managers nationwide . postal service officials believe that this will improve their oversight of the card program , since the electronic reviews are more expedient than reviews of paper records .