identify vulnerabilities in the system . establish priorities to address the system's identified vulnerabilities . develop a short - term approach with immediate actions to correct significant security weaknesses . develop a long - term and comprehensive national strategy that combines new technology , procedures , and better training for security personnel . the gore commission was charged with reporting its initial findings on aviation security in 45 days , including plans ( 1 ) to deploy new technology to detect the most sophisticated explosives and ( 2 ) to pay for that technology . we are pleased that the gore commission's september 9 , 1996 , report contains many recommendations similar to those we made . the commission recommended a budget amendment for fiscal year 1997 of about $430 million to implement some of the 20 recommendations made in the report . however , the commission stated that it did not settle the issue of how security costs will be financed in the long run . the commission will continue to review aviation safety , security , and air traffic control modernization over the next several months and is scheduled to issue its final report by february 1 , 1997 . given the urgent need to improve aviation security and faa's less - than - effective history of addressing long - standing safety and security concerns , it will be important for the congress to oversee the implementation of new security measures once they are agreed upon . therefore , we believe that congress should establish goals and performance measures and require periodic reports from faa and other responsible federal agencies on the progress and effectiveness of efforts to improve aviation security . to sustain the gore commission's momentum and its development of long - term actions to improve aviation security , we concluded in our classified august 1996 report that the commission should be supported by staff composed of the best available government and industry experts on terrorism and civil aviation security . we recommended the following: in view of the short time frame for the gore commission and the expertise within faa's aviation security advisory committee's working group , both groups should be melded together . detecting liquid explosives . faa is developing two different electromagnetic systems for screening bottles and other containers . a development issue is processing speed . these devices may be available within 2 years . the cost is projected to be between $25,000 and $125,000 each . although a number of commercially available trace devices could be used on passengers if deemed necessary , passengers might find their physical intrusiveness unacceptable . in june 1996 , the national research council , for example , reported that there may be a number of health , legal , operational , privacy , and convenience concerns about passenger - screening devices . faa and other federal agencies are developing devices that passengers may find more acceptable . the price is about $65,000 . faa estimates that the cost to provide about 3,000 of these devices to screen passengers would be about $1.9 billion . a number of trace devices in development will detect residue or vapor from explosives on passengers' hands . two devices screen either documents or tokens that have been handled by passengers .