interests section . in discussing this announcement , the attorney general stated that measures would be taken to ensure that persons who claimed a genuine need for protection , which they believed could not be satisfied by applying at the u.s . interests section , would be examined before their return to cuba . she also announced at that time that remaining cubans at guantanamo bay — about 18,500 as of june 7 , 1995 — would be considered for parole into the united states , excluding those found to be ineligible for parole due to criminal activity in cuba , in the united states , or while in safe haven and those with certain serious medical conditions . within the executive branch , an interagency working group is responsible for developing strategies for implementing the cuban migration policy . the working group is chaired by the national security council and includes representatives from the state department's bureaus for inter - american affairs and population , refugees , and migration and the legal advisor's office ; the department of justice's ins and crs ; the defense department's offices of the secretary of defense ( humanitarian and refugee affairs ) and joint chiefs of staff ; and the coast guard . interests section in havana is responsible for processing the more than 20,000 expected cuban applicants for u.s. entry , annually . as of august 1995 , the interests section had increased its processing staff to 6 full - time consular officers and about 3 temporary - duty consular officers , 4 ins officers , about 40 local nationals , and 4 u.s. and third country contract hires . consular officers at the interests section process immigrant visa applications and prescreen parole applicants ; the refugee coordinator prescreens refugee applicants . ins adjudicates refugee and parole applications in havana and parole applications at guantanamo bay . the defense department is responsible for carrying out the safe haven program at guantanamo bay . the office of the secretary of defense and the joint chiefs of staff oversee safe haven operations , and the u.s. atlantic command has operational responsibility . joint task force ( jtf ) - 160 executes the safe haven mission at guantanamo — caring for the inhabitants , providing for their security and protection , and preparing them for travel to the united states . jtf - 160 is also charged with the safety and security of u.s. personnel at guantanamo bay and the security of the station itself . the u.s. coast guard interdicts rafters at sea and , until may 2 , 1995 , it took them to safe haven at guantanamo bay . since may 2 , 1995 , most cubans interdicted at sea have been returned by the coast guard to cuba . civilian agencies implement various components of the safe haven program . the department of state's bureau for population , refugees , and migration provides assistance to the safe haven population at guantanamo bay through a grant to the world relief corporation . at guantanamo bay , crs assists in parole processing and provides human resource services , such as family reunification , conciliation and mediation assistance and training , and recreation and education .