this difference can be significant . for example , a 20-year - old female weighing 130 pounds would be allowed to gain about 8 pounds of fat by the age of 40 in the army , while in the navy and the marine corps no increase would be allowed . for a 20-year - old male weighing 200 pounds the difference would amount to about 12 pounds . dod guidance allows relaxation of the cardiovascular and muscular endurance standards with age , but do not address this issue in the case of body fat standards . army officials argued that it is realistic to reduce body fat standards as personnel age , but navy officials argued that relaxing the standards implies that health is less important as men and women age . researchers acknowledge that weight becomes progressively more difficult to maintain with age . there is a gradual loss of muscle mass as one ages , which may be replaced with fat over time . nonetheless , consistent with a focus on good health , neither the 1998 national academy of sciences report nor the 1995 federal dietary guidelines for americans found justification for allowing an increase in body weight with age . while some flexibility and discretion should be available to the services in setting their physical fitness policies , all of the services should follow clear and consistent policies and adjustments for age and gender should be scientifically based . therefore , we recommend that the secretary of defense revise the physical fitness guidance to establish clear dod - wide policy for age - and gender - based adjustments to general fitness and body fat standards , requiring all services to derive them scientifically , clearly document the basis used , and submit exceptions for approval and establish a dod - wide approach , based on current scientific research , to estimating body fat percentages . we also recommend that the secretary of defense take steps to ensure that the services adhere to the policy requiring physical fitness testing of all servicemembers , regardless of age . dod agreed with our recommendations . it said that it was already analyzing revisions to the standards: that considerations of age and gender will be required to be scientifically derived , with any exceptions to the policy submitted to the secretary for approval ; and that the services will be required to provide a statement in the annual fitness report that they are testing all military members , regardless of age . dod also said that it has been working toward establishing a single approach to body fat measurement and that a change to establish a dod - wide approach to estimating body fat will be included in the revised fitness and body fat policy to be completed by the end of 1999 . physical fitness oversight problems have persisted in dod without resolution for a considerable period of time . moreover , dod has not enforced the annual reporting requirement or identified a common set of statistics needed to assess fitness . consequently , it is unable to assess the effectiveness of the program . comparisons of limited data we were able to obtain raised questions about program effectiveness .