inchon . as with the case of the mhc ships , savings could also be achieved if the navy were to decide to remove this platform from its fleet . however , because the navy would still have to provide command , control , and support services from other navy ships or shore locations and incur costs in doing so , it is more difficult to estimate the savings to be achieved . dod partially agreed with our finding that the mhc's short on - station time and reserve status would limit its role in overseas locations . dod responded that a contract modification was in place that would increase the at - sea operational time . however , dod also responded that the bulk of the mhc class ships are going to ultimately be assigned to the reserve forces . dod did not agree with our finding that a dedicated mcs ship is not essential , stating that the navy has long held the tenet that a ship that provides effective command and control needs to be deployed with the operating forces . we acknowledged in this report that command , control , and support are essential during military operations . however , we also reported that these functions could be provided from other navy ships or shore - based locations . therefore , we do not believe the need for an mcs ship is as great as other more pressing needs , such as the need to develop the capability to conduct shallow water mine countermeasures . dod agreed with our finding that cost savings could be achieved by reducing the inventory of mine warfare ships , but did not agree that reducing the inventory of ships is a viable option . as discussed above , we and others believe that reducing the inventory of ships is a viable option . dod noted that the actual annual savings associated with not operating additional mhc ships , projected at $3.6 million each , would not be completely realized due to decommissioning and deactivation costs . as previously noted , the dod inspector general included deactivation costs in estimated cost savings and projected a 5-year , $69.2 million cost savings after deducting deactivation costs . the experience of operation desert storm revealed significant weaknesses in the navy's ability to conduct effective sea mine countermeasures , and the damage sustained by two navy warships during that operation clearly demonstrated the impact that enemy sea mines and obstacles can play in military operations . the navy has since undertaken a number of projects to improve its mine countermeasures capabilities . however , critical limitations and delays in the delivery of new capabilities remain . the navy is pursuing a number of different projects to enhance current capabilities and develop new ones ; however , it has not undertaken a total systems approach to identify a baseline of capabilities , develop alternatives , and establish priorities among those alternatives . many of these projects have historically experienced starts and stops and are continuing to experience delays in delivery . although the navy has identified the ability to conduct mine countermeasures in shallow water depths as a key priority , it still has only very limited capabilities in this area .