as you requested , we reviewed the meads program . specifically , this report ( 1 ) discusses the unique capabilities that meads will add to u.s. air and missile defense , ( 2 ) evaluates the development cost of meads and its affordability within the expected ballistic missile defense budget , and ( 3 ) assesses the impact that international development will have on meads cost and capability . however , germany and the united states disagree on the definition of a third party . one of the german contractors participating in the meads program employs a british citizen and germany wishes to give access to meads classified data to this employee . dod security officials told us that they do not believe that the german government could penalize the british employee if meads data was not safeguarded . german and italian contractor officials said that , with the formation of the european union , european citizens cross country boundaries just as u.s. citizens cross state borders . the officials said that if a contractor's ability to hire personnel is limited by the u.s. interpretation of a third party , the meads program may lose valuable expertise . if meads is designed to meet established requirements , it will give warfighters capabilities that are not present in any existing or planned air and missile defense systems . meads should be able to engage a wide range of targets , be easily transported by small transport aircraft , be capable of moving cross country and over unimproved roads , and be sufficiently lethal to destroy both conventional warheads and weapons of mass destruction . because of these unique capabilities , war - fighting commands place a high priority on the acquisition of meads . dod believes that jointly developing and producing meads with u.s. allies will reduce the u.s. investment in the weapon system and strengthen political ties , creating a more effective coalition force and increasing the allies' ability to defend themselves . however , dod does not know whether it is willing to share information to create a truly interoperable system , whether an international program can utilize existing u.s. missile system technology to its maximum advantage , how it will fund the u.s. share of the international program , or how it can alter the meads system or acquisition strategy to make the program affordable and acceptable to its partners . in addition , potential security risks exist because security specialists were not involved in negotiating the international agreement . an international program impacts the political ties between the united states and its allies , and its outcome impacts dod's ability to negotiate future collaborative efforts . because dod is considering other cooperative programs , the meads experience could provide valuable lessons . these lessons include careful consideration of all available program information before entering into an agreement to jointly develop a weapon system and assurance that funds will be available for program execution .