the army discontinued the test in 1990 . in the 1970s , the air force adopted an earlier version of the test and by 1987 categorized each of its enlisted occupations into one of eight physical demand categories . the air force currently requires all recruits to take the strength aptitude test at a military entrance processing station . the test requires recruits to lift weights on the incremental lifting machine starting at 40 pounds ; the weight is then increased in 10-pound increments until the recruit ( 1 ) cannot complete a lift , ( 2 ) asks to stop , or ( 3 ) lifts 110 pounds ( the maximum for any occupation in the air force ) . an air force counselor uses the results to match recruits to occupations based on the eight physical demand categories and screens out applicants who the test results indicate would have difficulty performing physically demanding jobs . the navy considered using a strength test to screen applicants for entry into physically demanding military occupations and concluded that more women than men would have been excluded from such jobs . the navy concluded , however , that women were already meeting the physical demands of their occupations and , for that reason , did not implement its test or categorize its occupations by physical demand . similarly , the marine corps has not adopted an occupationally based strength test or categorized its occupations by physical demand . except for the army , the services have not collected data on servicemembers' ability to do physically demanding jobs and have little basis on which to conclude that servicemembers are not having problems . we are concerned that some servicemembers may have difficulty doing some physically demanding tasks based on the results of a limited survey conducted by the army research institute ( ari ) and anecdotal information we obtained in interviews with servicemembers . however , given limitations on the ari survey and our interviews , we were not able to assess the significance of the problem . in 1989 , 1994 , and 1995 , ari surveyed servicemembers in selected army occupations . in 1989 , ari surveyed 21 combat and noncombat occupations and found that 59 to 84 percent of male and female servicemembers in 7 selected noncombat occupations reported no difficulty in lifting objects . in the 1994-95 follow - on survey of 10 of 267 occupations , ari found that 51 to 79 percent of servicemembers reported no difficulty in lifting objects in some of the same occupations as those looked at in the 1989 survey . because the surveys did not address the significance of the problem and rely on self - reported data , the results must be used with caution . on the other hand , the results also suggest that the army may have servicemembers who have had difficulty doing physical tasks . the other services have not done any systematic assessment of the capability of their personnel to perform the physically demanding aspects of their jobs . according to dod and army officials , the services rely upon the absence of complaints filtering up from operational units as an indicator that widespread performance problems do not exist .