additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the schedule contained three contracting initiatives for batteries . these programs include long - term and direct delivery contracts . the schedule information for these initiatives consisted of the year that each contract was awarded and other contract information . dla's schedule contained one prime vendor and one contracting initiative for material handling equipment supplies . the prime vendor program is designed to provide material handling supplies and pallets used at distribution depot in two regions ; the schedule indicated that there were at least 13 potential customers in one region , but did not identify any potential customers for the second region . the schedule information consisted of a june 1998 planned contract award for one region but did not include milestones for a concept test and evaluation phase , indicate the extent to which the prime vendor would actually be used within each region , identify a planned activation date for applicable locations , or project a date when the prime vendor would be in place at all locations . the one contracting initiative is a long - term contract for parts used to support the 463l cargo handling system . dla indicated 13 u.s. locations , as well as overseas locations , that use these parts but plans to award a contract that covers only 2 of these locations . the schedule information consisted of a planned contract award date of september 1998 . dla's schedule contained two prime vendor and one contracting initiative for parts supporting land - based vehicles , such as trucks and aircraft towing tractors . the first prime vendor is designed to provide over 2,000 items needed to support the m9 armored combat earthmover . the second prime vendor program is designed to provide supply support for the m939 series 5-ton truck . the schedule indicated an estimated award date of august 1998 for the first initiative , but there was no schedule information provided for the second initiative . the schedule did not contain an implementation plan for either prime vendor program . specifically , the schedule did not include milestones for a concept test and evaluation phase , indicate the extent to which the prime vendor will actually be used by dod operating locations , a planned activation date for those locations , or a projected date when the prime vendor would be fully implemented . the one contracting initiative is a long - term contract covering parts for cranes and aircraft towing tractors . the schedule information consisted of a planned contract award date and other contract information . the schedule contained five contracting initiatives for maritime system supplies . these five initiatives involve a combination of corporate contracting , long - term contracting , and direct delivery concepts . the contracts cover a range of items , including valves , filters , and pumps used on navy vessels . the schedule provided planned contract award dates for these initiatives . the schedule contained 14 contracting initiatives for other categories of supplies and 2 electronic commerce initiatives .