additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we performed our work at the following locations . defense personnel and readiness military personnel policy office , defense financial accounting system , kansas city , missouri ; denver , colorado ; and indianapolis , indiana ; defense manpower data center , seaside , california ; air force directorate of operations training division , washington , d.c. ; air force personnel center , randolph air force base , texas ; air force directorate of personnel military compensation and legislation division and rated management division , washington , d.c. ; air combat command , langley air force base , virginia ; bureau of naval personnel , office of aviation community management , navy total force programming , manpower and information resource management division , washington , d.c. ; navy manpower analysis team , commander in chief u.s. atlantic fleet , marine corps combat development command , force structure division , marine corps deputy chief of staff for manpower and reserve affairs department , washington , d.c. ; army office of the deputy chief of staff for plans force integration and analysis , alexandria , virginia ; army office of the deputy chief of staff for personnel , washington , d.c. ; congressional budget office , washington , d.c. we performed our review from march 1996 to december 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . norman l. jessup , jr. patricia f. blowe patricia w. lentini the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . the scope and methodology of our review are described in appendix i . acip , commonly referred to as flight pay , is intended as additional pay to attract and retain officers in a military aviation career . the amount of acip varies from $125 a month for an aviator with 2 years or less of aviation service to $650 a month for 6 years to 18 years of service . the navy offers long - term acp contracts of up to 5 years and a maximum of $12,000 a year to eligible pilots in aircraft types with a critical pilot shortage . the marine corps offered short - term acp contracts of 1 or 2 years at $6,000 a year through fiscal year 1996 . because the services' position descriptions for nonflying positions do not show the specific duties of the positions , we could not determine whether all or some part of the duties of the nonflying positions can only be performed by aviators . consequently , we could not determine whether the number of nonflying positions could be further reduced .