this testing will continue into 1999 . in - flight rcs measurements will begin in 1999 and continue into 2002 . mean time between maintenance is a measure of aircraft reliability defined as the total number of aircraft flight hours divided by the total number of aircraft maintenance actions in the same period . the f - 22 goal is 3 flight hours between maintenance actions by the time the f - 22 reaches system maturity . the air force estimated that by the time the f - 22 reaches system maturity ( 100,000 flight hours , or about year 2008 ) , the f - 22 will only require maintenance every 3.1 flight hours . a reliability computer model was used to develop this estimate by using factors like the design of systems on the aircraft and scheduled maintenance activities . throughout development and operational flight testing , maintenance data is to be collected from the 500th through the 5,000th hour of flight testing to update the maintenance estimate . data will continue to be collected about operational usage of the aircraft through system maturity to verify requirements . the payload parameter is the number of air - to - air missiles , medium and short range , the f - 22 is to carry when conducting an air superiority mission and not attacking enemy ground targets . payload is a key parameter because the f - 22 is designed to carry missiles in its internal weapons bay , not externally . carrying weapons externally increases an aircraft's radar cross section and can allow easier detection by enemy radar . the air force estimated that the f - 22 will meet the payload goal of carrying six aim - 120c medium - range missiles and two aim - 9x short - range missiles internally . weapons bay testing is scheduled for mid - 2000 to determine how well the missiles can exit the weapons bay when launched . the combat radius parameter refers to the nautical miles the f - 22 is required to fly to achieve its primary mission of air superiority . this mission requires the f - 22 to be able to fly a certain distance subsonically and a certain distance supersonically to achieve the mission . the air force estimated the f - 22 will exceed its combat radius goal by 23 percent . unfavorable estimates for two of three major subparameters — fuel usage and aircraft weight — are not unfavorable enough to prevent the f - 22 from meeting its combat radius goal . performance flight testing to help compute the aircraft's combat radius performance , as well as other aerodynamic capabilities , is scheduled to begin in late 1998 and end the third quarter of 2001 . the radar detection range parameter refers to the number of nautical miles at which the f - 22 radar should be able to detect enemy threats or potential targets . the radar needs to be able to detect enemy targets with small radar signatures at sufficient distance to ensure the f - 22 can engage the enemy first . the air force estimated that the f - 22 radar will exceed the established radar goal by 17 percent .