additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . central training is different from unit mission training . unit mission training is undertaken by operational units to maintain the units' required readiness in their primary combat , combat support , or combat service support missions . central training is the training of individual military members in formal courses . dod stated in its may 1997 report of the quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) that a steady increase in investment in modern equipment to an annual level of $60 billion is required to fulfill the defense strategy . to achieve modernization goals , dod plans to reduce the cost of its infrastructure , which includes central training . changes in and programmed savings from the army's distance learning program also contributed to lower programmed funding for professional and skill training . in 1998 , funding for the management of this program was moved from the central training infrastructure to another infrastructure category . in addition , funding was reduced beginning in 1999 to reflect both training load decreases and projected savings through the army's ongoing investment in distance learning technology . these savings are to accrue as classroom training time is shortened and student travel and per diem costs are reduced . army training officials informed us that the army continues to fully implement its distance learning program , so the service can achieve the savings planned from the program , but substantial savings are not projected to begin until 2004 because of the lengthy implementation process . the decline in army funding would have appeared even greater if the army had not received additional funding for its professional and skill training programs from defense - wide central training activities . the defense reform initiative directed the transfer of the national defense university operation and maintenance funding from the defense - wide accounts to the army . this increased army funding by $111 million in 1999 . total funding for aviation and flight training was projected to be about $1 billion lower in the 1999 fydp than in the 1998 fydp . this occurred primarily because planned procurement funding in the army's undergraduate pilot training program was transferred to programs that are not included in central training . army training and budget officials stated that the funding will be allocated to line units based on army priorities , although training programs will still receive equipment that is excess to the line units' needs .