additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . the results of our analysis are shown in table 4 . the problems being experienced with the m1 tank's rear engine module is illustrative of the type of problems the army faces with the other parts shortages . as of december 7 , 1995 , there were only eight serviceable m1 tank rear engine modules in the supply system , and all eight modules were in prepositioned war reserve . at the same time , there were backorders for 75 modules , of which 53 were high priority backorders . according to army officials , there are sufficient engine rear modules in the supply system , but most of the modules are unserviceable because of a shortage of repair parts to fix the modules . the officials attribute the shortage of repair parts to ( 1 ) insufficient demand forecasting due to bosnia operations , ( 2 ) implementation of an engine service life extension program before the needed repair parts were in the system , ( 3 ) worsening condition of returns from the field ( the returned items require extensive repairs ) , and ( 4 ) a reduced number of qualified part suppliers in the industrial base . some army officials in the maintenance community believe that an m1a1 overhaul program is needed because of the fleet's age and because there is no new tank production planned . the officials acknowledge that reported readiness rates are high . however , they are concerned that there may be latent deficiencies in the tanks that are not detected during readiness inspections and that these deficiencies could affect the tanks' operational capabilities during a conflict . to address the potential latent deficiencies , the officials proposed a joint proof of principle test program with general dynamics ( the m1 manufacturer ) to essentially overhaul the m1a1 tanks . the proposed joint effort is referred to as the aim xxi program , and the officials believe that it would produce a better - than - original m1a1 tank that would enhance training , be more reliable , and have sustained go - to - war capability . additionally , the officials believe that the program would reduce the tank's life - cycle operating and support costs . under the aim xxi proof of principle test , the army would bring 17 m1a1 tanks to the anniston army depot and completely rebuild and update them with the latest modifications . the estimated cost of this effort is $559,000 per tank , about $9.5 million total .