are you aware of this program ? yes = 25 no = 3 does your department currently use eximbank's working capital guarantee program ? yes = 13 no = 12 overall , how would you characterize your department's experience with eximbank's program ? 1 = very positive 7 = generally positive 3 = neutral 0 = generally negative 0 = very negative 2 = not sure n = 13 in your opinion , which of the following reasons best explains why your department has not used eximbank's working capital program ? ( please rank up to 3 reasons by placing “1” by the most important reason , “2” by the second most important , and “3” by the third most important. ) the following are gao's comments on sba's letter dated november 26 , 1996 . data was not readily available for us to make a comparable statement regarding the average number of employees per company that have obtained working capital loans guaranteed from eximbank . eximbank staff are presently located at 4 of the 19 useacs currently in operation . eximbank has indicated that it believes a combination of its regional office staff and city / state participants would be able to respond to regional useac needs for eximbank services . the following are gao's comments on eximbank's letter dated december 2 , 1996 . we modified the report to better highlight the difference in sba's and eximbank's credit qualification requirements . eximbank requires borrowers to have a positive net worth ; sba does not . eximbank's requirement is stipulated in its working capital guarantee program instructions . also , proaction agency , the consultant commissioned by eximbank and sba to evaluate harmonization efforts , reported in may 1996 that this requirement was a key difference between each agency's program . although eximbank officials stated that they have the flexibility to waive this requirement , they acknowledged that , in practice , there were only a few instances in which this was done . the default information presented in the report is not intended to demonstrate differences in default rates between the u.s. division and the delegated authority lender program . further , we did not include in the report any comparison of claims after a default under eximbank's or sba's program . rather , the report provides information on the number of defaults . the report recognizes that sba's cost estimates for administering its export working capital program do not include the time or costs for the agency's district office staff involved in handling export working capital guarantees . also , please identify the top three most important factors by placing a “1” by the most important factor , a “2” by the second most important factor , and a “3” by the third most important factor . if there is a demand , how likely would your bank be to provide export working capital loans for less than $833,333 to small businesses with whom you have an established banking relationship ? ( please check one. ) if there is a demand , how likely would your bank be to provide export working capital loans for less than $833,333 to small businesses with whom you do not have established banking relationship ? ( please check one. )