additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . technical comments have been incorporated as appropriate . as arranged with your office , we plan no further distribution of this letter until 30 days from its issue date , unless you publicly announce the letter's contents earlier . at that time , we will make copies available to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant , marine corps ; the directors , defense logistics agency and defense special weapons agency ; and other interested parties . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you have any questions about this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . to describe the department of defense's ( dod ) process for allocating funds , we reviewed dod's april 1994 management guidance that addressed how dod handles funding responsibilities for the defense restoration program , and a march 1998 update to this guidance . in addition , we reviewed supplemental program guidance , dod's april 1996 defense instruction on the defense environmental restoration program , and components' restoration guidance . we interviewed officials at the environmental security office , the defense logistics agency ( dla ) , the defense special weapons agency , and the military services about the implementation of dod's guidance for allocating funds . to identify reported schedule changes due to funding , we compared automated funding data obtained from the defense components showing planned and obligated cleanup funding by installation with automated information from dod's annual reports on cleanup schedules affected by funding . we discussed funding changes and effects with environmental and budget officials and compared what was reported for the installations in dod's annual reports for fiscal years 1995 and 1996 with command and installation records at the following selected commands and field installations . army materiel command , alexandria , virginia naval facilities engineering command , chesapeake activity , washington , d.c . naval facilities engineering command , atlantic division , norfolk , virginia air force aeronautical systems center , dayton , ohio dla defense distribution region east , new cumberland , pennsylvania dugway proving ground , utah badger army ammunition plant , wisconsin dahlgren naval surface warfare center , virginia yorktown naval weapons station , virginia camp lejeune marine corps base , north carolina tinker air force base , oklahoma air force plant number 4 , texas former lake ontario ordnance works , new york we conducted our review from march 1997 to july 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . beginning in fiscal year 1997 , with the devolvement of the defense environmental restoration account ( dera ) , the responsibility for planning , programming , and budgeting transferred from the office of the secretary of defense to the individual military components .