some data were not readily available . in other cases , dod decided not to collect the detailed data that would be required to address specific sections of the act . dod used budget data previously presented to the congress and subsequent obligational data to estimate costs and savings from prior brac actions and applied these to future brac actions . dod reported it could not meet this requirement because the estimates it submitted to the commissions were based on the secretary of defense's recommendations and were not the commissions' final , approved brac recommendations to the president and the congress . according to dod , differences in the secretary's recommendations and the commissions' final brac actions created differences , sometimes significant , in costs and savings estimates . in addition , dod's estimates of costs and savings submitted to the commissions excluded the costs associated with environmental restoration , since the brac criteria purposely excluded these costs as closure and realignment recommendations were developed . environmental restoration costs were added to budget estimates for brac costs and savings after all brac actions became final . in general , dod provided information on presentation requirements in subsections 2824 ( c ) ( 1 ) through ( c ) ( 8 ) where data were available , but often the information is incomplete . for example , dod did not display its savings data by service , brac round , type of facility , fiscal year , and budget category as required because it had difficulty locating specific cost of base realignment actions ( cobra ) analyses that were needed to develop complete comparisons . dod did not have complete information available to compare costs by fiscal year , spending category , and installation type as required by subsections 2824 ( b ) and ( c ) . this type of comparison would require the specific cobra analysis associated with each recommendation that the secretary of defense sent to the commissions ( and each final cobra analysis performed by the commissions ) . dod officials told us they did not provide the information prescribed in subsection 2824 ( c ) ( 6 ) because data available did not allow health costs to be isolated from other costs . dod also did not provide the required information in subsection 2824 ( c ) ( 7 ) , which required it to report savings attributable to changes in military force structure . according to a dod official , brac accounts contained no costs or savings attributable to military force structure reductions . finally , dod did not provide the required information in subsection 2824 ( c ) ( 8 ) , which required it to show , by service , fiscal year , and type of facility , the savings due to lower support costs for military installations that were closed or realigned . dod did , however , include an aggregate estimate of lower support costs in its savings estimates . dod provided an estimate , by fiscal year , of costs and savings from two future brac rounds in response to subsection 2824 ( b ) ( 10 ) , but it did not report amounts by service .