ii ) . at locations where adequate private housing is available , dod stated that it will not support construction of new government housing and will carefully review proposals to replace deteriorated government housing . dod also stated that it is pursuing initiatives to promote greater private investment in housing for military families and is studying potential changes to the housing allowance program that could result in correcting housing inequities and other problems . further , dod stated that it plans to revisit procedures for determining housing requirements and has chartered a study that will address the relationship between quality of life and family housing . with regard to our recommendation that the secretary of defense direct installation commanders to redesignate , to the maximum practical level , government housing reserved for senior personnel for use by junior personnel , dod stated that current policy allows installation commanders to give priority to lower grades and that dod will not superimpose an overall policy that would obstruct local retention objectives and operational effectiveness . although we understand dod's concern , we believe that it would be beneficial for dod to remind installation commanders of the junior member housing problem and to encourage the commanders to consider the current policy when evaluating use of existing on - base housing . dod did not agree with our draft recommendation to equalize the average amounts paid by service members living in private and government housing . dod stated that requiring the one third of military members that live in government housing to pay a portion of their housing costs would reduce their benefits , and as a result , could have severe consequences for military retention and readiness . dod also stated that it would cost too much to equalize the average amounts paid for housing by eliminating the out - of - pocket costs for the two thirds of military members that live in private housing . we agree that the recommendation would have an adverse impact on the military families that live in government housing since they would begin paying a small portion of their housing and utility costs . however , allowing the housing compensation inequity to continue also has adverse impacts , such as increasing demand for government housing even in areas where private housing is available . further , because out - of - pocket costs paid by families living in government housing could be used to fund offsetting increases in housing allowances , housing benefits for the two thirds of military families that live in private housing actually could increase . to clarify the intent of the recommendation and to ease its impact by allowing time for phased implementation , we changed the recommendation to say that dod should reduce , rather than equalize , the difference in the average amounts paid for housing by requiring families that live in government housing pay a portion of their housing costs . the difference is primarily due to three reasons . first , the government pays about 80 percent of the housing costs for a family that lives in private housing compared to paying 100 percent for a family in government housing .