we agree . dod's comment supports our point that other dod acquisition reform initiatives do not provide relief for this pilot . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . specific facilities have not yet been authorized . this effort is projected to be completed at the end of 1996 . this analysis is also a critical component of the pilot since a key objective is to develop a contract that allows trw's commercial division to maintain its normal business practices as much as possible . trw's commercial division does not want this pilot to adversely affect its highly successful commercial business . unless waivers or workarounds are granted for many of these government - unique requirements , the pilot will be limited in demonstrating the benefits of commercial practices , including the savings associated with high - volume material purchases . the difference between commercial and military practices , according to a pilot report , is often not in the actual compliance with a requirement , but in the level of documentation required . for example , trw's commercial division agreed to the far clause on affirmative action for vietnam veterans because the clause is consistent with standard commercial practices . however , far clause 52.222-37 , “employment reports on special disabled veterans and veterans of the vietnam era,” is not consistent with those practices . this clause requires an annual report on the number of disabled and vietnam veterans currently employed — by job category and location and of the number of new hires by category . we conducted our review under our basic legislative responsibilities . we are addressing this report to the committees involved in fostering acquisition reform because it identifies problems and calls for corrective action that the agency has indicated an unwillingness to take . the pilot program was undertaken as part of the air force materiel command's manufacturing 2005 strategy , which envisions a future where an integrated military - commercial industrial base will ensure the air force access to superior technologies at dramatically reduced costs . as part of the strategy , the air force analyzed key military sectors , including electronics .