activities can fall into more than one category . for example , coproduction activity may also include the transfer of technology needed to improve production processes . as another example , a contractor can buy carpet and display it prominently in its executive lobby — a combination of in - country procurement and marketing assistance activities . in addition , there are other activities that do not fit within any of these categories . coproduction tied directly to a weapons sale , subcontracting for defense - related products , and technology transferred as part of those arrangements , or separately , are transactions commonly found in the agreements we reviewed . procurements of goods and services not related to the weapon system sales — indirect offset activities — were also frequently used . coproduction occurs when defense companies located in offset countries receive contracts to assemble , build , or produce articles for the weapon system sale . subcontracting occurs when a u.s. contractor procures defense - related components and subsystems for export from suppliers in countries where the contractor has offset obligations . foreign subcontracts are either competed within the purchasing country or directed to an entity within that country . regardless , per the agreements , u.s. contractors normally insist that the foreign companies meet certain contract standards for price , quality , and delivery to become qualified subcontractors . one u.s. contractor stated that foreign companies must meet the same contract standards as those used to select qualified u.s. subcontractors . placing contracts overseas has resulted in additional contractors who are qualified to participate in weapon system development and production . however , the long - term supplier relationships that develop may result in reduced business opportunities for some u.s. firms . in the transactions we reviewed , coproduction and subcontracting activities ranged from 2.5 percent to 66.7 percent of the total offset obligation . the following examples describe coproduction and subcontracting activities . a u.s. contractor used two foreign defense companies to assemble an aircraft and produce some of its components and parts . together , the u.s. contractor and foreign country determined that these particular components and parts were compatible with the foreign companies' manufacturing processes and concluded they could be produced at a lower cost by the foreign companies than by the u.s. contractor . these activities equated to about 8.8 percent of the total offset obligation . according to the contractor , although the contractor did not solicit any u.s. companies to compete for the contract , it determined that the two foreign companies were competitive in their price , quality , and delivery . major contributors to this report were karen s. zuckerstein , lauri a. kay , and richard e. burrell . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o .