economy ? ) third , to obtain evidence on the continued relevance of these programs , we interviewed government officials , agricultural trade experts , and officials of the organizations previously mentioned and gathered applicable research , empirical evidence , and other information on the impact of these programs . finally , we synthesized all the information to present the best evidence available on the continued relevance of u.s. export programs in furthering the four categories of impact . while we have worked to provide the best evidence available , we acknowledge that determining program relevance is difficult because many of the domestic and international conditions under which past observations of and research on these programs have been based have changed ; thus , any assessment of the future relevance of these programs needs to be tempered with this understanding . please call me on ( 202 ) 512-8984 , if you or your staff have any questions about this report . this appendix presents detailed information about the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) four export assistance programs . lastly , we had a draft of this report peer reviewed for accuracy and objectivity by several public and private sector economists and agricultural experts . we performed our review from june 1996 to may 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we provided a draft of this report to usda for review and comment . we met with officials of the department , including fas' associate administrator and ers' deputy director , and other senior management officials representing fas' various export assistance programs . these officials agreed in principle to the report's conclusions and matter for congressional consideration . they also stated that the report provided insights into the complexity of isolating the impact of u.s. agricultural export assistance programs on u.s. agricultural exports , separate from the wide range of other variables that affect these exports . they acknowledged that market forces , not these federal programs , were the greatest factor in increasing u.s. agricultural exports . however , fas officials felt that the report was too negative about the programs and that the assumptions used preordained the outcome of our analysis . in particular , fas officials stated that our focus on the macroeconomic impact of u.s. agricultural export assistance programs — including the assumption of full employment — imposed an unreasonably high standard that these programs should have a positive impact on the overall u.s. economy . they questioned whether this standard could be met by any federally funded program . several senior fas program managers added that u.s. agricultural export assistance programs were in fact designed to redistribute economic resources from other sectors of the u.s. economy to agriculture . fas officials also felt that our presentation of studies regarding map's impact was selective and unbalanced . in response to usda's comments , we have expanded our discussion of map's impact to include five additional studies of the program . though this expanded the number of countries and commodities targeted by map that we discuss , it did not alter our conclusions .