some of these repossessions were costly . for example , according to a navy official , it had to spend about $2 million to tow 14 ships back to federal storage facilities in philadelphia from north carolina and rhode island when a ship scrapping contract was terminated due to contractor noncompliance with environmental and safety regulations . also , the navy and drms incurred additional costs for maintaining , storing , and reselling these ships . the domestic ship scrapping industry has historically been small . during the 1970s , when hundreds of ships were scrapped domestically , the industry was comprised of about 30 firms . however , given the small number of ships available for domestic scrapping since then , many of the firms exited the industry . currently , there are four private ship scrappers in the united states actively scrapping federal surplus ships . in addition , for national security reasons , one naval shipyard is scrapping nuclear submarines . the typical u.s. private sector ship scrapping site is located in an urban industrial area coincident with other industrial and maritime related facilities . the facilities area is generally small , fewer than 10 acres , and most of the firms , until recently , worked on only one ship at a time . according to a july 1997 marad study , ship scrapping companies tend to be thinly capitalized . the study concluded that the industry is a risky , highly speculative business . following the navy's experience with high rates of ship repossessions between 1991 and 1996 , both the navy and marad considered fewer firms to be technically and financially acceptable . for example , in response to marad's 1996 solicitation for scrapping eight ships , the agency received only five positive bids , and only one of these was considered technically acceptable by the agency . marad awarded the bidder only two ships , in part , because of the bidder's limited scrapping capacity . similarly , navy / drms solicitations in 1996 and 1997 , for a total of 11 ships , resulted in only two technically acceptable proposals for each solicitation and the award of only two ships . both the marad and navy awards were made to the same firm . recent testimony to congress and statements made by domestic industry officials raise doubts about the willingness of new firms to enter the industry and current firms to substantially expand their operations under current conditions . some domestic industry representatives stated that the profits from ship scrapping have not been commensurate with the financial risks and environmental liabilities associated with it , and one representative stated that his firm was no longer willing to assume such risks . however , other industry representatives believed that they could make a profit scrapping ships , as long as they could get enough ships to justify large scale and continuous production . as discussed later , the agencies have ( 1 ) taken action to sell ships in lots and ( 2 ) recognized that steps are needed to minimize environmental and worker safety risks associated with ship scrapping to make ship scrapping more financially attractive .