this report updates that assessment . you also asked us to review a report covering some of these same issues that dod was to provide to the committee on armed services by february 15 , 1998 . we were unable to review that report because dod had not released it , as of may 21 , 1998 . the primary mission of nmd is to defend the united states against an intercontinental ballistic missile attack consisting of several missiles launched from a rogue nation . it would also have some capability against an accidental launch from nuclear powers such as russia or china . the united states has been developing technologies for use in an nmd system for a number of years . in april 1996 , dod changed the purpose of the nmd program from a technology readiness program to a deployment readiness program and designated nmd as a major defense acquisition program . under the technology readiness program , the ballistic missile defense organization ( bmdo ) developed and matured technologies for possible use in an nmd system . under the current deployment readiness program , bmdo plans to integrate the technologies into a system that can be made operational . the deployment readiness program is commonly known as the “3+3” program . the goal of the nmd 3+3 program is to develop and demonstrate , by fiscal year 2000 , an initial , limited capability that could be deployed by fiscal year 2003 . the nmd acquisition strategy called for conducting ( 1 ) one system test prior to the initial deployment decision — a test that would not include all system elements or involve stressing conditions such as multiple targets — and ( 2 ) one test of the integrated ground - based interceptor before production of the interceptor's booster element must begin . if subsequent tests reveal problems , costly redesign or modification of already produced hardware may be required . since our december report , dod has revised program plans to mitigate schedule and technical risk to some extent . changes include procuring additional spare hardware to protect against further schedule slips and increasing the amount of planned testing . dod officials told us , however , that overall schedule and technical risk associated with a 2003 deployment will remain high , despite these actions . even with the additional funding , the program's schedule risk will remain high , according to dod officials . accomplishing all of the required contracting , development , integration , and testing planned before the initial decision point in fiscal year 2000 is , and will continue to be , high risk . according to the program manager , additional funding cannot be used to reduce schedule risk because “we simply cannot buy back time.” however , the additional funds can help mitigate further slips in the program schedule , according to the program manager . for example , additional funds have been identified to purchase back - up hardware to prevent unnecessarily long delays in test programs if something goes wrong , as it did in january 1997 when a test had to be aborted after the target was launched .