ii ) . dod took issue with three major issues in the report: the marine corps' range requirement , the navy's long - term plans for the 155-millimeter gun , and our suggestion that the navy is revising the coea to justify decisions it had already made . the navy completes its work on the coea and , on the basis of its results , proposes an nsfs program and funding in its future years defense program for fiscal years 1996-2001 . the navy restructures the nsfs program in light of funding shortfalls and cancels 155-millimeter , 60-caliber gun development . the marine corps identifies nsfs range requirements . the coea is signed out for distribution by the co - chairs of coea oversight board , but is not released to the congress . the navy proposes a revised nsfs program to the chief of naval operations and obtains approval . the chief of naval operations formally approves the nsfs range requirement and issues formal program guidance directing the navy to pursue upgrades to 5-inch guns and development of a precision - guided munition . the navy asks the center for naval analyses to provide a supplemental analysis to its original coea that reflects the marine corps' new range requirements by may 1995 . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . this gun does not exist and would have to be developed . the coea found that , for both major regional conflict scenarios , fewer 155-millimeter munitions and long - range missiles would be needed to hit a majority of the target sets than 5-inch , 70-caliber munitions and missiles . for example , the navy could hit 99 percent of the targets in one scenario with 1,316 fewer 155-millimeter projectiles , and 34 fewer long - range missiles at a wartime cost of about $69 million less than with a combination of 5-inch , 70-caliber projectiles and missiles . also , the coea stated that , if the nsfs program became fiscally constrained , development of a 5-inch , 70-caliber gun might save money in the near term , making it an attractive option because of lower research and development costs , but ( 1 ) wartime costs would be considerably higher than with larger guns and ( 2 ) a 5-inch , 70-caliber gun would not adequately cover the targets . the navy subsequently developed the nsfs program based on the results of the coea . dod said that plans to develop the 155-millimeter gun and precision - guided projectile , as recommended in the coea , have not been canceled and that this system remains a viable option for inclusion on the sc - 21 . this differs sharply from what navy officials told us during the audit . moreover , no funds have been budgeted for this program in the future years defense program for fiscal years 1996-2001 . also , in his december 1994 decision to focus on the 5-inch gun upgrade program , the chief of naval operations directed that no funds be used to develop the 155-millimeter gun . dod said that the navy was not revising its coea but was conducting a supplemental analysis to the original nsfs coea .