additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . figure 2 depicts an example of a linear battlefield . battlefields can also be arrayed in a nonlinear manner , meaning that they may have a less precise structure , and the functions of close , deep , and rear operations may have no adjacent relationship . on a nonlinear battlefield , close operations can take place throughout the entire area of military operations , rather than just at the forward area as in the linear organization . we provided a draft of this report to the office of the secretary of defense , the army , the air force , the marine corps , and the navy . the office of the secretary of defense and the military services orally concurred with information presented in the report . the purpose of this change was to expand opportunities for women in the services . to identify the military occupations and positions closed to women , we reviewed data from the army , the marine corps , the navy , and the air force on current positions closed to women , the numbers associated with each closed position , and the justification for each closed position . based on the information provided , we compiled the closed occupations and positions to determine the total number of positions closed and the justification for each . we discussed the currency of this information with officials from the department of the army , deputy chief of staff for personnel ; headquarters marine corps , deputy chief of staff for manpower and reserve affairs ; the department of the navy , bureau of naval personnel ; and the department of the air force , deputy chief of staff , personnel . during this review , we did not evaluate the military services' decisions for closing certain positions or units to women . to identify dod's rationale for the exclusion of women from direct ground combat positions , we reviewed documents , including policy memorandums , congressional correspondence , and press briefings from the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness . we also interviewed officials from the office of the under secretary of defense for personnel and readiness , who helped provide useful information regarding the historical origins of the prohibition of women in direct ground combat . to determine the relationship of dod's definition of direct ground combat to current military operations , we reviewed army and marine corps ground combat doctrine .