this did not happen . the requirements for both types of items were shown as one requirement but the inventory was not . as a result , the inventory to meet the overall requirement was understated , and the item was placed in a deficit position . for example , according to the item manager for a night window assembly used on the tow subsystem for the m2 / m3 bradley fighting vehicle , the budget stratification report showed a deficit supply position of $800,000 for the item . this occurred because inventory belonging to a substitute item was not counted toward the prime item's requirements . the item manager said the true deficit for the assembly was $65,000 . there were also requirements problems for items being repaired at maintenance facilities . the requirements system did not accurately track stock in transit between overhaul facilities and the depots . according to item managers at several inventory control points , they had problems either tracking the physical movement of inventory between the depots and repair facilities , or ensuring that all records were processed so the database accurately accounted all applicable assets . these problems could cause items to be erroneously reported as being in a deficit position . table 4 shows how often these reasons resulted in understated inventory levels . our review of selected items identified nine items that should have been excluded from the budget stratification process . by including these items , the budget stratification process identified funding needs for the items when , in fact , the funds to procure the items were being provided by another service , a foreign country under a foreign military sales agreement , or another appropriation . table 5 shows the number of items that were incorrectly included in the budget stratification process . the following examples illustrate the effect of including “excluded” items in the budget stratification process: according to the item manager for a fire control electronic unit used on the m1a2 main battle tank , the army issued a contract in august 1993 to procure items to meet the army's requirements as well as foreign military sales . because the army is reimbursed for foreign military sale items , these items should have been excluded from the budget stratification process . however , the items were included in the stratification process and were reported as having a deficit inventory position of $2.3 million . the inventory control point procured a gas - particulate filter unit used in producing modular collective protective equipment . according to the item manager , procurement appropriation funds , provided by the program manager's office , were used to buy the items . because the stratification process is only supposed to deal with items procured by the defense business operating fund , the item should not have been included in the stratification process and a deficit inventory position of about $800,000 should not have been reported . according to the item manager , the air force manages and makes all procurements for a panel clock item . the army's budget stratification report showed this item had a deficit inventory position of $700,000 .