in some commands such activities have more than doubled . these deployments involve myriad actions , such as training exercises between u.s. services and those of other countries , computer simulation exercises , intergovernmental and multinational requirements such as the show of u.s. force to promote regional stability , and support required by treaties with other nations . for example , partnership for peace is a new type of exercise that emerged after the gulf war . this initiative seeks to intensify military and political cooperation throughout europe and includes participation of north atlantic treaty organization countries and countries from eastern europe and the former soviet union . according to dod officials , no system tracks all of these activities , and no standardized terminology distinguishes them . consequently , individual contributions to the increases are difficult to analyze precisely . increased deployments are rooted in the changing national military strategy . according to dod officials , the increased focus on regional security and stability has been accompanied by increased deployments for peace operations . many of these operations involve an increasingly complex integration of diverse land , sea , and air assets from u.s. and other nations' military services , making joint training increasingly important and spurring increased deployments for joint activities . however , the need for deployments for training in each service's individual mission also continues unabated . dod officials acknowledged that better balance and management of these competing demands is needed , and dod has begun to address this need . the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff exercise program annually administers about 200 activities , over two - thirds of which have been focused on objectives other than joint training . program officials told us that many joint training exercises involve small groups of servicemembers , and they are attempting to reduce them by combining or canceling some exercises . moreover , program officials said they are continuing to develop joint mission essential task lists to help integrate joint and service training tasks , which could lead to less redundant training . at the request of the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , the cincs are also examining exercise plans to prevent redundant training by consolidating , synchronizing , reducing participation in , or canceling exercises . many of the cincs and joint staff personnel told us that the scope and duration of joint exercises , particularly those involving ineffective large - scale exercises , are already being reduced and many exercises are involving fewer people . one cinc reduced the number of scheduled exercises in his area from 112 in fiscal year 1995 to 85 in fiscal year 1996 by combining smaller , single - service exercises into larger , joint training exercises . according to dod officials , many other deployments are generated by intergovernmental and other demands outside the chairman's program . these officials are developing definitions for all the various types of activities to provide a better basis for analyzing such demands .