match ? three organizations we visited also increased the use of purchase cards . two of these organizations adopted the use of the cards after they found that small purchases accounted for a small percentage of purchase dollars , but represented a large percentage of the transactions . for example , one organization determined that before reengineering , total acquisition costs ( including those for procurement and payment ) averaged about $142 , but at least 20 percent of its invoices were for purchases of less than $100 . by issuing purchase cards to the individuals who were likely to make small purchases , the organization eliminated the need to prepare and approve requisitions and purchase orders . in addition , the purchase card reduced the number of payment transactions . the organization reported eliminating about 5,000 payment transactions a month by making 1 electronic payment to the card issuer . controls were maintained by setting guidelines , limiting the purchase amount per transaction and per month , and periodic reviews of charges . officials noted that each card can be coded so that purchases are charged to the proper cost accounts . one organization official said that accounting requirements were less detailed than previously . however , he believed the increased efficiency of management reviews of consolidated information and savings per transaction outweighed the usefulness of the more detailed accounting information . our report on federal agencies' use of purchase cards also showed that agencies were able to reduce labor and payment processing costs by using purchase cards for simple purchases . two of the private - sector organizations we visited had available processing costs . they reported that reengineering reduced their direct labor costs to process a contract payment to less than $3 — a 30- to 50-percent reduction . a study of 700 firms conducted by a management consulting firm showed labor costs for invoice processing ranged from $0.71 to $12.23 per invoice . moreover , the organizations we visited reported that payment productivity increased . for example , one organization reported that the annual number of invoices processed per full - time employee equivalent ( fte ) nearly doubled from about 8,500 to 16,400 , a 93-percent increase . the consulting firm also reported that the number of invoices processed per fte ranged from about 1,900 to about 55,000 per year with an average of about 11,000 per year . the columbus center processes an average of about 1,000 invoices per individual per year . the following are gao's comments on the department of defense's letter dated february 7 , 1997 . dod's principal concerns are discussed and evaluated on pages 17 and 18 of this report . we have modified the report to reflect the percent of dollars and the percent of invoices paid by the defense finance and accounting service ( dfas ) columbus . we have added language to clarify our position and provided a more detailed discussion of the basis for our conclusion , which is presented on pages 15-16 . we have added additional information on dod's initiatives and have modified our recommendations so as to not imply that the dod comptroller and the under secretary of defense for acquisition and technology are not working together .