dod concurred with the recommendations . it stated that the development and testing of an automated process for predicting indirect and overhead personnel requirements would be completed before the system is certified as operational at maintenance depots . we also incorporated technical comments where appropriate . this should enhance the effectiveness of the awps system . also , on the basis of an expected decline in workload in fiscal year 1998 , amc headquarters gave the rock island arsenal approval in may 1998 to eliminate 237 positions for a total arsenal workforce reduction of 335 positions . employees who voluntarily retire or resign will receive incentive payments , based on a varying scale with a maximum payment of $25,000 . these incentives were intended to reduce the number of employees facing involuntary separations . by the end of september 1998 , 54 watervliet and 146 rock island employees had accepted incentive offers . as an additional incentive to encourage voluntary separations , the arsenals , in august 1998 , received authority to offer early retirements to eligible employees . both arsenals have tried to develop new areas of work because their traditional weapon - making roles no longer provide enough work to allow them to operate efficiently . for a number of years , rock island has been fabricating and assembling tool kits , maintenance trucks , and portable maintenance sheds for the army , other military services , and civilian agencies . rock island personnel involved in this work made up about 22 percent of the arsenal's total employment in fiscal year 1998 . watervliet has tried to branch out into making propulsion shafts for navy ships and has done contract work for private industry , making such things as ventilator housings and other metal fabrication items . the rock island facility is still selling exclusively to government customers . presenting the plan to the congress would provide a basis for the congress to oversee dod's plan for infrastructure reductions and allow the affected parties to see what is going to happen and when . the need for such a plan is even more important given that the issue of eliminating excess capacity in the industrial facility area is likely to raise questions about the ability of dod's ability to accomplish this objective absent authority from the congress for additional brac rounds . while the congress has not approved additional brac rounds mainly due to concerns about the cost and savings , timing of new rounds , and other issues , it has asked dod to provide it with information concerning the amount of excess capacity on its military installations and information on the types of military installations that would be recommended for closure or realignment in the event of one or more additional brac rounds . dod's report to the congress on this subject provided most , but not all , of the information requested by the congress . while this report indicates that significant excess capacity remains in the army's industrial facilities , more needs to be done to fully identify the extent of excess facilities before any future brac round .