for these reasons , all nasa programs have carryover balances . the unobligated balances expire at the end of their period of availability , and according to nasa officials , uncosted obligations carried over will eventually be expended to cover contract costs . carryover balances at the end of fiscal year 1995 for human space flight and science , aeronautics , and technology programs totaled $3.6 billion . table 2 starts with the carryover from fiscal year 1996 and ends with the balance that nasa estimates will carry over from fiscal year 1997 into 1998 . the cost plans shown in the tables reflect the amount of costs estimated to be accrued during the fiscal year . the carryover balances will change if actual cost and budget amounts differ from projections . nasa program officials are in the process of updating their 1996 cost plan estimates . officials in some programs now expect the actual costs to be less than planned , resulting in higher carryover balances at the end of 1996 than those shown in the tables . nasa often discusses and analyzes carryover balances in terms of equivalent months of a fiscal year's budget authority that will be carried into the next fiscal year . for example , the aeronautical research and technology carryover balance of $217.9 million at the end of fiscal year 1996 is equivalent to 3 months of the $877.3 million new budget authority , based on an average monthly rate of $73.1 million . table 3 shows each program's carryover in equivalent months of budget authority . the carryover balances at the end of fiscal year 1995 ranged from the equivalent of 1 month for the space shuttle to 16 months for academic programs . nasa officials gave several overall reasons for the large relative differences in carryover amounts . one major reason was that programs such as the space station and the space shuttle , which have fewer months of carryover , prepare budgets based on the amount of work estimated to be costed in a fiscal year . other programs , such as mtpe and space science , have based their budgets on the phasing of obligations over a number of fiscal years . another major reason given was that some programs fund a substantial number of grants , which are typically funded for a 12-month period regardless of what point in the fiscal year they are awarded . this practice , coupled with slow reporting and processing of grant costs , contributes to higher carryover balances . science programs such as mtpe , space science , and life and microgravity sciences and applications , fund grants to a much greater extent than the space station and the space shuttle . nasa officials also said the size of contractors affects carryover balances , with larger contractors requiring less funding into next year than smaller contractors . nasa officials gave two major reasons for mtpe's carryover balance at the end of fiscal year 1995 . first , the mtpe program has undergone several major restructurings since its inception in 1991 . during the periods when the content of the program was being changed , selected program activities were restrained until the new baseline program was established .