this did not happen . in the absence of specific goals , thresholds for performance , and a baseline , the army compared the outcomes of seven nondigitized units that participated in four training rotations against the same well - trained red force at about the same time . four units were at the national training center prior to april 1994 , one at the same time as the digitized battalion , and two were there after the digitized unit's exercise . the comparison showed that the blue force generally performed no better than the seven other nondigitized blue forces against the red force . for example , the loss exchange ratio ( the ratio of enemy losses to friendly losses ) of the digitized blue force was about the same as the seven nondigitized blue forces in offensive and defensive engagements . the main reasons for these poor results were the immaturity of the b2c2 software , its lack of interoperability with the m1a2 tank's command and control software , and a lack of hands - on training with the digital systems . despite these poor results , the army decided to proceed to the brigade - level experiment instead of redoing the battalion experiment because it would have slowed the digitization effort by a year and cost several million dollars . additional instrumentation at critical nodes would allow increased confidence in experiment outcomes . it would permit a determination of when systems are operational , when they are used , how much they are used , who is communicating with whom . and if the systems are down , is the cause hardware , software , radio propagation , or human error . the lack of instrumentation does not provide system developers the kind of information they need to troubleshoot problems identified during the exercise and make needed fixes.” objective data is vital in decisions to proceed to the next experiment and finally to full - rate production and deployment . the army is planning to provide a more controlled environment for data collection of 100 instrumented vehicles during a 9-month training period prior to the february 1997 brigade experiment . however , it is unclear whether this will be enough in the context of numbers and critical nodes . the army , in conjunction with an independent test agency , needs to decide specifically what instrumentation is needed to provide sufficient objective data to support moving the experiment forward . last year , congress directed the army to include the marine corps in its plans for the digital battlefield . also , in fiscal year 1995 , the army provided the marine corps with $429,000 to help it launch its digitization program . the army will also provide the marines — at a cost of about $2.3 million to the army — with enough appliques and installation kits to equip a light - armored reconnaissance company to participate in the 1997 brigade experiment . despite these efforts , the marines will have a $4.8 million shortfall in fiscal year 1996 research and development funds for equipment , engineering support , and operational demonstrations , which will affect its preparation for the army's 1997 brigade experiment .