both dod and fema concurred with the recommendation . these items are described in table 1 . the locations of the nonstockpile chemical materiel , as of january 31 , 2000 , are shown in figure 2 . since the early 1990s , the army has undertaken research and development on several transportable systems that are designed to identify , access , and treat chemical agents in nonstockpile munitions and decontaminate the containers and munitions . all disposal methods are to comply with federal and the affected state's environmental and safety regulations . until recently , the army emphasized the use of transportable treatment systems because of the relatively small quantities and the characteristics of nonstockpile chemical weapon materiel located at a potentially large number of sites through the country . in november 1991 , because of public concern about the safety of incineration , the army requested the national research council to evaluate potential technological alternatives to the baseline incineration process . in the 1993 defense authorization act ( sec . 173 ) , the congress directed the army to use the council's evaluation and report on potential technological alternatives to incineration . the congress also directed the army to consider safety , environmental protection , and cost - effectiveness when evaluating alternative technologies . consequently , in august 1994 , the army initiated the alternative technologies and approaches project , a more aggressive research and development program , to investigate , develop , and support the testing of two technologies based on chemical neutralization of chemical agents at the bulk - only stockpile sites — aberdeen , maryland , and newport , indiana . the project focused on these two sites because they have only one type of chemical agent stored in large steel bulk containers . the army is conducting this project in conjunction with the baseline incineration program . in 1997 , the project proceeded with full - scale pilot testing of the neutralization technologies at the following two stockpile sites: edgewood chemical activity is located at the edgewood area of the aberdeen proving ground , north of baltimore , maryland . the aberdeen stockpile consists of 1,625 tons ( or 5.2 percent of the original stockpile ) of mustard agent stored in 1,818 ton containers . these containers are designed for safe storage of bulk chemical agents and do not have fuzes , warheads , or other explosive devices . the disposal technology being tested at aberdeen is neutralization followed by the biodegradation process . the environmental permit was obtained from the state in february 1999 , enabling the start of site preparation activities and construction . newport chemical depot is located 2 miles south of newport and 32 miles north of terre haute in western indiana . the newport stockpile consists of 1,269 tons ( or 4 percent of the original stockpile ) of nerve agent stored in 1,690 ton containers . the technology being tested at newport was neutralization followed by a supercritical water oxidation process . the environmental permit was obtained from the state in december 1999 , enabling the start of construction activities .