the cia did not provide comments . ( see pp . this official added that the procedures for regulating personnel access to classified information are executive order 12968 and applicable security policy board guidelines and executive order 12968 and executive order 12958 for safeguarding such information . the assistant to the president also stated that the report suggests that the eop operated in a vacuum because the eop written security procedures implementing executive order 12968 were not issued until march 1998 . the official noted that eop carefully followed the president's executive orders , security policy board guidelines and applicable director of central intelligence directives during this time period . while the eop disagreed with the basis for our recommendation , the assistant to the president stated that eop plans to supplement its security procedures with additional guidance . we agree that the executive orders , security policy board guidelines , and applicable director of central intelligence directives clearly lay out governmentwide standards and procedures for access to and safeguarding of sci . however , they are not a substitute for local operating procedures that provide agency personnel guidance on how to implement the governmentwide procedures . we believe that eop's plan to issue supplemental guidance could strengthen existing procedures . the assistant to the president also stated that it is not accurate to say that the eop has not conducted security self - inspections . this official stated that our draft report acknowledges that “security personnel conduct daily desk , safe , and other security checks to ensure that sci and other classified material is properly safeguarded.” the assistant to the president is correct to point out the importance of daily physical security checks as an effective means to help ensure that classified material is properly safeguarded . however , such self - inspection practices are not meant to substitute for a security self - inspection program as described in executive order 12958 . self - inspections as discussed in the order are much broader in scope than routine daily safe checks . the order's guidelines discuss reviewing relevant security directives and classified material access and control records and procedures , monitoring agency adherence to established safeguard standards , assessing compliance with controls for access to classified information , verifying whether agency special access programs ( such as sci ) provide for the conduct of internal oversight , and assessing whether controls to prevent unauthorized access to classified information are effective . our report recommends that the eop establish a self - inspection program . in commenting on our recommendation , the assistant to the president said that to enhance eop security practices , the skilled assistance of the eop security office staff are being made available to all eop organizations to coordinate and assist where appropriate in agency efforts to enhance self - inspection . we believe eop security practices would be enhanced if this action were part of a security self - inspection program as described in executive order 12958 . the director , information security oversight office noted that our report addresses important elements of the sci program in place within the eop and provides helpful insights for the security community as a whole .