we disagree . our scope of work included an examination of the missions that the c - 17 performed during the deployment and a comparison of how it was used versus its expected capabilities . a discussion of whether the c - 17 had the opportunity to perform the stated capabilities during the deployment is appropriate to the discussion , since these are c - 17 operational capabilities that have yet to be fully demonstrated . dod also provided suggestions for additional comments to be included in the report . to the extent practical , those comments are reflected in the body of our report . dod's written comments are included in appendix i . to determine ( 1 ) how the c - 17 was used during the deployment and ( 2 ) whether the deployment required airlift aircraft to perform any of the unique operational capabilities the c - 17 is expected to perform , we interviewed officials and obtained , reviewed , and analyzed reports and electronic airlift transportation performance information . this information was provided by the u.s. transportation command and amc . we also interviewed deployment airlift customers and analyzed reports and data available from the u.s. european command ; the u.s. army , europe ; and the u.s. air forces , europe ; as well as discussed and documented their observations concerning the performance of the c - 17 from a customer perspective . to determine the operational capabilities required and actually performed during the deployment , we interviewed c - 17 pilots , maintainers , and loadmasters at the 437th air wing , charleston air force base , south carolina ; and conducted interviews and analyzed reports on c - 17 deployment experience from representatives of the 621st air mobility operations group at travis air force base , california , who comprised and operated the tanker airlift control elements at zagreb , croatia , and taszar , hungary . the scope of our work did not include an assessment of the cost - effectiveness of using one airlift aircraft to provide intratheater airlift support versus another . however , we are currently assessing dod's intratheater airlift requirements and will address the cost - effectiveness issue in that report . to assess reported airlift activity by aircraft type during the deployment , we analyzed data contained in amc's military airlift integrated reporting system ( mairs ) and the amc history system ( ahs ) . ahs is a database of airlift sorties and is intended to replace mairs ; however , amc was using both systems at the time of the joint endeavor deployment . amc representatives expressed concern about data accuracy and reliability of both databases . at the time of our review , amc officials could not provide us with a statistical error rate or confidence level with which they , or we , could rely on data derived from these systems . however , amc used this data to support some of its c - 17 performance claims . our assessment of those databases supports various amc representatives' concerns regarding data reliability and accuracy . our review of data within these systems identified records containing questionable information .