this has been achieved through several mechanisms . the world bank's holst fundensures transparency and accountability by ( 1 ) specifying the types of expenditures for which funds may be used , ( 2 ) using an established auditing firm to verify documentation of expenditures , and ( 3 ) stipulating that donor funds be channeled to the palestinian authority only to replenish approved and documented disbursements . pecdar serves as a common address for all donor aid to be provided to the palestinian authority . further , all holst funds destined for individual palestinian authority ministries flow through this entity , which , in turn , interfaces with touche ross , saba & co. — the bank's auditors . the donors have established a separate control mechanism for handling the disbursement of police salaries . this mechanism relies on a united nations relief and works agency - managed disbursement and accounting system . the united states disbursed $5 million for police salaries in 1994 . these funds were provided directly to plo for the benefit of the palestinian authority because a disbursement mechanism was not in place when these funds were transferred . the united states contracted with an egyptian audit firm to monitor the disbursement of these funds . the auditor's report documents that the $5 million was appropriately disbursed and used only for approved purposes . the united states does not plan to provide any further funding for police salaries . we have not independently determined that donor - developed controls are effective . however , evidence that these controls appear to be working is provided in the payments that have been rejected by the world bank and its auditors . for example , in violation of its grant agreement with the world bank , the palestinian authority spent $2 million of holst funds on martyr payments . when the palestinian authority applied for a replenishment of its account , this charge was noted by the bank's auditors and promptly disallowed . a bank official also told us that the palestinian authority filed claims for expenses relating to plo's office expenses in rome and washington , which were disallowed . a group in israel called peace watch alleged that the first $13 million in holst funds was disbursed to the palestinian authority without any conditions and that these funds were diverted to plo forces operating in lebanon . this $13 million appears to be related to the monthly funding cap that holst fund administrators placed on palestinian authority spending . a written statement from the bank's auditors indicated that the palestinian authority actually received an initial advance of $15 million . a bank official told us that this initial advance was never diverted to lebanon and that the entire amount was spent on authorized purposes , such as civilian salaries . the statement from the bank's auditors confirmed that the entire $15 million was replenished on the basis of applications filed by the palestinian authority that were audited in accordance with standard bank practices . we conducted our review from july 1994 through april 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we obtained comments on the classified version of this report from the state department and cia .