the bat program has had some turbulence . we recently reported that the submunition's test schedule appeared to be extremely ambitious and that testing uncovered several problems that required design changes , additional testing , and schedule delays . dod concurred with a draft of this report and all of its recommendations ( see app . in agreeing that a policy , which emphasizes consideration of the prime subcontractor relationship and its outcome on programs is needed , dod noted that this policy must also reflect consideration of privity concerns . dod envisioned that this policy would also include the actions called for by our recommendation to ensure that leadership and incentives be provided by program managers in their acquisition strategies . dod believes that current policies and efforts address some of the concerns raised in the report . these initiatives include ( 1 ) reducing the use of detailed specifications ; ( 2 ) placing decision - making authority with the prime contractor ; and ( 3 ) using ipts , cost as an independent variable , past performance information , and integrated program team contractor reviews . dod stated that , in addition to the extensive acquisition reform training currently offered , a jdam case study was being prepared for release this year . finally , dod noted that ( 1 ) the biggest impediment to acquisition strategies that support good supplier relationships is the financial stability of the program and ( 2 ) stability is considerably beyond the control of any program manager or service . nonetheless , dod stated that long - term relationships can be established that are contingent upon the program's continuation under commercially acceptable terms and conditions . we believe that some of dod's current policies — such as less detailed specifications and cost as an independent variable — can give a program manager the latitude needed to create an environment that fosters greater supplier involvement . others , such as ipts , represent tools program managers can use to build and maintain relationships . officials from supplier b believed the company's rating was low because of waivers that were necessary until the prime contractor decided on certain requirements . supplier c said it received a low rating for waivers that were necessitated by the army's change in the missile carrier for bat . the supplier said that the changes were not reflected in the rating criteria or the delivery schedule . it was devastating to the firm , the supplier said , partly because personal bonuses were affected by customer ratings . jdam participants uniformly described the program as structured in a way that encouraged communication . a key factor was how ipts were employed from the beginning — including the design phase — with the government customer ( represented by the dod program office ) closely involved . jdam was one of the first programs to use these teams in all aspects of business . figure 1.1 shows the bat . subsequently , the low - rate initial production was rescheduled from december 1997 until december 1998 .