responses from both surveys will be compared . although the surveys will be quite detailed , the single question for determining pilot test success will be “ how satisfied are you with your relocation moving experience ? ” the cendant survey consists of 12 questions , the key question being: “how satisfied are you with your relocation moving experience ? ” responses are used to determine the amount of “performance” pay that the contractor can earn in accordance with the contract terms . data provided to us for the first 6 months of activity , covering 88 responses where the response choices were “excellent,” “very good,” “good,” “fair,” and “poor,” showed that 98 percent of the members had received “excellent,” or “very good,” service . none indicated dissatisfaction with their overall relocation moving experiences . for example , it includes a number of questions on the members' previous moves and services used . the key question , however , is: “how satisfied are you with your relocation moving experience ? ” when the hunter participants are at least 10 percent more satisfied than the control group , which are the personnel moving from fort stewart during the same time as the hunter personnel , the customer satisfaction rating subfactor will be deemed successful . while there are a number of possible responses to this question ( “very satisfied,” “satisfied,” “neither satisfied nor dissatisfied,” “dissatisfied,” or “very dissatisfied” ) , it is not clear how “more satisfied” will be defined . results to date are limited because the independent contractor did not start until october 5 , 1997 , and it needed time to test and revise the survey before proceeding with the full survey process . the army audit agency , however , has not yet completed its validation of those responses . the independent contractor survey is more extensive and probing than the hunter contractor survey , consisting of about 100 questions . the survey results are expected to be reported to the army in october 1998 . the second subfactor related to quality of life is claims settlement time . this is based on the contract requirement that the contractor offer settlement to a member within 30 days of claim receipt for damage or lost property . consequently , the threshold is 30 days . the average time it took the contractor to settle claims was 13 days , the average amount claimed was $919.18 , and the average amount settled was $455.15 . to date , none of the hunter servicemembers has exercised his or her option to file a claim with the army . the third subfactor is direct delivery , which is defined as delivering a shipment to a servicemember's residence without storage intransit . direct delivery is a contract performance measure in which the contractor is paid an incentive for maintaining a direct delivery rate above 60 percent . consequently , the threshold is 60 percent . of the shipments delivered during the first 6 months of contractor operations , 35 percent were direct deliveries . the fourth subfactor under quality of life will be the number of congressional or white house inquiries that the army office of deputy chief of staff for logistics will receive concerning dissatisfaction of a hunter test participant .