( see fig . for operation of the system , the round is mated with the launch unit , but the launch unit may also be used in a stand - alone mode for battlefield surveillance and target detection . these criteria include the requirement that the design of the system remain substantially unchanged during the period covered by the multiyear contract . if the government awards a multiyear contract for a weapon system with an unstable design , the government could lose its budget flexibility without corresponding cost savings because contract changes or termination costs may substantially increase the cost of the weapon system . between the end of development in 1993 and the beginning of low - rate production in 1994 , the army made 39 design changes to correct reliability problems . since 1994 , the army has made a number of changes to the system's design to reduce production and logistics costs and expects to continue making changes through the beginning of full - rate production in 1997 . most of these changes are being incrementally incorporated into hardware produced under three low - rate production contracts . the contractor is continuing production while changes are developed and qualified . as changes are approved , the contractor incorporates them into units in the production process . the army estimates it will spend approximately $49.4 million from fiscal year 1994 through fiscal year 1997 while javelin is in low - rate production to redesign various javelin components . these changes are expected to reduce production and logistics costs by $329 million . however , because redesigned components are added to the production line as they are developed and qualified , the contractor will produce at least one and sometimes two variations of the javelin system during each of the three low - rate production runs . according to current schedules , the last planned changes will not be incorporated into the production line until after full - rate production begins in 1997 under the planned multiyear contract . javelin tests conducted to date have identified the need for additional design changes . during the first 8 months of javelin round assembly , the round contractor stopped final assembly twice so engineers could redesign components that failed during testing . in january 1996 , warheads in missiles undergoing production verification tests failed to function properly . engineers said the failures occurred after they made minor changes to the fuzing device's electronics . however , the warhead failures stopped production for 4 weeks until a remedy could be identified and implemented . in april , the contractor stopped round assembly for 2 weeks when electrical problems in the restraint pin mechanisms of two missiles occurred during a limited user test . the problems prevented one missile from leaving the launch tube after the gunner pulled the trigger and caused another to dive into the ground shortly after launch . during this test , a third missile failed when a short occurred in a transistor . this missile also failed to leave the launch tube . army officials said the restraint pin assembly has been modified to remedy the problems that occurred during the limited user test . the contractor is retrofitting already produced missiles with the new assembly .