the building was removed . the land at mcas futenma is leased from about 2,000 private landowners by the government of japan . about 40 percent of the base is used for runways , taxiways , and aircraft parking . the remaining portions of the base are used for air operations , personnel support facilities , housing , and administrative activities . mcas futenma has a runway and parallel taxiway that are 9,000 feet long as well as an aircraft washrack , maintenance facilities , vehicle maintenance facilities , fuel storage facilities , a hazardous waste storage and transfer facility , a control tower , an armory , and other facilities needed to operate a marine corps air station . if the marine corps presence is to be maintained with air and ground combat units and logistical support collocated on okinawa , then mcas futenma or a suitable replacement is required to maintain the operational capability of the iii marine expeditionary force's air combat element . the u.s. and japanese governments established a working group to examine three options for replacing mcas futenma . the options were relocation of the air station onto ( 1 ) kadena air base , ( 2 ) camp schwab , or ( 3 ) a sea - based facility to be located in the ocean offshore from okinawa island . the saco final report stated that the sea - based facility was judged to be the best option to enhance the safety and quality of life of the okinawan people and maintain the operational capabilities of u.s. forces . the report also cited as a benefit that a sea - based facility could be removed when no longer needed . acquisition of the sea - based facility would follow a process that began with the united states' establishing operational and quality - of - life requirements and would conclude with japan's selecting , financing , designing , and building the sea - based facility to meet u.s. requirements . the government of japan has decided to locate the sea - based facility offshore from camp schwab . however , at the time of our review some residents living near the proposed site had opposed having the sea - based facility near their community , but u.s. officials are proceeding on the basis that the facility will be built . the security consultative committee established the futenma implementation group to identify a relocation site and an implementation plan for the transfer from mcas futenma to the sea - based facility . on the u.s. side , the group is chaired by the deputy assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs and has representatives from the joint staff ; the headquarters of the marine corps ; the assistant secretary of the navy for installations and environment ; the pacific command ; usfj ; the office of japanese affairs , department of state ; and the political - military affairs section of the u.s. embassy - tokyo . the group was established to oversee the design , construction , testing , and transfer of assets to the sea - based facility . mcas futenma will not be closed until the sea - based facility is operational .