munitions list . the president delegated the control of exports of munitions list items to the secretary of state and the implementation of the fms program to the secretary of defense . they include complete missile systems and subsystems such as rocket engines and guidance sets . category ii items comprise a wide range of commodities , including test equipment and propellants . these items are evaluated on a case - by - case basis and typically denied for sale if destined for use in weapons of mass destruction . the u.s. government controls the two categories of items through the u.s . munitions list or through the commerce control list . the missile technology export control committee is a u.s. interagency working group that reviews proposed u.s. exports of missile technology and evaluates them in terms of mtcr and u.s. nonproliferation policy . the u.s. government has a complex process with many participants to determine what technology may be transferred as part of a proposed sale . an interagency committee oversees the national disclosure policy and considers exceptions to the policy when classified military information is involved in the proposed transfer . the committee does not approve actual foreign military sales but provides authority to transmit the classified information associated with sales . in addition , military departments with responsibility over certain weapon systems and technologies have administrative processes to make disclosure decisions within their jurisdictions . each military department has its own process for making disclosure decisions within its authority and for preparing proposed fms agreements . the national disclosure policy committee is responsible for formulating , issuing , administering , and monitoring the implementation of the national disclosure policy , as well as considering exceptions to the policy . although the committee is responsible for determining what classified military information may be transmitted to a foreign government , it does not approve the actual sale that transfers the information . the committee may discuss actual sales in the context of considering exceptions to the policy . the committee consists of general members and special members who represent heads of various federal agencies , dod components , and each military department . general members vote on all issues and include the secretaries of state , defense , army , navy , and air force and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff . special members usually vote only on those issues in which they have a direct interest . the committee is co - chaired by the state department and dod . the state department must provide its approval before any arms can be transferred , including arms sold under the fms program , but it relies on dod to provide information describing the proposed sale and the sensitivity of the technology . the defense security cooperation agency refers fms requests and agreements to the defense threat reduction agency on an ad hoc basis . the director of the defense threat reduction agency stated that the agency does not generally review fms requests or agreements . however , defense threat reduction agency officials told us they should be given the opportunity to respond officially on all fms major defense equipment or sensitive items .