a critical component of the engine is the recuperator . the recuperator uses engine exhaust to preheat compressed air before fuel combustion , allowing the engine to use less fuel . for example , the navy expects the icr engine to achieve a weighted average improvement of 30 percent in fuel efficiency for a mechanical drive destroyer . figure 1.1 shows a cut - away drawing of the icr gas turbine engine in its planned enclosure . portions of the icr program are a collaborative effort among the united states , british , and french navies . memorandums of understanding , signed between the united states and the two other countries , relate to the development of an advanced , fuel efficient ship propulsion system to satisfy common operational requirements and meet emerging environmental emission standards . the memorandum of understanding with the united kingdom calls for the joint development and qualification testing of the icr engine . specifically , the united kingdom is responsible for providing an icr test facility along with fuel , utilities , and manpower to support up to 2 years , or 1,500 hours , of developmental testing . the memorandum was signed on june 21 , 1994 , for a 5-year period . the 10-year memorandum signed by france , in august 1995 , calls for the joint adaptation and testing of an icr engine upgrade for reducing exhaust emissions . the u.s. navy estimates the icr program's developmental total cost to be $415 million , with $223.6 million having been spent through fiscal year 1995 . these amounts include foreign financial contributions of $15.8 million from the united kingdom and $15 million from france . although the navy has classified the engine as a preplanned product improvement program for the ddg - 51 destroyer , it will not decide on whether it will install the icr engine on the destroyer until january 1997 . the british and french navies are completing the design of a multinational frigate , known as the horizon , and are considering the engine as its propulsion system . the only operational icr test facility established , to date , is at pyestock , united kingdom . in a september 1995 letter to the navy's deputy chief of naval operations ( resources , warfare requirements and assessments ) , the navy's commander in chief , atlantic fleet , recommended that the icr engine not be funded in the future , noting that “in this year's . budget process , the icr gas turbine engine program stands out as a major cost without a realistic prognosis for long - term benefit.” he stated that the engine's long - term cost - benefit projections are speculative at best and that its technology will most likely become obsolete before a return on its investment is realized . he also stated that the engine is not a viable candidate for existing ships due to its large size , weight , and cost . in an october 1995 reply , the deputy chief of naval operations stated that the navy may decide the fate of the engine program as it finalizes its budget submission for fiscal year 1998 .