no country with icbms will sell them . three countries — all of which were assessed as being “high” in both technical ability and economic resources — will not be interested in developing an icbm that could reach the united states ( and elsewhere ) . a flight test program lasting about 5 years is essential to the development of an icbm . an attack against the united states from off - shore ships using cruise missiles , while feasible , is unlikely to occur . in addition , nie 95-19 did not specify its assumption about the payload weight or weights the ic used in forecasting the range for north korea's taepo dong 2 ballistic missile . publicly , the nic's chairman has stated that the taepo dong 2 missile could have a range sufficient to reach alaska , some u.s. territories in the pacific , and the far western portion of the 2,000 km - long hawaiian island chain . nie 95-19 did , however , specify payload weights for the taepo dong 1 missile . nie 95-19 had 12 dissents in the estimate . nie 93-19 and nie 93-17 had 23 and 2 dissents , respectively . there were qualitative differences in the nature of the dissents in the nies . according to a february 1996 statement by the current chairman of the nic , “the process for producing nies is directed particularly at ensuring presentation of all viewpoints . we do not impose consensus ; in fact we encourage the many agencies that participate in nies to state their views and we display major differences of view in the main text . nie 93-19 explicitly analyzed the effects of changes in payload weight on the estimated range of ballistic missiles . for example , nie 93-19's key judgments contained two fundamental disagreements by one department on the overall potential for proliferation of nuclear weapons and on the nuclear weapons program of a specific country . other dissents in the body of this estimate were also of a fundamental nature . the payload weight directly affects the range of a missile — that is , a lighter payload allows any given missile to travel farther . for example , the ic judges that a certain country could increase the range of its existing intermediate range ballistic missile by 90 percent , if it decreased its payload weight by 70 percent . like nie 95-19 , the 1993 nies did not explicitly identify their critical assumptions , as a rule . however , in one case , the text of nie 93-17 prefaced its judgment with a clear assumption about the current nuclear practices in one country . nie 95-19 did not develop alternative futures: less likely ( but not impossible ) scenarios that would dramatically change the estimate if they occurred . nies should “describe the range of possible outcomes , including relatively unlikely ones that could have major impact on american interests , and indicate which outcomes they think are most likely and why . the job , after all , is not so much to predict the future as to help policymakers think about the future,” according to a former nic chairman .