iv ) . in conducting our work , we prepared a survey that builds upon a similar survey we created in 1996 for all u.s. insurance providers operating in japan . ( see app . for this report , we surveyed the 13 u.s. majority - owned insurance companies operating in japan . following completion of negotiation of the 1996 u.s. - japan insurance agreement but before the agreement was signed , ustr and the japanese government created a separate document , referred to as a “minute,” that was intended to provide a limited exception to the agreement . according to ustr negotiators , this exception , which proved difficult to negotiate , was meant to allow cigna , per a business agreement reached in 1993 , to sell a majority interest in ina ( which has third sector business ) to yasuda and then allow the japanese - owned ina to continue to have a limited level of third sector life sales . sales of third sector life “niche” products , such as cancer and medical insurance , by subsidiaries of large japanese insurance companies , were expressly prohibited in the 1996 agreement . according to ustr officials , the “minute” would also prevent other large japanese non - life insurers from similarly entering the third sector . during subsequent discussions , the two governments never reached agreement concerning the precise meaning of the “minute” and how it could be implemented . further , views differ between ustr and two u.s. insurance companies regarding the extent to which ustr provided details of this exception to industry at the time it was negotiated . the document's actual impact on the third sector sales of a yasuda - owned ina has never been tested , since the majority sale has not taken place . our observations on certain aspects of the “minute” are included at the end of this appendix . five of the 13 companies , representing about 70 percent of u.s. premiums , reported that the japanese government had not vigorously enforced the anti - monopoly act in the insurance sector . eight companies and all three brokers reported that keiretsu practices and case agents still adversely affected them to a moderate or greater extent . officials from two companies indicated that japanese companies would usually not buy insurance outside of their keiretsu . however , officials from two companies and one broker believed that keiretsu groups would weaken over time . overall , 9 of the 13 companies , representing about 90 percent of the premiums , reported that japan's efforts to improve competition by taking antitrust actions had no effect on their ability to compete in japan . this result is very similar to what companies reported to us in our 1996 survey . in our 1999 survey , 9 of the 13 companies , representing around 50 percent of u.s. premiums , and two of the three brokers reported that the 1996 agreement had a positive effect on their ability to compete in japan . companies reported that while japan had implemented many of the commitments , some had not been fully met . the 1996 agreement listed several deregulation commitments for the primary sector .