dod disagreed with most of our findings . it partially concurred with our recommendation . specifically , dod disagreed that it had not learned from problems in past programs and stated these problems in part led it to initiate the outrider actd . dod also disagreed that outrider may not satisfy user needs unless it meets the navy's shipboard requirements and is interoperable with the tactical control system . it stated that the actd responds to an approved joint requirement and does not identify service unique requirements , but will address the effect of weight and engine type . dod also noted that it has formed an integrated team between the outrider and tactical control system programs and taken other measures to ensure interoperability . we recognize that dod is aware of problems with past uav programs and agree that an actd can provide useful insights . however , we remain concerned about dod's strategy for the outrider because the planned demonstrations of military utility that will precede dod's low - rate production decision are ( 1 ) limited in scope ; ( 2 ) will not be complete before the decision ; and ( 3 ) may not identify and resolve serious system deficiencies , such as compatibility with joint requirements , and interoperability with the tactical control system . as detailed in this report , similar acquisition strategies for the hunter and pioneer programs resulted in the acquisition of additional systems that required costly modifications in order to meet user needs . dod has the opportunity to operationally test the outrider's performance without risking commitment to additional unproven systems under low - rate production . dod is acquiring 6 outrider systems with 24 aircraft under the original contract . if the outrider is assessed positively during the actd , dod could modify the actd hardware to the production representative design for operational tests . in responding to our recommendation , dod concurred that outrider should not enter production until the results of operational testing demonstrate its effectiveness and suitability . dod noted that completing operational test and evaluation is a statutory requirement for formal acquisition programs entering production . dod added , however , that this statute does not apply to actds entering low - rate production . we recognize that full operational testing is not a statutory requirement for actds entering low - rate production . however , our past work shows that awarding low - rate initial production contracts without any operational testing has resulted in the procurement of substantial inventories of unsatisfactory weapons requiring costly modifications to achieve satisfactory performance and , in some cases , deployment of substandard systems to combat forces . to determine whether dod is applying lessons learned from prior uav lessons learned to this program , and whether the outrider would meet user needs , we reviewed program plans , test schedules , performance documents , and other records relating to the outrider actd and examined dod guidance related to systems acquisition , acquisition streamlining and reform , and actds .