we did not independently verify this information . the dod inspector general has cited system deficiencies and internal control weaknesses as major obstacles to the presentation of financial statements that would fairly present the defense business operations fund financial position for fiscal years 1993 through 1996 . to evaluate smag's price setting - process , we ( 1 ) obtained and analyzed the budget documents used in setting prices , ( 2 ) interviewed air force comptroller and program officials at headquarters and afmc to discuss the rationale for the various factors , including cost reduction goals , used to develop smag's prices charged customers , ( 3 ) analyzed documents on the new price - setting procedures and interviewed air force officials to determine if the air force encountered problems in implementing the new procedures , and ( 4 ) analyzed budget documents concerning prices and interviewed air force officials to determine why the air force changed the fiscal years 1997 and 1998 prices once they were implemented . to evaluate the air force's working capital fund's cash management practices , including its practice of advance billing customers , we ( 1 ) collected and analyzed financial information related to the cash balances , advance billings , collections , disbursements , accounts receivable , and accounts payable from fiscal year 1992 through fiscal year 1997 , ( 2 ) obtained and analyzed dod and air force guidance on managing cash , and ( 3 ) interviewed officials in the office of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , air force headquarters , and afmc concerning the cash management practices and the air force's continual need to advance bill customers to alleviate the cash shortage problem . we also analyzed the dod working capital fund report , dated september 1997 , that was prepared in response to the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1997 , to determine the actions dod is planning to improve the working capital fund's cash management practices . we did not independently verify the reported cash information . we performed our work at the headquarters , offices of the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) and air force , washington , d.c. ; air force materiel command , dayton , ohio ; the sacramento air logistics center , sacramento , california ; headquarters , defense finance and accounting service , arlington , virginia ; defense finance and accounting service denver center , denver , colorado ; air combat command , langley air force base , virginia ; air mobility command , scott air force base , illinois ; and air force space command , peterson air force base , colorado . our work was performed from august 1997 through may 1998 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the department of defense provided written comments on a draft of this report . we incorporated dod's comments where appropriate . these comments are discussed in chapters 2 , 3 , and 4 and are reprinted in appendix i . we have previously reported that dod has had long - standing problems in preparing accurate working capital fund financial reports , particularly with regard to the accuracy of net operating results ( the difference between annual revenue and expenses ) .