dod agreed with our recommendation . ( see app . ii for a list of the military organizations we visited or contacted during our work. ) information about the army's lessons learned program , however , is based primarily on issues developed in our september 1993 report and limited follow - up discussions with officials at the center for army lessons learned . effective follow - up and validation are important parts of a lessons learned program since they are the only means for ensuring that problems have been corrected and are brought to closure . recent data shows that friendly fire - related incidents at the center have decreased over 50 percent since 1990 . military units continue to experience recurring deficiencies in exercises and operations , even though the services and the joint staff have lessons learned programs . this situation is unlikely to change markedly until the services and the joint staff begin to make better use of the wealth of lessons learned information contained in their databases . the database showed that , at least as far back as 1989 , ( 1 ) friendly force identification codes were not used properly and ( 2 ) several different air tasking order problems were experienced , including orders that contained inaccuracies regarding the capabilities of carriers and airwings , demonstrated improper planning to carry out air strikes , and went to several organizations that did not have a need for the orders . since the establishment of the army's combat training centers in the 1980s , the center for army lessons learned has documented a number of recurring deficiencies in units' performance . for example , a 1992 lessons learned report stated that the following problems continued to be repeated: ( 1 ) direct fire was not synchronized effectively ; ( 2 ) reconnaissance and surveillance plans were not well coordinated , managed , or focused ; ( 3 ) communications with higher headquarters were not properly planned and executed ; ( 4 ) fire support plans did not support the scheme of maneuver ; and ( 5 ) operations in a chemical environment were not satisfactory . many of these same problems continue today . regional commanders in chief have reported recurring deficiencies during training exercises and operations , including just cause in panama ( 1989 ) , desert shield and desert storm , and restore hope . according to a 1991 lessons learned report , one recurring problem was the lack of adequate training on the joint transportation planning and management system . this system schedules and manages strategic air and sea movements during peacetime and wartime . joint staff officials said that this problem had come up during almost every exercise since the early 1980s . another recurring problem has been inadequate training of personnel involved in the formation and operation of a joint task force headquarters . for example , the task force headquarters for operation restore hope , which included personnel from all services , was formed on an ad hoc basis after deployment . according to a lessons learned report from the operation , this situation resulted in inefficient planning , confusion , and a less - than - optimal deployment .