stump u.s.s . key west air combat command in the honolulu , hawaii , area headquarters , u.s. pacific command headquarters , u.s. pacific air forces headquarters , u.s. pacific fleet cruise missile support activity , pacific at macdill air force base , florida headquarters , u.s. central command headquarters , navy central command naval strike warfare center , naval air station , fallon , nevada headquarters , central air forces , shaw air force base , sumter , we performed our work from august 1992 to december 1993 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the department of defense ( dod ) provided written classified comments on a classified draft of this report . dod partially concurred with the major findings of the report , but it disagreed with our recommendations . somalia even though the size and duration of the air plan changed before the start of the air campaign on january 17 , 1991 , its basic premise remained unchanged . phase i attacks on iraqi air defense facilities , the electrical power system , and command and control targets were carried out predominately by the f - 117a , f - 111f , f - 15e , and a - 6e aircraft , all of which carried precision munitions such as laser - guided bombs , and by tomahawk cruise missiles and calcms . in total , coalition fixed - wing aircraft launched more than 40,000 individual attacks against targets in iraq and occupied kuwait during the campaign . tomahawks and calcms struck heavily defended targets deep in iraq whose destruction was vital to the success of the desert storm air plan and that , if attacked by aircraft , could have led to unacceptable losses of aircraft and aircrews . most cruise missiles were fired early in the campaign . navy ships attempted to launch a total of 297 tomahawk missiles . of the 288 that were launched , 282 ( 95 percent ) achieved cruise flight and proceeded toward their target . of the 39 calcms carried to launch points by b - 52s , 35 ( 90 percent ) were launched and proceeded toward their target . according to data in studies conducted by the center for naval analyses ( cna ) and the defense intelligence agency ( dia ) and our analysis of gulf war air power survey data , both missiles achieved results approaching those of manned aircraft , such as the f - 117a , during desert storm . dod and navy officials said that multiple weapon strikes on many of the aim points and a lack of timely battle damage assessment during desert storm made it very difficult to determine the effectiveness of the tomahawk and the calcm . target analysts were unable to obtain damage assessments for each aim point after each attack . since many targets were attacked more than once by both aircraft and cruise missiles , it was an arduous task to determine which attack caused the observed damage in those cases . additionally , since many aim points were also targeted by multiple missiles , it was difficult for the analysts to determine how many weapons caused the resulting damage .