ii. ) unless you publicly announce this report's contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its issue date . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the chairmen , senate committee on armed services , senate and house committees on appropriations , and house committee on national security ; the secretaries of defense , the air force , the army , and the navy ; and the directors of the defense logistics agency and the office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others upon request . the other six had been transferred to dla . six of the items still under navy management had demand forecasted for the following year . four of these had excessive stock on hand , ranging from 6 to more than 20 years of supply . dod has implemented several programs — some dod - wide and others service specific — to reduce secondary inventory . over the last 3 years , dod disposals have amounted to about $43.4 billion . ( see table 1. ) one reason more progress has not been made is because incentive for the disposal of secondary items was lacking . in 1992 , dod consolidated its industrial and stock funds into the defense business operations fund . dod was partly motivated to consolidate the funds in order to improve the visibility of storage costs . however , neither the inventory control points nor the weapon system program managers have an incentive to reduce storage costs . the service unit ( customer ) that requests and uses the inventory pays for the cost of storage because cost is included in the price charged the customer . for fiscal year 1996 , dla plans to begin charging inventory control points for storing the material they manage . although rates will vary by type of commodity and storage , the rate for covered storage ( which applies to most secondary items ) will be $5.15 a square foot . this charge should be an incentive for item managers to dispose of material that is not needed . in addition , dod has initiated a study to determine its inventory holding costs . as part of this study , dod will compare its holding costs with those of private industry . in commenting on a draft of this report , dod said that it had no preconceptions as to what impact , if any , the project would have on retention or disposal decisions . the project is scheduled for completion in the spring of 1995 . furthermore , as manager of dod's depot system , dod and dla have developed strategic plans for reducing dod's storage capacity as secondary item inventories are reduced . dla officials told us that a number of contributing factors , including base closure and realignment commission actions and its own efforts , have resulted in storage facilities being vacated and substantial reductions in storage requirements during the past 2 fiscal years . dla projects that dod's secondary inventory will be reduced to approximately $54 billion by 2001 and that its total requirement for covered space will be reduced to approximately 400 million cubic feet .