access to funding was not delayed . similarly , in april 1998 , the imf board approved a waiver when the ugandan government experienced a temporary shortfall in its checking account balances , causing it to miss a required condition . according to the imf staff , this shortfall happened because the government made payments sooner than expected . the staff viewed this as a minor , technical issue and recommended the waiver . the imf and borrower countries may also negotiate changes in conditions to respond to unanticipated developments . for example: the imf and korea revised korea's program several times during its first 2 months . the imf acknowledged that the initial program was “overly optimistic” as economic conditions worsened ; korea continued to have access to financial assistance during these renegotiations . brazil's program was modified due to adverse events . the maintenance of the exchange rate regime was an objective of brazil's imf program . brazil turned to the imf for assistance in september 1998 , when its currency came under pressure as a result of the russian crisis , and it experienced a significant loss of reserves . this reserve loss decelerated after the negotiations began ; but , according to brazilian officials , brazil's currency came under additional pressure after its imf program had started . the reasons for this included the defeat in brazil's congress of two tax measures deemed crucial to the fiscal adjustment program and the reluctance of a number of brazilian state governors to fulfill their financial obligations to the government . to try to stem the additional loss of reserves , the brazilian government found it necessary to devalue and then float the currency . the imf program was then revised to reflect the new economic situation and currency regime . in some cases , the imf determined that the countries had not made sufficient overall progress in meeting program conditions . in these cases , no additional funds were made available until , in the imf's judgment , satisfactory progress had been achieved . the imf delayed disbursements to indonesia at various points during its current program until the imf determined that the country had made sufficient overall progress in meeting the program requirements . for example , the imf delayed indonesia's disbursements from mid - march 1998 to early in may 1998 due to the imf staff's determination that indonesia had made insufficient progress in carrying out its program . the first review was completed in may 1998 . indonesia met none of the required conditions addressing macroeconomic components of the program and one of the key conditions for structural economic changes . imf staff recommended that the board grant indonesia's request for waivers of these conditions on the basis of actions taken by the government . ( for example , the government had established a new comprehensive bank - restructuring program in january 1998 to be implemented by a new agency , the indonesian bank restructuring agency. ) following the board's approval , indonesia received its next disbursement . at this time , the imf moved from quarterly to monthly reviews of indonesia's program . disbursements were also delayed in the process of completing several subsequent reviews .