these were completed and submitted to the board . on august 1 , 1994 , the board approved milestone i , and on august 18 , 1994 , issued an acquisition decision memorandum . the memorandum directed the navy to submit an updated documentation package for the board's approval within 60 days . the package is to include an acquisition strategy report , reflecting the navy's plan to initiate detail design and lead ship construction at electric boat . the board also directed the navy to initiate ( 1 ) advanced procurement of the lead ship's nuclear reactor in fiscal year 1996 and ( 2 ) lead ship construction in fiscal year 1998 . further , the board directed the navy to update the submarine's combat system acquisition strategy to reflect “a significant degree of private sector involvement in planning an open system architecture,” which contains commercially available hardware and software that meet broad industry standards . a september 1993 cost and operational effectiveness analysis prepared by the center for naval analysis estimated the cost for comparison purposes of procuring 30 nssns and procuring 30 seawolf submarines at 1 ship per year . in constant fiscal year 1994 dollars , the procurement cost for the nssn was about $45 billion ( $1.5 billion each ) and for the seawolf about $56 billion ( $1.9 billion each ) . by incorporating management lessons into the nssn program , the navy may avoid repeating many of the problems that caused seawolf detail design and lead ship construction cost increases and schedule delays . in recognition of seawolf problems , the nssn project manager told us he intends , subject to dod approval , to incorporate the five management lessons into the multibillion dollar nssn program . however , because of the absence of a dod approved acquisition strategy , the extent to which the nssn acquisition strategy will include these lessons cannot be assessed now . under the split design / construction strategy used for the seawolf program , tenneco's newport news shipbuilding and drydock company was responsible for the overall design and detail design of the submarine's forward end , while general dynamics' electric boat division was responsible for designing the submarine's aft end and for constructing the ssn - 21 and the ssn - 22 . the split design approach , with a requirement that design data be suitable for use at either shipyard , was originally instituted to instill competition for building 29 ssn - 21 class submarines . this approach , which required additional time and resources as well as a high degree of coordination between the two shipbuilders , caused design and construction cost increases and additional time to approve design data and to resolve design drawing problems . electric boat , to construct the ssn - 21 , still had to convert newport news shipyard's generic design data into electric boat specific work packages ( instructions and materials ) . according to seawolf program office officials , the two shipyards were unwilling to open their operations to one another . in addition , the navy's seawolf program office occasionally had to mediate the resolution of design drawing problems between the two shipyards .