we disagree . the report is directed toward improving dod's management of acquiring efog - m for the rfpi actd , demonstrating efog - m's utility , and evaluating its military value . dod partially agreed with our draft recommendation to prepare a formal requirements document and conduct analyses comparing efog - m cost - and operational effectiveness with other alternatives by the end of the force - on - force demonstration . dod stated that it would prepare a formal cost - and operational effectiveness analysis and statement of requirement if the results of the actd indicates that a larger quantity of efog - m should be acquired . however , it believed that the timing should be keyed to the transition decision . based on dod's comments , we modified the recommendation to provide more flexibility in the timing of establishing requirements and conducting a cost - and operational effectiveness analysis . dod agreed with the modified recommendation . dod did not agree with our draft recommendation to establish measurable exit criteria regarding the most critical efog - m performance issues . dod stated that exit criteria are not appropriate for use with an actd . it further stated that appropriate testing would be performed to characterize performance and required levels of performance will be established at the conclusion of the actd . we disagree with dod . the army has already established exit criteria for efog - m and the rfpi actd management plan recognizes that most of the systems ( including the efog - m ) have approved exit criteria that describe the technical goals for each system . our recommendation is directed toward making some of these technical goals more specific and measurable . we continue to believe that measurable critical levels of performance should be established before beginning the tests , demonstrations , and evaluations . because of a misinterpretation , dod partially agreed with our draft recommendation to evaluate the feasibility and costs of performing sufficient tests and evaluations during the limited procurement to preclude the need to duplicate them during a larger procurement . dod concluded that we wanted them to expand the testing program . however , our intent was to preclude the need to repeat tests to support a larger procurement . therefore , we modified the recommendation to prevent any misunderstanding . dod agreed to provide evidence that the deployment of efog - m would be cost - effective before requesting appropriations to support and operate the efog - m equipment beyond the extended user evaluation period . dod stated that the results of the rfpi actd would include an analysis of the cost - effectiveness of limited fielding with the inventory procured for the actd as well as for an expanded deployment and that any decision to procure additional units would include full consideration of funding and personnel levels required to operate and support the expanded deployment . the dod response and our comments are included in appendix iii . we are sending copies of the report to the secretaries of defense and the army and the director , office of management and budget . copies will be made available to others upon request . but its development was not approved .