this has not occurred . although in its comments , dod limited its discussion to the impact of program terms and conditions of the program's operations , an analysis addressing issues that we raise in our report , such as the use of export financing by purchasing countries and by exporters , would also contribute to the debate about the future of the program . we have deleted part of our original recommendation that called for dod to develop a recommendation on the future of the program . however , our remaining recommendations are still valid because dod's proposal does not relieve it from complying with the current legislation or continuing sound management of current operations . for example , dod has ongoing business such as the loan guarantee to romania that requires continued management until its conclusion . dod's response , without attachment , is reprinted in appendix i . to determine the delg program's activity and financial status , we examined delg legislation , policy , loan guarantee , and budget documents . we interviewed past and present officials working on the delg program , collected and analyzed budget documents , and discussed the delg budgetary accounts with officials from the dod comptroller's office , the office of management and budget , and the congressional budget office . we discussed with several banking and industry officials the level of interest in the delg program as well as alternative financing sources available to borrowing countries . we examined the country risk rating schedule for the 39 delg - eligible countries and the impact the country rating had on the cost of the delg loan guarantee to borrowing countries . to provide a broader context of information on u.s. government defense - related export financing , we compared the delg program with dod's foreign military financing program and the eximbank's financing for dual - use items . we obtained information and program documents from dod and eximbank officials on their financing programs . we reviewed and assessed various characteristics of all three financing programs , including the governing legislation , program purpose , type of financing provided , spending authority , eligible articles to be financed , and country participation . we also compared the impact of subsidies on delg and eximbank loan guarantee exposure fees . finally , we identified unresolved management issues regarding the delg program and discussed them with dod officials . we performed our work between march and october 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date unless you publicly announce its contents earlier .