( see app . ii for a discussion of adjustments. ) a counter , according to tecom officials , is that the aviation technical test center is not directly billed for any base operating support costs at fort rucker . absent time for a more detailed assessment of base operating costs at each of the locations , we considered the army's methodology , with adjustments as noted above , to represent a reasonable approach for comparing such costs . nevertheless , we conducted a sensitivity analysis , reducing base operating costs at edwards by $400,000 to determine the impact on recurring savings at fort rucker and found that the relative cost advantage of each competing location remained unchanged . in reviewing contracted aircraft maintenance cost estimates , we found broad differences in estimates of labor costs at the three locations . the army's most recent study had used a wage differential of 5.7 percent between fort rucker and yuma , based on actual experience at the two locations . however , it used a wage difference of 19 percent between fort rucker and edwards air force base , based on federal wage grade tables . the study assumed the work , if moved to edwards , would be contracted out . most recent department of labor wage rate data for aircraft mechanics showed the differences between fort rucker and yuma and between fort rucker and edwards air force base , to be 28.2 percent and 25.8 percent , respectively . while department of labor wage rates provide a uniform basis for comparison , various army officials have expressed concern that actual costs at the time a contract would be negotiated would be somewhat less than indicated by the department of labor data . for uniformity in comparing differences among the three locations , we chose to adjust the army's data to reflect current department of labor wage differences among the three locations . at that time , we will send copies to the chairmen , senate committee on armed services ; subcommittee on defense , senate committee on appropriations ; house committee on national security ; and subcommittee on national security , house committee on appropriations ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the secretaries of defense and the army . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-8412 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report were barry w. holman , assistant director ; raymond c. cooksey , evaluator - in - charge ; and david f. combs , senior evaluator . we obtained and reviewed various studies completed by the army's test and evaluation command ( tecom ) and others pertaining to the consolidation of aviation test facilities . discussions were held with pertinent officials at the department of the army headquarters ; tecom headquarters at aberdeen proving ground , maryland ; and tecom test sites at yuma proving ground , arizona ; edwards air force base , california ; and fort rucker , alabama .