section . instead , we focused on key aspects of u.s . section activities that were related to our audit objectives . further , we did not evaluate the effectiveness of the u.s. section's activities . to identify the amount of the u.s. section's direct appropriation , we reviewed the u.s. department of state's appropriation data for fiscal years 1994 to 1998 and its budget request for fiscal year 1999 . specifically , we analyzed the u.s. section's funding development schedules , department of state apportionment schedules , and reports on budget execution . to identify those funding sources in addition to the direct appropriation , we analyzed records supporting the u.s. section's financial statement . we reviewed the funds reimbursed to the u.s . section for construction , as well as for operations and maintenance expenses from mexico , other federal agencies ( such as epa ) , and state and local municipalities . we examined interagency agreements between the commission and epa for the administration of epa's facility planning fund . we reviewed the history and status of construction project funding , schedules of anticipated and earned reimbursements , and various congressional hearing records and correspondence . to obtain an understanding of various budget and execution records , we interviewed the u.s. section's key financial management officers , including the chief administrative officer , the chief of the finance and accounting division , and the budget office analyst . we inspected the records of all funds provided to the u.s . section for fiscal years 1994-98 , identifying direct appropriations from the department of state and all other funding sources . we also analyzed the uses of those funds and reviewed fiscal year 1997 expenditures . to determine that funds owed to the u.s . section from mexico and other entities for construction and operations and maintenance costs were properly included and classified in the accounts and financial reports , we reviewed appropriation and funding data documents and project minutes to identify arrangements for and amounts of payments the accounting system should reflect . we found that the u.s . for three projects — two wastewater treatment plants and a cross - border bridge — each country assumed full responsibility for their respective project costs . however , for the other two projects — the nogales wastewater treatment plant , completed in 1992 , and the south bay wastewater treatment plant , completed in 1998 — the united states financed mexico's share of the construction costs with a no - interest loan . mexico will repay the loaned funds in 10 annual installments and was given a grace period until the plants were fully operational to initiate repayment . mexico's agreed - upon shares of the construction costs for the nogales and south bay projects were $1 million and $16.8 million , respectively . in present value terms , the net cost to the united states to finance mexico's share for the two projects is approximately $8.6 million , as shown in table 3 .