dod agreed with our recommendation . it stated that its fiscal year 1996 annual report to congress will identify appropriation , environmental pillar ( such as compliance or pollution prevention ) , legal requirement , and environmental class for each project estimated to cost over $300,000 . dod officials expect this report to be published in december 1997 . dod also provided technical comments , which we have incorporated where appropriate . dod's comments are reprinted in their entirety in appendix ii , along with our comment on a specific point . to obtain information on dod's criteria for determining which appropriation account is used for programming funds , we obtained , reviewed , and analyzed applicable laws and regulations and held discussions with officials from the office of the comptroller , office of the under secretary of defense for environmental security , and in headquarters and field offices of the army , the navy , the air force , the marine corps , and dla . to obtain information on dod's and the military services' processes for programming funds , we reviewed pertinent laws , regulations , policy statements , and other documents . however , we did not assess the extent to which projects complied with applicable laws and regulations . we obtained additional information on the processes through discussions with osd and service officials . we used information that we previously reported in november 1993 and june 1996 . we selectively verified data for specific projects , but did not verify overall database accuracy . however , we have issued a series of reports over the past few years documenting deficiencies in the department's ability to reliably account for and report on its expenditures . to address reporting on future funding requirements , we reviewed and analyzed dod budget reports , submissions , and expenditure data for fiscal years 1995 through 1998 . we documented examples of construction and repair projects costing over $300,000 that were funded with military construction and operation and maintenance funds to illustrate the difficulty of reporting and projecting future requirements . the remaining funds were to be spent on air quality and other projects . officials from the office of the under deputy secretary of defense ( comptroller ) recently advised us that , beginning with the fiscal year 1999 budget , all projects meeting the definition for repair will be funded from operation and maintenance appropriations . in the past , the defense components sometimes requested specific authorization of military construction appropriation funds for major repair projects such as landfill closures and wastewater treatment facility upgrades . for example , for fiscal year 1996 , the air force requested and received specific authorization for $7.5 million in military construction funding for landfill closure projects at beale air force base , california . military construction projects must be specifically authorized by law . specific authorization means that each project is requested and justified individually to the authorization and appropriation committees . when approved , the amounts authorized for various locations are listed in the authorization act , and each project is identified by name , location , and amount in the committee reports on the military construction appropriations act .