program officials have no plans to do so . as we note , the navy rejected the recommendation in the january 1997 operational assessment that a new nssn baseline be established to reflect more current information and be evaluated against the currently projected threat . based on our discussions with navy officials , there is no indication that tests scheduled for fiscal year 2000 will include an assessment of overall survivability nor that the results of the tests will be used to make modifications to the program . if the combined reduction of subsystem performance is subsequently found to affect overall ship survivability , the nssn program could face expensive modifications or reduced capability . therefore , we have modified our draft report recommendation to clarify what we meant by sufficient survivability modeling . dod concurred with our recommendation that the secretary of defense take steps to ensure that the modeling results are used in making fiscal year spending decisions on the program . dod officials have stated that it now plans to conduct comprehensive annual reviews of the nssn program . we analyzed navy and dod documents and studies such as the nssn cost - and operational effectiveness analysis and discussed the status of the nssn's acquisition with navy program officials in washington , d.c. ; at the naval undersea warfare center , newport , rhode island ; and the naval surface warfare center , carderock division . we held additional discussions with officials from the offices of the chief of naval operations ; the assistant secretary of the navy for research , development , and acquisition ; the secretary of defense ; and the program executive office for submarines . we also discussed program acquisition status with ( 1 ) representatives from electric boat corporation , groton , connecticut , and newport news shipbuilding and drydock company , newport news , virginia ; ( 2 ) the supervisors of shipbuilding at these respective shipyards ; and ( 3 ) representatives from lockheed martin federal systems , manassas , virginia . in addition , we analyzed the threat modeling and other testing results contained in the nssn's operational assessments and discussed the results with representatives of the commander , operational test and evaluation force , norfolk , virginia . discussions on the capabilities of the projected submarine threat were held with representatives of the office of naval intelligence , the defense intelligence agency , and the central intelligence agency . we conducted our review between december 1996 and march 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the four congressional defense committees , the secretary of the navy , and the assistant secretary of the navy for research , development , and acquisition . upon request , we will make copies available to other interested parties . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are in appendix ii . william t. woods , assistant general counsel the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each .