the land between the runways is paved . the clear zones are not paved but are plowed . beyond the clear zones and along the sides of the runways , the land is disturbed desert ( regrown native desert plants ) with undisturbed native desert beyond . the land surrounding china lake's airfield has always been desert and is not watered . navy officials at china lake are satisfied with the type of terrain that exists at the end of the runways and in the zones under the flight paths . one of the advantages of this land is that the natural desert vegetation controls dust and does not attract birds . navy officials believe the desert terrain allows personnel to respond more quickly to a crash site than if the area had vegetation . all water used at china lake comes from wells . the base's golf course is watered with treated effluent . nellis air force base is located in the great basin area of southern nevada , about 10 miles northwest of lake mead and 8 miles northeast of las vegas . in 1941 , the property was signed over by the city of las vegas to the u.s. army quartermaster corps for the development of a gunnery school for the army air corps . locating the school there had many advantages . flying weather was practically ideal year - round ; more than 90 percent of the area to the north was wasteland in the public domain and available at $1 per acre ; the strategic inland location was excellent ; rocky hills approximately 6 miles from the base afforded a natural backdrop for cannon and machine gun firing ; and dry lake beds were available for emergency landings . both runways are 150 feet wide . a third runway being completed is to be about 7,800 feet long . land use surrounding the airport varies . the shoulders of the runways are paved . outside of the paved areas is a 10-foot - wide strip that is periodically sprayed with herbicide to control vegetation . at the end of each of the two runways is a 1,000-foot paved overrun and an additional 1,000-by - 3,000-foot mowed grass overrun . the remainder of the areas around the airfield are described as grassland that is kept mowed . in 1940 , the u.s. army choose a site in arizona for an army air corps field for advanced training in conventional aircraft . the city of phoenix bought 1,440 acres of land and leased it to the government for $1 a year , and in march 1941 , construction began for what was then known as litchfield park air base . the first class of 45 students arrived in june 1941 to begin advanced flight training . during world war ii , the field was the largest fighter training base in the air corps . by 1946 , the number of pilots being trained had dropped significantly , and the base was deactivated . however , after combat developed in korea , the field was reactivated on february 1 , 1951 , as luke air force base . luke air force base has two runways .