some of these problems continue . for the past 2 years , u.s. counternarcotics activities in colombia have been hampered because the state department did not effectively plan and manage funding and assistance to support the numerous and varied u.s. counternarcotics objectives in colombia . state and the u.s. embassy could not fully support planned counternarcotics activities because they were not well prepared for the consequences of expanding the coca aerial eradication program . funding used to support the aerial eradication effort came at the expense of other counternarcotics activities . moreover , state did not take steps to ensure that equipment included in a $40 million assistance package from defense department inventories was consistent with the priority needs of the counternarcotics forces of the colombian police and military or with the embassy's counternarcotics plan . as a result , the assistance package included equipment that may be of limited benefit to the colombian police and military and will require additional funding not budgeted for in embassy plans . moreover , the military assistance was delayed for 10 months because state and the embassy could not reach agreement with the government of colombia over acceptable end - use provisions to ensure that the assistance was not being provided to units suspected of human rights violations . beginning in october 1996 , the state department , through its bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs , decided to significantly increase the u.s. level of support and participation in colombia's aerial eradication operations against coca and opium poppy . according to state officials , the decision was made primarily to improve upon the results achieved in 1995 and 1996 in eradicating coca and opium poppy . however , state had not developed an operational plan and had not fully coordinated with the narcotics affairs section in the embassy to implement the program increase . as a result , the section was unprepared for the escalation in costs to support this effort and was unable to fully support other programs meant to achieve the embassy's counternarcotics objectives . in addition , other components at the embassy , including dea and defense representatives , complained that the state department was not adequately supporting their activities to help meet the embassy's counternarcotics objectives . during fiscal year 1997 , state increased the number of aircraft and u.s. contractor personnel involved in the aerial eradication program . as of july 1997 , 112 contractor personnel — 9 management and administrative staff , 56 pilots and operations staff , and 47 maintenance staff — were in colombia . the contractor personnel's role also changed from being primarily responsible for training colombian pilots and mechanics to directly maintaining aircraft and actively participating in planning and conducting eradication operations . the state department estimates that the direct costs of supporting the contractor in colombia increased from about $6.6 million in fiscal year 1996 to $14 million in fiscal year 1997 . throughout fiscal year 1997 , the embassy's narcotics affairs section continually adjusted its estimates of the amount of funding needed to support eradication efforts , from about $19 million in the beginning of the fiscal year to $34 million by july 1997 .