actd projects are not acquisition programs . the actd program seeks to provide the war fighter with the opportunity to assess a prototype's capability in realistic operational scenarios . from this demonstration , the war fighter can refine operational requirements , develop an initial concept of operation , and make a determination of the military utility of the technology before dod decides whether the technology should enter into the normal acquisition process . not all projects will be selected for transition into the normal acquisition process . the user can conclude that the technology ( 1 ) does not have sufficient military utility and that acquisition is not warranted or ( 2 ) has sufficient utility but that additional procurement is not necessary . of the 11 actd projects completed as of august 1998 , 2 were found to have insufficient utility to proceed further , 8 were found to have military utility but no further procurement was found to be needed at the time , and 1 was found to have utility and has transitioned to the normal acquisition process . actd funding is to be used to procure enough prototypes to conduct the basic demonstration of military utility . at the conclusion of the basic demonstration , actd projects are expected to provide a residual operational capability for the war fighter . under the current practice , actd funding is also to be available to support continued use of actd prototypes that have military utility for a 2-year , post - demonstration period . the 2 years of funding is to support continued use by an operational unit and provide the time needed to separately budget for the acquisition of additional systems . further , if the actd prototypes — such as missiles — will be consumed during the basic demonstration , additional prototypes are to be procured . as stated in the actd guidance , a key to successfully exploiting the results of the demonstration is to enter the appropriate phase of acquisition without loss of momentum . actds are intended to shorten the acquisition cycle by reducing or eliminating technology development and maturation activities during the normal acquisition process . the candidates are then reviewed and assessed by staff from the office of the deputy under secretary of defense ( advanced technology ) . after this initial screening , the remaining candidates are further assessed by a panel of technology experts . the best candidates are then submitted to the joint requirements oversight council , which assesses their priority . the final determination of the candidates to be funded is made within the office of the deputy under secretary of defense ( advanced technology ) , with final approval by the under secretary of defense ( acquisition and technology ) . by limiting consideration to prototypes that feature mature technology , the actd program avoids the time and risks associated with technology development , concentrating instead on technology integration and demonstration activities . the information gained through the demonstration of the mature technology could provide a good jump start to the normal acquisition process , if the demonstration shows that the technology has sufficient military value . time and effort usually devoted to technology development could be reduced or avoided and the acquisition process shortened accordingly .