( see app . i for a more detailed comparison. ) furthermore , the contractor is estimating that the average unit flyaway cost , in then - year dollars , for the v - 22 will eventually get down to about $40.9 million . the contractor estimate is based on the assumption that the production quantities and cost will stabilize ( commonly referred to as the production learning curve ) at about the time that aircraft number 153 is produced . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . the v - 22 osprey program was approved in 1982 . the v - 22 was being developed to meet joint service operational requirements that would satisfy various combat missions , including medium - lift assault for the marine corps , search and rescue for the navy , and special operations for the air force . from a mission and training point of view , these officials claim that it is critical that both pilots be able to see the entire refueling operation in the event that the pilot in the left seat has to take over the operation . while socom pilots perform significantly more missions requiring refueling , marine corps officials told us that they believe that as long as the pilot in the right seat can clearly see the probe , the pilot in the left seat could make necessary adjustments to safely conduct the refueling mission should the need arise . v - 22 program officials have agreed that if future testing shows that the current design of the refueling probe is a problem , necessary steps will be taken to correct the baseline aircraft . however , if a redesign is necessary , it could have an impact on aircraft performance ( weight , range , and speed ) or other aircraft systems , such as the radar . the downward force from the v - 22 proprotor blades while in the hover mode ( referred to as downwash ) continues to be an area of concern . downwash is a concern for both the marine corps and socom in areas such as personnel insertions / extractions , external load hookups , fast rope exercises , and rope ladder operations . according to dod documentation , the extremely intense rotor downwash under the aircraft makes it a challenge to stand under the aircraft , let alone perform useful tasks .