his appeal was subsequently denied . assessing the screening process for vietnamese veterans was particularly difficult because it appears that almost everyone who was associated with the south vietnamese or u.s. governments was subject to some form of punishment , such as “reeducation.” in most of the veterans' cases we reviewed , the punishment occurred immediately after the communist victory in 1975 and tended to taper off during the 1980s . also , the punishment often appeared light , such as reeducation for several days . however , there appeared to be some exceptions to this . for example , in one case , a husband had served in the south vietnamese army from 1967 until 1974 . from 1967 until 1972 , he was an interpreter assigned to the u.s. army 517th intelligence unit , where he helped interrogate captured north vietnamese . in the appeals documents he and his wife submitted , they noted that , among other things , a new police chief in their district had been interrogated by the husband during the war and severely beaten by u.s. intelligence officers . in denying his claim to refugee status , the interviewer recorded that the police chief had been assigned in 1980 , and that nothing had happened to the couple in the intervening years prior to their escape . according to their appeal submissions , the police chief was assigned in 1988 , not 1980 , and consequently the husband fled , fearing persecution . the wife stated that she was detained and raped by the new police chief ( “a mere abuse of police power,” granting that it was true at all , according to the interviewing officer ) . in addition , the husband claimed that he was involved in an anticommunist organization in 1987 and was shot while escaping from his mother's house in saigon . the appeals board upheld the first instance decision to deny him refugee status . he requested a mandate review by unhcr , but the file did not indicate a response . prior to our fieldwork , we obtained first instance screening decisions prepared by philippine immigration officials for 177 asylum seekers and then blacked out all the decisions to conduct a test . a team of five gao evaluators each reviewed a set of decisions and assessed whether the applicant had been screened in or out based on the information in the decision paper . in general , the team found that many of the screening decisions presented limited information about the asylum seeker's claim for refugee status . the write - ups often lacked important details about the applicant's background , situation in vietnam , and reasons for leaving the country . without such information , it was difficult to determine the relative strength or weakness of individual cases . in addition , many of the write - ups contained weak support or no explanation for the screening decisions made by the immigration officials . in reviewing cases , different members of the team often chose a decision different from the decision rendered , indicating that a good deal of subjective judgment may be involved in the adjudicator's decisions .