title 10 u.s.c . 2464 provides that dod activities should maintain a logistics capability sufficient to ensure technical competence and resources necessary for an effective and timely response to a mobilization or other national defense emergency . title 10 u.s.c . 2466 prohibits the use of more than 40 percent of the funds made available in a fiscal year for depot - level maintenance or repair for private sector performance: the so - called “60 / 40” rule . title 10 u.s.c . 2469 provides that dod - performed depot maintenance and repair workloads valued at $3 million or more cannot be changed to another dod activity without the use of merit - based selection procedures or changed to contractor performance without the use of competitive procedures for competitions among private and public sector entities . in recent years dod has sought relief from statutes dod officials believe limit their flexibility to contract out additional depot maintenance workloads — including 10 u.s.c . 2466 and 2469 and other statutes affecting competition and privatization . directions for defense , the 1995 report of the commission on roles and missions , recommended that dod privatize most existing depot maintenance work and all support for new and future weapon systems . in his letter forwarding the commission report to congress , the secretary of defense agreed with the commission's recommendations but expressed a need for dod to retain a limited organic core capability to meet essential wartime surge demands , promote competition , and sustain institutional expertise . dod established joint teams and working groups to plan and direct efforts aimed at increasing privatization and outsourcing . dod's january 1996 plan for increasing depot maintenance privatization and outsourcing provides for substantially increasing reliance on the private sector . section 311 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1996 reiterated long - standing congressional support for maintaining core capabilities within dod depots as essential to national security . congress found that dod did not have a comprehensive policy regarding the performance of depot - level maintenance and repair and expressed a compelling need for dod to ( 1 ) articulate known and anticipated core maintenance and repair requirements , ( 2 ) organize its resources to meet those requirements economically and efficiently , and ( 3 ) determine what work should be performed by the private sector and how such work should be managed . congress specified that dod submit a policy report that provides for properly sizing depot capabilities to meet security requirements effectively and efficiently , competition between public and private entities for noncore workload , and performance of maintenance and repair for any new weapon systems defined as core in facilities owned and operated by the united states . section 311 also required dod to provide a workload distribution report that included ( 1 ) an analysis of the need for 10 u.s.c .