negotiations are underway . both of the companies that operated on plant property as tenant and lessee are sharing in cleanup costs . alliant produced ammunition for the army as a tenant using government facilities , but alliant's facility contract did not contain indemnification provisions . in 1995 , an attorney for alliant estimated that the company had paid over $10 million since the 1985 apportionment agreement , whereby alliant is to pay the cleanup costs at the south plume , and the army is responsible for costs at the north plume . the cost of cleaning up groundwater where the origin of contamination is unclear will be split between the parties , with the army paying 80 percent and alliant 20 percent . the 3m company produced for the commercial market under a lease with the army . the company is solely responsible for cleanup of radioactive contamination of property on the site . the company has cleaned up the contaminated buildings and soils , but the army has not yet examined and approved 3m's cleanup actions . the lake city army ammunition plant is the army's only installation that now manufactures small - caliber ammunition . the plant , which occupies about 4,000 acres in a rural area near independence , missouri , began operating in 1941 . remington arms operated the facility until 1985 , when the current contractor , the olin corporation , took over . manufacturing operations at the lake city plant generated hazardous wastes . soil has been contaminated with explosives ; volatile and semivolatile organic compounds ; oil and grease ; low - level radioactive materials ; and such metals as arsenic , lead , mercury , and zinc . groundwater was contaminated with dichloroethylene , lead , and vinyl chloride . because these contaminants exceed levels set by epa , groundwater from wells on the installation must be treated before it can be consumed . for example , the epa maximum contaminant level for vinyl chloride is 2 parts per billion , but the drinking water aquifer at the plant contained 8,000 parts per billion . according to test results and studies , contamination has not yet migrated off the site but will do so eventually , unless preventive action is taken . because the site is located in a rural , sparsely populated area , no immediate threat exists to the groundwater of surrounding communities . the lake city plant was placed on epa's national priorities list in 1987 . the contaminated areas at the plant are divided into four units . preliminary assessments and site inspections were conducted in 1979 . epa and the missouri department of natural resources approved the remedial investigation for one unit in march 1995 . another was completed in may 1995 , but awaits epa and missouri approval . the army is not proceeding with remedial investigations for the other two units until it receives comments from epa and the state of missouri on the may 1995 investigation report and a feasibility study submitted in june 1995 for the first unit . the proposed corrective actions mainly involve groundwater treatment and soil excavation . both dod and army estimates increased from fiscal year 1993 to 1994 .