additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . these officials generally agreed with our categorization of the exercises . to determine the available cost data for the exercise program , we interviewed officials and analyzed data obtained from the joint staff , cincs , service component commands , and service headquarters . we also interviewed officials and obtained budget data from headquarters , u.s . forces command ; headquarters , air combat command ; the commander in chief , atlantic fleet ; the commander , marine forces atlantic ; the commander in chief , pacific fleet ; and headquarters , marine forces pacific . we also discussed with the joint staff the methodology for estimating the costs of the cjcs exercise program that were reported to congress . to assess whether dod maintains the data needed to estimate the impact of cjcs exercises on overall deployment rates , we interviewed officials and obtained documents from service headquarters ; the atlantic , central , european , pacific , and southern commands ; and service components of the atlantic , european , and pacific commands . we determined the systems the joint staff , cincs , services , and major commands use to track military personnel and unit deployments by contacting the following organizations: the joint staff operational plans and interoperability directorate ( j - 7 ) ; the u.s. atlantic , central , european , pacific , and southern commands ; the army deputy chief of staff for operations ; the air force operations support center , training division ; the office of the deputy chief of naval operations for plans , policy , and operations ; and the marine corps current operations branch exercise office , deputy chief of staff for plans , policies , and operations . we also contacted major service component commands . because these organizations were unable to provide data on the amount of time units and personnel deployed for cjcs exercises , service training , and operational deployments , we could not evaluate the impact of the program on personnel or unit deployment rates . both the lack and inconsistency of the data that is maintained made it difficult to determine the actual time personnel or units are deployed . we conducted our work from september 1997 to july 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretaries of defense , the army , the navy , and the air force ; the commandant of the marine corps ; and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff . we will also make copies available to others on request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5140 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . the services have different definitions of deployed forces .