additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . this action is consistent with our recommendations . dod's comments are presented in their entirety in appendix i. dod provided additional technical comments , which have been incorporated in this report , as appropriate . to identify deficiencies with the operational performance of the b - 2a , we reviewed key test reports and summaries prepared by the b - 2a combined test force , which conducted the developmental test and evaluations , and the air force operational test and evaluation command , which conducted the initial operational test and evaluations . we also reviewed assessments of the b - 2a operational testing prepared by the office of the secretary of defense , operational test and evaluation , and we reviewed various program management and engineering reports that summarized performance and testing efforts being conducted on the b - 2a program . we interviewed air force engineers , test managers , and program management officials to determine the nature and extent of problems that were identified . we also discussed deficiencies identified during testing and current operational experience and performance of operational b - 2as with air force officials at whiteman air force base , missouri . to identify cost issues and plans to correct deficiencies , we reviewed the available planning documents that identified corrective plans and funding requirements for selected deficiencies . we reviewed the b - 2a's program office annual cost and budgetary estimates , financial and management reports , contract cost reports , program schedules and plans , and other documents . we also interviewed air force officials in the b - 2a program and at air combat command to determine cost and funding plans to correct deficiencies and complete efforts necessary to provide fully operational b - 2a aircraft . to identify the status of the block 30 modification schedule , we reviewed the contract and planning schedules for the block 30 modification process , delivery documents identifying the delivery date and number of deficiencies on the delivered aircraft , and reports showing planned and actual manning at the contractor's modification facility . we also discussed with air force managers of the modification process , the reasons for delayed deliveries , changing schedules , and the plans to correct remaining deficiencies . we performed our review from september 1997 to may 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the secretaries of defense and the air force , the director of office of management and budget , and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others upon request . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . b - 2 bomber: cost and operational issues ( gao / nsiad - 97-181 , aug. 14 , 1997 ) . b - 2 bomber: status of efforts to acquire 21 operational aircraft ( gao / nsiad - 97-11 , oct. 22 , 1996 ) .