aircraft have not been rebuilt or modified . the marines plan to deviate from this practice with reman . under reman , the marines plan to award single - year contracts to remanufacture 72 of the day attack model aircraft and convert them to aircraft with night attack and radar capabilities over a 10-year period . the day attack aircraft are to be transported to the naval aviation depot ( nadep ) in cherry point , north carolina . there , the aircraft are to be tested for flight worthiness and then disassembled . about $6 million worth of parts from each aircraft are to be returned to the supply system and about $11.3 million of designated components and assemblies from each aircraft are to be either used in their current condition , refurbished , or modified for reuse in the reman program . the components and assemblies are to be sent to the contractor , mcdonnell douglas aerospace company in st. louis , missouri . the contractor is to integrate these used components and assemblies , along with a new fuselage , a new engine , and an apg - 65 radar system , to produce the final reman aircraft . the first reman aircraft is scheduled for delivery in february 1996 . considering the costs associated with inducting an aircraft into the reman program , disassembling , refurbishing , and modifying components and assemblies ; the value of components and assemblies furnished to the contractor ; and economies available through multiyear procurement , our review indicated that the reman program is not the most cost - effective procurement approach . it would be feasible for the navy to revise its acquisition strategy because the contractor's production line and facilities are still in place and ready for continued production of radar model av - 8b aircraft . during our review , we compared past procurement cost figures ( adjusted for inflation ) with current reman program cost estimates . we also assessed the impact of multiyear procurement on new production cost estimates due to recommendations by the department of defense ( dod ) inspector general and recent congressional interest . twenty - one radar aircraft were procured in 1991 at an average unit flyaway cost of $22.4 million . six more were procured in 1992 to replace aircraft lost during desert storm at an average unit flyaway cost of $31.9 million — a 42-percent increase that the program office explained was due to the small quantity procured . table 1 shows the procurement history of the av - 8b program . the av - 8b program office does not have a current cost estimate for producing additional radar aircraft . therefore , to facilitate a comparison of reman and probable new production costs , we used the fiscal year 1991 flyaway cost as a baseline because of its more efficient production rate ( 21 aircraft ) . using navy indexes , we escalated the average unit cost of fiscal year 1991 procurement ( $22.4 million ) by 7.5 percent ( $24.1 million ) to account for inflation .