usia has closed some posts . however , the agency has maintained posts in countries that , by its own criteria , are relatively less important to u.s. interests . in fiscal year 1995 , usia operated posts in 67 countries at a cost of more than $36 million ( plus $23 million in exchanges ) , where usia believed the united states had limited public diplomacy goals . one post , for example , had four u.s. foreign service officers and 21 fsns assigned and cost $1.4 million a year to operate . exchanges to that country cost an additional $643,000 . in another country , three u.s. and five foreign nationals were employed , with post and exchange costs totaling $2.5 million . in april 1996 , usia announced that it was abandoning its principle of universality because of budget constraints . usia states that as a result , its current overseas presence is 13 posts and 4 countries below fiscal year 1995 levels . developing baseline requirements for activities and the number of people needed overseas could help usia to accommodate budget reductions . overseas staffing levels are particularly important because personnel costs consumed more than half the cost for usia's overseas operation in fiscal year 1995 . in some countries , these costs were even higher: personnel costs in germany and japan consumed 65 percent and 68 percent , respectively , of the total usia country budget . in germany , usia spent $9.5 million for the salaries and benefits of 126 fsns , and $2.4 million for 26 u.s. employees . usia is now downsizing its overseas personnel levels , which cost approximately $168 million in fiscal year 1995 . individual posts may be losing one or more positions based on a 1993 usia system that ranks countries by importance and other characteristics , such as population and size , and usia's potential to affect u.s. interests there . for each rank , usia established a benchmark in 1994 for personnel levels and programs , and posts with staffing levels above this benchmark would lose staff . however , this benchmark is based on historic staffing and program levels and therefore may be above actual staffing requirements . for example , terminating rfe / rl's broadcasts in romanian could cut costs by over $2 million ; terminating rfe / rl's or voa's russian service could reduce annual funding by $7.8 million and $5 million , respectively . however , making decisions to cut languages or services is difficult because the consolidation of voa and rfe / rl did not resolve questions regarding the relative importance and priority of the various languages and the appropriate mix of television and radio . furthermore , the bbg has yet to develop a worldwide broadcasting strategy to address these issues . ( see fig .