the information was forwarded to ins for investigation . ( see app . the post suspected that this scheme was related to a larger one involving petitions on behalf of tonga residents to stay in the united states illegally . also , the u.s. embassy in bogota uncovered a fraud scheme in which the local church was providing applicants with false documents to demonstrate that the applicants had been members of the church for the required 2-year period . the embassy's antifraud unit discovered that in some cases the applicants had recently joined the church , and in other cases , they had no membership affiliation at all . ins and state reviewers stated that they are not confident that the agencies' screening process is identifying all unqualified applicants and sponsoring organizations . they attributed the problem to the lack of sufficient information to determine the eligibility of visa applicants and their sponsors . ins , with state's support , is considering a number of steps to address this problem . ins requires the petitioner to provide evidence that ( 1 ) the organization qualifies as a nonprofit organization , ( 2 ) the alien meets the qualifications for an immigrant religious worker visa , and ( 3 ) the alien will be paid or otherwise remunerated by the religious organization . ins and state reviewers have asserted that sometimes the required supporting evidence , although minimally acceptable , consists of little more than a letter from the sponsoring organization and does not adequately establish an applicant's eligibility as a religious worker or the sponsoring organization's ability to pay the worker . the reviewer can deny the application or petition pending the receipt of additional information , but such actions take more time . the ins reviewers stated that more specific information about the applicant's training and qualifications and the exact nature of the position to be filled , including the number of petitions previously filed , should be provided up front , similar to other employment - based visa categories . in addition , unlike most other employment - based visas , the applicant can file a petition on his or her own behalf and , although supporting documentation from the sponsoring organization is still required , all of it can be submitted by the applicant . for most other employment - based visa categories , the petition and supporting documentation must be submitted by the potential employer . the reviewers believe ins should require information from independently verifiable sources . the reviewers also stated that the documents should be current . they said that sometimes the sponsoring organizations submit copies of their original tax - exemption form , which may no longer be valid . a related issue raised by state's overseas posts concerns the definition of a "religious worker. they believe that the definition of religious worker is too broad , making the religious worker visa program an attractive vehicle for fraud and abuse . according to the survey , posts sometimes struggled with what they considered to be the "marginal" nature of some of the religious positions used by the applicants .