( fig . 3 shows the breakdown of these no - cost transfers ) . an additional 19,500 acres will be transferred for economic development purposes . of the 24 bases with airfields , 16 will be transferred to local communities for public use , 2 will be retained by federal agencies , 5 will be used for nonaviation purposes , and the reuse of 1 is yet to be determined . as of may 1 , 1994 , the communities at the 37 bases we examined had received $107 million in federal grants to assist in developing and implementing reuse plans . according to dod officials , most of the funds were provided by dod to the administering agency because their use is related to a base closure . additional grants are likely to be forthcoming . the office of economic adjustment provides 3- to 5-year grants to local communities to develop and implement reuse plans . if the plan calls for a civilian airport , communities can request additional funds from the federal aviation administration for airport planning and improvements . if infrastructure improvements are needed , communities can request grants from the economic development administration . as of may 1994 , the office of economic adjustment had provided approximately $19.1 million to local authorities for reuse planning . the federal aviation administration had provided $3.8 million , the economic development administration $43.1 million , and the department of labor $40.5 million in grants . see appendix iii for the distribution of grants for the 37 installations we reviewed . most cash grants have gone to communities trying to establish civilian airports . the local reuse authority at eaker air force base has received $1.7 million from the office of economic adjustment thus far , and a dod official projected that funding may be required for 6 years . the economic development administration grants at wurtsmith air force base amounted to $9.7 million to tie the base water supply and sewer to the municipal system , shut down base wells , and construct large water intakes from lake huron . dod will retain 26,000 of the 110,000 acres . nearly 10,000 acres at 14 bases will be retained for use by reserve and national guard units . dod will also retain over 1,000 acres of military housing at 6 bases for use by personnel assigned to nearby bases . the largest acreage planned for retention by dod will be 13,000 acres at fort wingate for the ballistic missile defense office for missile testing in conjunction with the white sands missile range in new mexico . as shown in figure 2 , 84,000 of the 110,000 acres will be transferred to other federal agencies , including the bureau of land management , the fish and wildlife service , and the bureau of prisons . about 79,000 acres of mostly undeveloped property , wetlands , and natural habitats will be transferred to the fish and wildlife service or the bureau of land management at eight bases . this includes the land contaminated with unexploded ordinance at jefferson proving ground and fort ord . the bureau of prisons will receive 1,800 acres at 3 bases for federal prisons . appendix i shows the planned disposition of property .