a range of options can be considered . a logical first step would be to include understandable supplemental financial information on the government's long - term commitments and responsibilities in the budget . for example , in a recent report we concluded that supplemental reporting of accrual - based costs of insurance programs would improve recognition of the government's commitments.other options to refine the budget process or budget reporting to improve the focus on these commitments and prompt early action to address potential problems can be explored . for example , long - term simulations of current or proposed budget policies could be prepared periodically to help the congress and the public assess the future consequences of current decisions . another option , which would supplement the current practice of tracking budget authority and outlays , would be to provide information to permit tracking the estimated cost of all long - term commitments created each year in the budget . in this report , the analysis of alternative fiscal policy paths relies in substantial part on an economic growth model that we adapted from a model developed by economists at the frbny . the model reflects the interrelationships between the budget and the economy over the long term and does not capture their interaction during short - term business cycles . the main influence of budget policy on long - term economic performance is through the effect of the federal deficit on national saving . conversely , the rate of economic growth helps determine the overall federal deficit or surplus through its effect on revenues and spending . federal deficits reduce national saving while federal surpluses increase national saving . the level of saving affects investment and , in turn , gdp growth . budget assumptions in the model rely , to the extent practicable , upon the baseline projections in cbo's september 1997 report , the economic and budget outlook: an update , through 2006 , the last year for which cbo projections are available in a format usable by our model . these estimates are used in conjunction with our model's simulated levels of gdp . for medicare , we assumed growth consistent with cbo's projections and the health care financing administration's long - term intermediate projections from the medicare trustees' april 1997 report . for medicaid through 2006 , we similarly assumed growth consistent with cbo's budget projections . for 2007 and thereafter , we used estimates of medicaid growth from cbo's march 1997 report , long - term budgetary pressures and policy options . for social security , we used the april 1997 intermediate projections from the social security trustees throughout the simulation period . other mandatory spending is held constant as a percentage of gdp after 2006 . discretionary spending and revenues are held constant as a share of gdp after 2006 . our interest rate assumptions are based on cbo through 2006 and then move to a fixed rate . ( see appendix i for a more detailed description of the model and the assumptions we used. ) we conducted our work from september to october 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .