1 site . plans for the new convention center were initiated in 1993 by the district's hotel and restaurant associations , the convention and visitors association , and the district of columbia government . the washington convention center authority act of 1994 ( 1994 act ) authorizes wcca to construct , maintain , and operate the new convention center , as well as maintain and operate the existing convention center . the current design calls for a total of 2.1 million gross square feet , which includes approximately 730,000 square feet of prime exhibit space compared to the existing convention center which has a total of 800,000 gross square feet , including 381,000 gross square feet of prime exhibit space . the proposed new convention center is projected to rank sixth , based on the gross square feet of prime exhibit space , in the united states when completed , and the size of the proposed new convention center should remain highly marketable into the 21st century . according to wcca officials , the proposed new convention center is intended to allow the district to compete for larger conventions and trade shows . a 1993 feasibility study by deloitte & touche , commissioned by the local hospitality industry , stated that even though the district is viewed as a desirable location , the existing convention center is small compared to the convention centers of other cities , such as atlanta , new york , chicago , and philadelphia . the current master plan calls for constructing a new convention center at mount vernon square , the legislatively preferred site , located at ninth street and mount vernon place , northwest . in the 1993 feasibility study , eight potential sites were identified and evaluated against certain criteria such as physical and location characteristics , historic preservation , parking , and cost , including land acquisition and construction . as a result of this analysis , the mount vernon square site was determined to be the preferred site due to its close proximity to the district's downtown businesses and because the district owns the majority of the land , thus minimizing the cost of land acquisition . on september 25 , 1997 , wcca obtained site approval and preliminary building design approval from the national capital planning commission ( ncpc ) . ncpc approved mount vernon square as the site for the new convention center , which is about two blocks north of the current center . however , ncpc did not grant final approval of the building design but instead made several recommendations to improve the aesthetics of the building . wcca anticipates that final design approval will be obtained from ncpc by early september 1998 .