additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . not all spending cuts have the same impact over the long run . decisions about how to reduce the deficit will reflect — among other considerations — judgments about the role of the federal government and the effectiveness of individual programs . in our 1992 work , we drew particular attention to federal investment in physical capital , human capital , and research and development . such public investment plays a key role in economic growth , directly and by creating an environment conducive to private sector investment . accordingly , in addition to the overall level of deficit or surplus , the proportion of the budget devoted to investment spending will also affect long - term growth . the extent to which deficit reduction affects spending on fast - growing programs also matters . although a dollar is a dollar in the first year it is cut — regardless of what programmatic changes it represents — cutbacks in the base of fast - growing programs generate greater savings in the future than those in slower - growing programs , assuming the specific cuts are not offset by increases in the growth rates of the programs . figure 5 illustrates this point by comparing the long - run effects of a $50-billion cut in health spending with those of the same dollar amount cut from unspecified other programs . for both paths the cut occurs in 1996 and is assumed to be permanent but , after 1996 , spending is assumed to continue at the same rates of growth as those shown in the “no action” simulation.we used the simple assumption that a reduction either in health or in other programs would not alter the expected growth rates simply to illustrate the point that a cut in high - growth areas of spending will exert greater fiscal effects in the future than the same size cut in low - growth areas . because the 1996 cuts are equal dollar amounts , the two simulations appear very similar in the early part of the period . a gap develops between them as time passes , however , and by 2025 the difference between the two paths has widened to nearly 4 percent of gdp . this updated analysis of the long - term economic and budgetary implications of alternative fiscal policy paths relies in substantial part on an economic growth model that gao adapted from a model developed by economists at the federal reserve bank of new york ( frbny ) . the model represents growth as resulting from labor force increases , capital accumulation , and the various influences affecting total factor productivity . to allow a closer analysis of the long - term effects of fiscal policy , we added a set of relationships describing the federal budget and its links to the economy . the relationships follow the definitions of national income accounting , which differ slightly from those in the budget . the model is helpful for exploring the long - term implications of policies and for comparing alternative policies within a common economic framework .