( app . ii provides additional information on how the cpi is constructed and on how weights are calculated. ) as agreed more specifically , we focused on the market basket's expenditure weights by ( 1 ) obtaining the views of individuals who were knowledgeable of the cpi on updating the weights between major revisions to the cpi and the practices followed by other industrialized countries in updating their consumer price indexes , ( 2 ) estimating the additional cost to bls to update the weights on a 5-year cycle , ( 3 ) estimating the dollar effect on the federal budget if the weights were updated on a 5-year cycle , and ( 4 ) identifying and assessing bls' reasons as to why updates of the weights have only occurred during major revisions to the cpi , which have been about every 10 years . the cpi measures the change in prices of a fixed market basket of goods and services purchased directly by urban consumers . however , other changes to the cpi , such as those recommended by the boskin commission , may do more to improve the cpi's accuracy . measurement of homeownership costs in the consumer price index should be changed ( gao / pad - 81-12 , apr . alternatives for modifying the indexation of federal programs ( testimony , mar . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . as usually defined , a cost - of - living index would be broader in coverage than an index that is based on consumer expenditures . bls has said through the years that the cpi is not a cost - of - living index . to date , the federal government has not developed a comprehensive cost - of - living index . in 1961 , the price statistics review committee ( hereafter called the stigler committee for its chairman , george stigler ) recommended that the conceptual framework of the cpi be modified to represent a cost - of - living index .