additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . our no action simulation assumes no changes in current policies . since current policies include caps on discretionary spending , our no action path assumes compliance with these caps — a real cut in discretionary spending of 10 percent by 2002 assuming cbo's inflation projections . the budget surpluses that occur in the early years of the no action path are assumed to reduce debt held by the public as in cbo's baseline . the major improvement in the fiscal outlook discussed in our october 1997 report was due to both policy actions and the performance of the economy . since then , the fiscal outlook has continued to improve due to the strong economy and the slower growth in health care costs that underlie the changes in cbo's baseline projections . despite this improvement , our model shows that a fiscal policy of no action is still unsustainable over the long term due to the spending pressures caused by the retirement of the baby boom generation and growth in health care costs . our february 1998 no action simulation is a “good news but” picture . figure ii.1 in attachment ii illustrates both the good and bad news in our current no action simulation . it shows how our no action deficit path has changed since our initial report in 1992 . both our 1992 and 1995 no action simulations indicated that deficits would have reached 10 percent of gdp by 2016 at the latest . in contrast , our current no action simulation indicates that the federal budget would be in surplus in the early years of the 21st century and deficits would not reach the 10 percent level until about 2040 . despite this good news , under the current no action simulation , deficits would reemerge in 2015 , less than a decade after the baby boom generation begins to retire . these deficits would then escalate quickly , reaching unsustainable levels as shown in figure ii.1 . the ratio of debt held by the public to gdp tells a similar story — near - term improvement followed by rapid deterioration to nearly 100 percent of gdp by 2040 . such long - term simulation models could provide information to help judge the future implications of current or alternative fiscal policy paths . the effects of congressional budget resolutions could be simulated over the long term to gauge their potential impact on the long - term outlook . thus , use of economic simulations could help establish a long - term framework linking budget planning and long - term fiscal policy goals . with regard to program categories for which the budget currently provides misleading or incorrect incentives and signals , we recently reported that the cash - based budget provides neither complete cost information for budget decision - making nor the incentives necessary to control costs for federal insurance programs .