we disagree with the recommendation . ( 4 ) insufficient information . we have no basis for taking a position on the recommendation because we have not done work in the specific area addressed by the recommendation or the recommendation was too vague for us to comment . the report is organized in the same manner as the npr report's recommendations . the first 22 sections of the report focus on npr recommendations that were directed toward federal agencies , and the last 16 sections focus on recommendations regarding crosscutting government systems . within each section there is an overall summary , a gao contact for all the recommendations in that section , and a discussion of each recommendation . that discussion includes ( 1 ) the recommendation and any associated action items , ( 2 ) our comments regarding the recommendation , ( 3 ) our view of the recommendation's implementation , and ( 4 ) a listing of related gao products . no action items are listed in sections for which an npr accompanying report had not been issued by september 7 , 1994 . ( 3 ) disagree . we did not review the npr's estimated savings from implementing its recommendations . the congressional budget office already has analyzed some of the npr recommendations from that perspective . we also did not review the status of approximately 130 “reinvention labs” that have been developed in federal agencies . we plan to discuss these labs in a forthcoming report . neither did we examine other activities that npr said was occurring that were not related to their september 1993 recommendations . our comments regarding each recommendation are based on the wording of the recommendation and any associated action items , not on how the recommendation is being implemented . we strongly support these changes . as noted previously , outcome - based management and reinvented government also require the development of and investment in information systems to collect and transmit programmatic and financial information to decisionmakers . the federal government's record of successfully implementing critical information systems to support cost reduction and service improvements is poor . for years , agencies have experienced unacceptable rates of project failure , delay , and overspending and shown little evidence of returns on the public's large investment in this area . only with major shifts in the strategic processes through which information and technology assets are managed will the possibilities offered by modern information technology be realized . the best practices used by leaders in the field of information technology can provide valuable lessons to government in this regard . outcome - based goals , accurate performance data , and state - of - the - art information systems are of little value unless they are used by decisionmakers . therefore , leaders in both the executive and legislative branches of government must also focus on achieving results . omb and congress , like agency managers , have historically focused on inputs , processes , and outputs . however , changes currently under way at omb have the potential to alter that focus in the executive branch .