we disagree with this position . the fiscal year 1999 appropriation act was enacted after fiscal year 1998 ended . the authority cited by dc courts only authorizes it to use fiscal year 1999 appropriations to pay deferred amounts to court - appointed attorneys , but does not excuse dc courts from managing its activities within the appropriation level congress provided or authorize obligations in excess of available budgetary resources . accordingly , the critical issue for applying the anti - deficiency act in this case is whether the over - obligations were entirely attributable to the mandatory obligations for court - appointed attorneys and were , therefore , authorized by law . why were payments to court - appointed attorneys deferred from july through september 1998 ? did dc courts process payments to court - appointed attorneys in accordance with policies and procedures ? in summary , we found that dc courts experienced difficulties in planning and budgeting during this transition year . as adjusted by us , its records showed that it potentially over - obligated its resources by more than $5 million , which would violate the anti - deficiency act . after we briefed dc courts officials , they told us they do not believe that a violation of the anti - deficiency act occurred . i will compare the essence of our respective positions later in my statement . we also identified a legal issue regarding the crime victims compensation program . in performing our work , we reviewed dc courts' financial records , and held extensive discussions with dc courts officials over the past several months . we shared a draft of this statement with dc courts officials , and incorporated their comments to the extent that it was appropriate . our work was performed in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . dc courts' records indicated that total obligations in fiscal years 1996 , 1997 , and 1998 were $115.4 , $119 , and $126.3 million , respectively . fiscal year 1998 obligations reflect our adjustments , as discussed later , and are not comparable to the prior years' obligations . this is primarily due to the changes resulting from the revitalization act of 1997 . for example , dc courts non - judicial employees received federal benefits that increased dc courts' obligations for fiscal year 1998 . in addition , the adult probation function was transferred from dc courts to a new entity , the court services and offender supervision agency for the district of columbia ( cosa ) , in fiscal year 1998 . dc courts also provided its non - judicial employees a 7-percent pay raise and assumed responsibility for the judges' pension costs as part of its fiscal year 1998 appropriation for court operations . prior to the decision to transfer the adult probation function to a new entity , dc courts had requested $123.5 million to fund its fiscal year 1998 operations . when dc courts received $108 million in its fiscal year 1998 appropriation , it no longer had operational responsibility for the adult probation function , but continued to pay salaries and related costs on behalf of the cosa trustee .