b . labor department liquidated damage claims . c. excess reprocurement costs on same contract . b - 213507-o.m. , september 12 , 1984 . offset against an individual's final salary check or lump - sum leave payment upon retirement or resignation is not governed by 5 u.s.c . § 5514 unless it is the continuation of an offset against current salary initiated under section 5514 . 64 comp . ( 5 ) what procedures are required ? before taking an offset against an employee's salary under section 5514 , the agency must give the employee at least 30 days' written notice of its intent to use salary offset , and must provide the following rights: opportunity to inspect and copy government records relating to the debt ; opportunity to negotiate a written repayment agreement ; and opportunity for a hearing on the existence and amount of the debt and on repayment terms where not established by written agreement . the agency must provide a hearing if the employee requests one within 15 days after receipt of the agency's notification . the hearing must be conducted by someone not under the supervision or control of the agency , or by an administrative law judge . the hearing official must issue a decision not later than 60 days after the request . hearings are not required for pay adjustments resulting from an employee's election of , or change in , coverage under a federal benefits program requiring periodic deductions from pay if the debt accumulated over no more than four pay periods . § 550.1104 ( c ) . the federal labor relations authority has held that the procedures under 5 u.s.c . § 5514 are not exclusive , and that a proposal to establish the negotiated grievance procedure as an alternative , with respect to debts owed to the employing agency , is negotiable . american federation of government employees , afl - cio , local 1592 , 33 f.l.r.a . however , the alternative procedure cannot extend to debts owed to other agencies . national association of government employees , local r1-109 , 37 f.l.r.a . 500 ( 1990 ) ; national federation of federal employees , local 29 , 32 f.l.r.a . ( 6 ) how much can be set off ? the pre - 1982 version of 5 u.s.c . § 5514 permitted the offset of up to two - thirds of the debtor's paycheck after certain deductions . see , eg , 34 comp . the revised statute sets a maximum of “15 percent of disposable pay” unless the employee consents in writing to a larger amount . “that part of current basic pay , special pay , incentive pay , retired pay , retainer pay , or in the case of an employee not entitled to basic pay , other authorized pay remaining after the deduction of any amount required by law to be withheld . agencies must exclude deductions described in 5 cfr 581.105 ( b ) through ( f ) to determine disposable pay subject to salary offset.” thus , disposable pay is determined by deducting from gross pay those items listed in opm's garnishment regulations , 5 c.f.r . §§ 581.105 ( b ) through ( f ) .