she is dissatisfied with the current arrangement . the treasury ig told us that she and the general counsel have agreed on the outlines of an mou and will continue to discuss the matter . the professional standards applicable to igs do not require them to select one method of obtaining legal services over another and do not preclude different arrangements that reflect igs' preferences . government auditing standards require auditors and audit organizations to be independent and to maintain an independent attitude and appearance so that opinions , conclusions , judgments , and recommendations will be impartial and will be viewed as such by third parties . to this end , they also require auditors to evaluate whether evidence is sufficient , competent , and relevant to afford a reasonable basis for findings and conclusions . an auditor's approach to determining the sufficiency , competence , and relevance of evidence depends on the source of that evidence . in considering whether to rely on an attorney's work , an auditor considers the attorney's qualifications and independence , both personal and organizational . twenty - five of the 27 igs in our survey currently obtain legal services in the manner they prefer . having their primary source of legal services in the oig helps to provide 22 igs with confidence that their reliance on the legal advice they receive will not compromise their independence . the requirements and conditions contained in the mous at dod , epa , and hhs help to provide those igs with similar confidence . in the final analysis , the igs , under governing standards , must determine whether to rely on the legal advice they receive . during our review , we gathered information on the composition and duties of the legal staffs currently providing services to igs to determine whether those located in ogcs differ as a group from those located in oigs . as shown in appendix iv , the size of legal staffs supporting igs , both in isolation and in comparison to total oig staff , bears no relation to the location of the attorneys . the size of legal staffs varies from 1 to 19 attorneys . the median number of attorneys providing services to igs is three . the ratio of attorneys to total oig staff also varies widely , with no widespread correlation between the ratio and the location of the ig's attorneys . likewise , we found that there is no distinguishable difference between the grade levels of principal legal advisors located in ogcs and those in the oigs . in the five agencies at which ogc attorneys provide legal services to the oig , three ( 60 percent ) of the principal legal advisors are in the senior executive service , one is a gs - 15 , and one is a gs - 14 . in the 22 agencies where oig attorneys provide such services , 15 of the principal legal advisors ( 68 percent ) are in the senior executive service and 7 are gs - 15s . the grade levels of the ogc and oig staff attorneys are also mixed . appendix v contains data on the grades of the legal staffs providing services to igs .