doing so is a daunting task . like all networks of any size , ours has thousands of different devices linked to the network infrastructure and thousands more which form the network itself . in addition , these devices come from thousands of different manufacturers , and while they are designed and configured to operate together , the industry is not yet so standardized that the status of each can be determined from a central point . we have , however , taken the first steps in securing such a capacity . we have procured the dominant industry platform for network management . when this combination of hardware and software is fully implemented , it will allow us to proactively review the status of major devices across the network , determine traffic patterns , and highlight potential trouble spots . while the platform provides a rich set of tools , implementing it will require a significant level of effort . we will need to standardize the network as much as possible , ensuring that each device on it has a unique address that can be identified and monitored centrally . however , we recognize our ability to manage the full network centrally will come only with the continued development of this segment of the information industry . the training institute has developed a comprehensive program to support the successful implementation of the dca . the program will begin with a “dca leadership briefing and workshop,” targeted to the senior executive service leaders and staff managers . this course will provide a framework for understanding the dynamics of organizational change and the skills , the tools , and the techniques for managing change involving new technology . as part of the course , the executives and the managers will lead their units and core groups through the dca implementation . in addition , all staff will attend a “dca overview briefing” to learn about the dca's features and benefits and the impact that we anticipate it will have on gao's work processes . at these sessions , unit leadership will set expectations for staff to learn about and adapt to the new environment . this overview will also consist of a dca demonstration ; a briefing on benefits , use of the dca , organizational implications , and support provided for implementation ; and group discussions . classroom training on the dca will follow the overview . it will include a 1-day course to teach the basics of the dca , which will be followed by several specialized training sessions — either on - site workshops or self - paced instruction — to learn additional dca capabilities . in addition , staff will complete self - assessments a few weeks after training to identify their current skills and any additional training and / or assistance they might need . finally , once the staff are back on the job , they will have the support of focal points and user groups at their units to reinforce the skills that they have developed in the classroom . several best practices were developed from the pilot experience , which gao used in preparing a detailed plan for gao - wide implementation of the computer network and the dca .