where is the work done ? what are the process triggers and outcomes ? how does this business process link to other processes ? what are the primary customer impacts ? in answering these questions , the team can plan for the implementation . once the redesigned business process has been established , the team should then examine how the work will be done . any changes to the process will affect the nature of the staff's jobs and potentially , how staff are grouped . the following questions should be addressed: what new jobs are created ? what current positions are affected ? what are our preliminary training requirements and capabilities ? what are the fundamental structural implications ? will we have individual or team oriented work ? how will we reward people ? management and measurement systems ( stakeholder impact ) changes to the business process will have implications for jobs and structures , which in turn , may affect the management systems . integrated processes typically give rise to multidimensional jobs . this could require that staff be organized more in teams , which could affect recruitment , evaluation , and compensation . listed below are some of the management systems that may be affected . this does not negate the role of the p&r directors or others , who will still be heavily involved in integrating all the change initiatives . the champions will be involved in the design , the pilot , and the implementation of initiatives in their selected areas . they will also act as advocates , communicating the benefits of the reforms to others . they will be supported in this by their p&r directors . the process champions , it is also hoped , will communicate informally with one another . the p&r directors as the jmpo will continue to play an active role in the project . they will be advised on the development of the initiatives as they are taken from concept to pilot and ultimately onto rollout . in addition , they will support the acgs in championing the initiatives . they will also follow up on the pilots running in their divisions and provide feedback on the success and the effectiveness of the various efforts . the process owners will help assure that the process reengineering results can be implemented with a high level of confidence . they can act as the teams' critics , spokespersons , monitors , and liaisons . in a process - oriented organization , process , not function or geography , forms the basis of organizational structure . every process continues to need an owner to attend to its performance , especially once the process reengineering is complete . the project teams will be responsible for successful piloting and implementation of the initiatives . they will support the core team ; their members will come from all areas of gao , including the job process reengineering team , and thereby introduce diverse views and build ownership . each team will be responsible for a particular subprocess , such as job acceptance and staffing , job design , or data collection and analysis .