help” . press < enter > . options” that provides a way to obtain custom asksam queries and reports ( for those who know the asksam programming language ) . allows you to identify the impact of gao's work and key open recommendations that deserve priority . you may search using key words or a table of contents . allows you to locate open recommendations using terms indexed to major subjects in gao reports . allows you to locate open recommendations by the congressional committee or subcommittee having primary interest in or jurisdiction over subjects discussed in gao reports . allows you to locate open recommendations that were addressed to a specific executive department , agency , or congressional committee . allows you to locate open recommendations by the gao executive who is the point of contact for questions about reports and recommendations . to refine a search , you can use the following: 1 . to look for a phrase in the exact order , enclose your search words in “” . you can use wildcards characters to substitute for a single character or a group of characters . “*” can represent a group of characters . for example , use “account*” to get accounting , accountant , and accounts . ” can represent a single character . for example , use “f - 1 ? ” to get f - 15 , f - 16 , and f - 18 . ( 2 ) is defense technology being effectively maintained and protected ? ( 3 ) is the department of defense ( dod ) reforming its acquisition process to address long - standing problems ? ( 4 ) do dod contracting policies and practices ensure that public funds are spent properly ? increased emphasis is being placed on ensuring that as defense downsizing takes place , there is an orderly , efficient , and effective restructuring of the defense industrial base . we are examining key industrial base activities , as well as the effectiveness of plans to spend $20 billion over the next 5 years , on defense conversion . we are also examining dod policies and practices to ensure that as efforts to enhance u.s. competitiveness are promoted , critical defense technologies are adequately protected . dod and the congress continue to pursue proposals to reform the defense acquisition system . we increased our efforts to evaluate these proposals to ensure that they achieve the benefits intended at reasonable costs . we also continued our review of dod contracting practices to ensure that they adequately protect the taxpayer against fraud , waste , and abuse . our reports and testimonies highlighted areas where dod and defense contractor controls were not adequate to protect against improper use of government funds . for example , our work reviewing contractor overhead charges found examples of defense contractors' charging the taxpayers for costs that were not allowable under federal regulations . our audit work related to contract overpricing also found that a small percentage of defense contractors were responsible for most contract overpricing . in addition , we made several recommendations that , if effectively implemented , could save the taxpayers millions of dollars .