further increases are expected . real spending for environmental compliance grew 7.3 percent in 1994 — according to the government's latest available estimates . this growth rate represents the largest single - year increase in a decade . ( prior year increases were about 3 percent. ) in 1994 the nation spent $122 billion in current 1996 dollars on environmental protection — or 3 percent of the gross domestic product . thus , epa's almost $7 billion budget has a significant impact on the nation's economy . rising costs , demands for more environmental protection , and efforts to reduce government spending highlight the need for innovative approaches and demonstrated results . in the past , the nation has taken a strict “command and control” approach toward environmental protection . under this approach , epa has set specific limitations on pollutant discharges and prescribed , in detail , how these limits are to be met . while this strategy may have served its purpose in the past , a consensus among industry , regulators , and even some in the environmental community is growing that this approach will not effectively control future sources of pollution . this prescriptive approach has also strained relationships between epa and the states . both the congress and epa seem poised to allow states , localities , and business more flexibility to carry out their environmental responsibilities without extensive direction or oversight from epa . our work has been in the forefront , highlighting our nation's recurring environmental problems and recommending ways in which the congress and epa can effectively address those concerns . in an effort to seek a more realistic balance between environmental expectations and available resources , we have continued to review epa's efforts to incorporate strategic planning into the agency's management and operations . this approach would help ensure that limited resources are targeted to high - risk environmental and public health problems . for example , we have recommended that the agency establish benchmarks for implementing and monitoring a complex project directed towards integrating its management processes for planning , budgeting , and ensuring accountability . this project's success is important for epa to better measure the costs and results of its programs . finally , our work over the past several years has stressed the need to adequately fund those programs that address high risks to the public and to adopt more cost - effective methods of achieving environmental results through alternatives and supplements to traditional regulatory approaches , including pollution taxes , pollutant trading , public disclosure of emissions , and pollution prevention . epa has started to implement these key recommendations — several of which will require years to fully put in place . also , epa and the congress appear increasingly open to alternatives to traditional regulatory approaches as the environmental statutes go through the reauthorization process . we designated epa's superfund program management as a high risk area . the food and agriculture issue area covers the domestic food and agriculture programs at the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , the third largest civilian agency in the federal government , with a budget of about $57 billion .