executive order no . 12805 , signed in 1992 , reflected changes that had been made in the 1978 inspector general act ( p.l . 95-452 ) , as amended . the 1992 executive order primarily expanded the pcie membership to include the executive council on integrity and efficiency ( ecie ) , which consists of the statutory igs appointed by the heads of designated federal entities . the pcie is chaired by the deputy director for management of the office of management and budget . the following are also members of the pcie: vice chairperson of the ecie ; an fbi official , as designated by the director , fbi ; special counsel , office of special counsel ; director , office of government ethics ; deputy director , office of personnel management ; and controller of the office of federal finance management , office of management and budget . in 1982 , the pcie established an informal working group to act as a clearinghouse for allegations against igs and their staffs . the igs we talked with expressed support for the 1996 executive order , stating that its provisions strengthened the position of the integrity committee . generally , the igs believed that the provision giving the fbi the authority to initiate inquiries into noncriminal allegations will provide the independence desired by all concerned . the igs generally agreed that it is critical that they retain the discretion , which they believed the order allows , to determine if an investigation of oig officials can be done in - house , referred to the fbi , or done with the assistance of another ig . however , several pcie members believed that allegations against oig senior staff — the deputy ig and / or assistant igs — should automatically be referred to pcie for review to preserve the appearance to outside interests that any resultant investigation was independent . others believed that their right of first refusal regarding such allegations was essential to their position . all igs stated that if an allegation appeared to present a potential conflict , they would immediately refer it to the pcie . under the 1996 executive order , responsibility for investigating allegations against oig staff remains with the affected ig . however , the igs must refer such allegations to pcie's integrity committee if a senior staff member is alleged to have acted with the affected ig's knowledge or if the subject allegation is related to an allegation against the ig . in addition , the order provides that igs shall refer allegations against a senior staff member to the integrity committee after determining “that an objective internal investigation of the allegation , or the appearance thereof , is not feasible” and that “review of the substance of the allegation cannot be assigned to an agency of the executive branch with appropriate jurisdiction over the matter.” according to the march 1996 executive order , the integrity committee , with the pcie chairman , shall establish the policies and procedures necessary to conduct investigations and report activities . currently , the vice chairperson of the pcie and representatives of the integrity committee are working to establish those policies and procedures .