the oig did not do this . frequently a single act , taken by itself , is not sufficient to establish that the act was done willfully and intentionally with improper purpose . however , a series of acts considered collectively may suggest a pattern of conduct indicative of intentional impropriety rather than accident or error . for example , the following actions or alleged actions concerning the hospital director were not linked or followed up on by the oig . if the oig had done so , the linkage would have suggested a pattern of conduct requiring additional investigation and lines of inquiry by the oig . the hospital director did not notify law enforcement authorities of the unexplained deaths despite the district counsel's recommendation that he do so . the hospital director did not notify law enforcement authorities of a statistical relationship between a nurse and the unexplained deaths despite telling the staff physician who had developed the analysis that he would do so . the hospital director , after learning that a staff physician had accused the nurse in question of killing his patients , did not refer the matter to the oig . the hospital director demoted the hospital's chief of police reportedly because of the chief's efforts to obtain information about the hospital's response to the unexplained deaths . the hospital director did not provide the peer review board examining the unexplained deaths with the statistical analysis that established a relationship between a nurse and the deaths . the hospital director's initial reaction to the fbi investigation was to attempt to obtain confidential information provided to the fbi , potentially to identify the source of that information . the hospital director , in an apparent attempt to impede an investigation , instructed the staff physician who prepared the statistical analysis to have no further contact with the fbi . the hospital director's son — the chief of human resources at the hospital — instructed the tqi coordinator to determine from the fbi and the oig whether they had had recent contact with the complainant . our review of the oig case files , interviews with individuals involved with the special inquiry , and statements from knowledgeable hospital employees reflected that potential lines of inquiry were not pursued . for example , in the incident of a conference call between the va central region chief of staff , the hospital director , the hospital pathologist , and the tqi coordinator , it was alleged that the central region chief of staff , in response to the issue of notifying law enforcement , stated that the last time law enforcement authorities had been called in , both the chief of staff and the hospital director were fired . the special inquiry analysts interviewed the pathologist and the tqi coordinator . one individual recalled the statement being made ; the other did not . however , the analysts never interviewed the hospital director or the central region chief of staff about this issue .