( see app . ii and iii for complete agency comments. ) both situations increase corporation vulnerability . none of the corporations' databases pertaining to professional liability suits or criminal referrals systematically provide social security numbers or other similar identifiers necessary to make a positive identification for similar names . to perform our verification when social security numbers were not available , we requested individuals' home addresses and dates of birth from the corporations . these were sometimes available only on documents maintained by outside legal counsel . further , the organization of fdic's professional liability suit database , containing over 1,500 individuals' names , is such that it constrains the usefulness of the database for employment screening . it does not have the capability to retrieve defendants by name . instead , this database , which fdic officials acknowledged would be difficult to use for employment screening , identifies failed institutions resolved by fdic , each followed by a list of defendants' names . therefore , we were unable to determine whether the corporations employed any of these individuals in vital positions . rtc had never filed suit against two other rtc employees we found on its professional liability suit listing . rtc included these two names on the listing because it routinely enters the names of all directors and officers from a failed institution in the database from which it drew the listing . rtc told us that this database was not designed , nor ever intended to be used , for employment screening . neither rtc nor fdic has established a systematic means for communicating determinations of culpability to managers in a timely way . managers become aware of culpability determinations made against current employees through happenstance . however , early notification would allow managers to evaluate and determine , in a timely manner , whether to restrict the employees' duties and responsibilities or to evaluate their employment status . such action would help limit the corporations' vulnerability to fraud , abuse , and mismanagement . for example , rtc hired an individual in january 1990 as a credit specialist to manage a conservatorship institution with $1.9 billion in assets . rtc filed a professional liability suit against him in december 1992 . being unaware of the suit , a senior manager at the regional rtc office offered the employee a new position ( and a paid move ) 4 days after rtc had filed the professional liability suit . in fact , the manager did not learn of the suit for 11 days after making the offer ( 15 days after rtc had filed suit ) . after learning of the suit on december 28 , 1992 , the manager acted to limit rtc's vulnerability: he restricted the individual from all rtc offices and placed him on a fully paid administrative - leave status for approximately 1 month until his employment was to expire because the local rtc office was closing .