we did not attempt to validate the database . to assess the potential effectiveness of the techniques planned for the hcfa projects for identifying improper payments attributable to potential fraud and abuse , we ( 1 ) performed a comparative analysis of common types and sources of referrals of fraud and abuse occurring in the medicare program , the types of techniques identified by investigative experts as most effective for identifying them , and the extent to which identified techniques are incorporated in the respective methodologies and ( 2 ) discussed the results of our analysis with officials in hcfa's program integrity group and oig . to gain an understanding of how the implementation of additional procedures to identify and measure improper payments attributable to potential fraud and abuse could affect providers , suppliers , and recipients of health care services and supplies , we interviewed officials from patient and health care provider advocacy groups , including the american medical association , american hospital association , hhs administration on aging ( aoa ) , american association of retired persons ( aarp ) , and the health care compliance association ( hcca ) . we performed our work from november 1999 through june 2000 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as the category indicates , cases involving billing for services not rendered occur when health care providers bill medicare for services they never provided . potential fraud and abuse is usually detected by statements received from the provider's patients or their custodians and the lack of supporting documents in the medical records . for example , a provider routinely submitted claims to medicare and champusfor cancer care operations for services not rendered or not ordered ; upcoded procedures , as defined below , to gain improper high reimbursement ; and double billed medicare for certain procedures . as a result of the fraudulent submissions , the provider allegedly obtained millions of dollars to which they were not entitled . cases involving medically unnecessary services , supplies , or overutilization occur when providers or suppliers bill medicare for items and services that are not reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis and treatment of illness or injury or to improve the functioning of a body part . they include incidents or practices of provider , physicians , or suppliers of services that are inconsistent with accepted sound medical practices , directly or indirectly resulting in unnecessary costs to medicare , improper payments , or payments for services that fail to meet professionally recognized standards of care or are medically unnecessary . for example , a provider ordered magnetic resonance imaging tests ( mris ) and neurological tests which investigators questioned whether the tests were medically necessary , and whether the neurological tests were actually performed . most of the tests were performed on patients who responded to the provider's advertisements in the yellow pages . after a 5 to 10 minute consultation , the provider would diagnose almost every patient with the same disorder – radiculopathy , a disease involving compression of , or injury to the roots of spinal nerves . medicare publishes coverage rules on what goods and services the program will pay for and under what circumstances it will pay or not pay for certain goods and services .