i and ii. ) you were concerned that doe may not have properly implemented or adequately enforced federal standards of ethical conduct or doe ethics regulations at the project and that failure to do so may have contributed to contract award and management abuses . “consent to subcontract” is defined at 44.101 as the contracting officer's written consent for the prime contractor to enter into a particular subcontract . in a may 30 , 1990 , letter , saic originally requested doe's consent to add a $185,000 amendment to irg's march 1990 subcontract for $15,000 . according to a yucca mountain project contracting officer in 1994 , such a request was “irregular,” stating that any modification over 20 percent of a contract's value is of “concern” according to the competition in contracting act . doe apparently never acted on saic's request . in early july 1990 , saic requested bids from the two predetermined firms that had bid on the march 1990 contract — irg and a larger business in which saic held a 49-percent interest and whose unsalaried chief financial officer at the time was an saic official in contracting . on july 12 , 1990 , saic requested by letter that doe approve its decision to award the second time and materials subcontract to irg as the low bidder for $224,450 . in that letter , saic advised the contracting officer that only two firms had been solicited , largely to perform regulatory compliance strategy reviews and to develop / present related training at the project but also to recommend methods for successful interaction with various entities , including the congress . on july 13 , 1990 , the doe contracting officer approved the subcontract award . in determining whether to consent to a subcontract award on a time - and - materials basis , the contracting officer must exercise particularly careful and thorough consideration of several factors , including whether the contractor has a sound basis for selecting and determining the responsibility of the proposed subcontractor . 44.202 ( a ) ( 7 ) ) further , the “competition in subcontracting” clause at f.a.r . 52.244-5 , which provides that contractors must select subcontractors on a competitive basis to the maximum extent practical and consider the objectives and requirements of each contract , was in saic's contract . although the second subcontract called for different services and the resulting amount of the award was significantly higher than that of the first subcontract , the contracting officer apparently did not object to saic's method of competition . however , according to the project's chief counsel , it was highly unusual for saic to have only two companies bid for the work that was subcontracted to irg . the work was not very specialized , and a large pool of companies could have been considered . to have solicited only two bids , she said , defeats the purpose of competition to get the best price for the government . in april 1992 , the doe yucca mountain project manager engaged in lobbying activities outside proper official channels by attending a meeting that included congressional officials and representatives from saic and irg to discuss the project's future .