( see fig . for the 1993-96 period , records show that mid - delta employees returned approximately $226,000 in payment for unused leave . see figure 2 . according to mrs. reed , in 1994 after consulting with legal and tax advisors , she discontinued allowing her employees to roll over unused leave from one year to the next . thus , as a company practice , employees were given checks for the cash value of their unused leave , then were asked to endorse and return them to the company . further , former and current employees whom we interviewed complained that between 1993 and 1996 , employees had been presented with unsigned ( nonnegotiable ) checks in payment for their unused leave time and were asked — some employees said coerced — to endorse the checks back to the company . some also complained that in 1993 and 1994 , mrs. reed had issued stock certificates instead of paying them for unused leave time . at mrs. reed's request , according to employees we interviewed , employees endorsed the back of their checks and returned them . mid - delta home health officials deposited most of the checks in an account for the indigent care fund and some to the bank account of a political action committee , both controlled by mrs. reed . some of the moneys from the account for the indigent care fund were subsequently deposited to p&t management's operating account ; and mid - delta's director of finance confirmed that medicare had reimbursed the amount claimed for employee payroll costs , including the unused leave . see figure 1 . the intermediary also informed us that intermediaries look at an entire employee compensation package to determine if the costs claimed are reasonable and that it had not conducted a detailed audit of any mid - delta cost report . mid - delta home health , in our opinion , violated medicare cost reimbursement principles in claiming costs that it had not incurred . first , mid - delta home health presented approximately $226,000 in checks to its employees , representing payment for unused leave time in the 1993-96 period . mrs. reed subsequently asked the employees to endorse the checks and give them back to mid - delta . when questioned about this , some current and former employees told us that they had felt coerced into giving back the checks . the company then improperly claimed the full amounts of the leave as part of the employees' payroll costs and was reimbursed by medicare . second , mrs. reed requested — or , again according to some employees , coerced — mid - delta and p&t management employees to return a certain amount ( about 20 percent or more ) of their 1996 bonuses to the company . those on a “special employee” list received larger bonuses by agreeing in advance to return certain amounts of their bonuses ( an average of 29 percent ) to the company . the bonus paybacks totaled about $170,000 , including $80,000 from mrs. reed . mid - delta improperly claimed , and received reimbursement from medicare for , the returned bonuses .