( see app . his eight known switchless reselling companies operated at various times between 1993 and 1996 , charged their customers at least $20 million , and have been fined hundreds of thousands of dollars by state regulatory agencies and the fcc . however , neither the fcc nor we were able to locate him in 1997 or to date in 1998 because he has concealed his whereabouts . both business and individual consumers must select a pic to provide their long - distance service through their local exchange carrier . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . determining the prevalence of slamming is extremely difficult . although the fcc began receiving slamming complaints after the divestiture of at&t in 1985 , no central repository exists for slamming complaints ; and no entity , in our opinion , has made a significant effort to estimate the prevalence of slamming . contributing to the uncertainty concerning the prevalence of slamming , some consumers , who do not review their monthly telephone bills closely , are unaware that they have been slammed . others may be aware that they were slammed but take no corrective action , such as filing a complaint . customers can voluntarily change their long - distance company — or primary interexchange carrier ( pic ) — by contacting , or submitting an “order” to , the local exchange carrier . long - distance companies can also legitimately process a pic change to which the customer has agreed through either a written or verbal authorization . the three types of long - distance providers are facility - based carriers such as at&t , mci , and sprint ; switching resellers ; and switchless resellers . according to representatives of the fcc , numerous state regulatory agencies , and the industry , those who most frequently engage in intentional slamming are switchless resellers . they have the least to lose by using deceptive or fraudulent practices because they have no substantive investment in the industry . nevertheless , the economic incentives for slamming are shared by all long - distance providers . facility - based carriers have an economic incentive to slam because they have high fixed costs for network equipment and low costs for providing service to additional consumers . thus , providing service to additional consumers , even without authorization , adds to a carrier's cash flow with little additional cost . conversely , those same high fixed costs represent a strong commitment to the long - distance industry and a need to maintain the trust , and business , of their existing customers . resellers — switching and switchless — also provide long - distance service to their customers . switching resellers maintain and operate switching equipment to connect their customers to the networks of facility - based carriers .