( see fig . air operations were conducted by planes and personnel assigned to operation provide comfort on a temporary duty basis . on april 14 , 1994 , two u.s. army black hawk helicopters and their crew assigned to the military coordination center were transporting u.s. , united kingdom , french , and turkish military officers ; kurdish representatives ; and a u.s. political advisor in the taor . the black hawks had departed zakhu enroute to irbil , iraq . ( see fig . at the same time , two f - 15s were sanitizing the area that the black hawks were in ; and the awacs was over turkey providing airborne threat warning and control . the awacs was aware that the army black hawk helicopters had departed zakhu and were proceeding east into the taor . however , the f - 15 pilots were unaware that black hawk helicopters were already in the area and were not advised of the presence of friendly aircraft . the fighters twice informed the awacs that they had unknown radar contacts in the taor , and the awacs had access to electronic information regarding the presence of friendly aircraft in the vicinity of the f - 15s' reported radar contacts . throughout the incident , the helicopters were unable to hear the radio transmissions between the f - 15 pilots and the awacs because they were on a different radio frequency . according to the aircraft accident investigation board president's opinion , when the f - 15 pilots were unable to get positive / consistent electronic responses , they performed a visual intercept with each making a single identification pass over the black hawks to identify the “unknown” aircraft . however , the board president concluded that the identification passes were carried out at speeds , altitudes , and distances at which it was unlikely that the pilots would have been able to detect the black hawks' markings . according to the chairman , each of the shortcomings was being addressed and corrections implemented . at the direction of the secretary of defense and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , the secretary of the air force tasked the air combat command to investigate the specific operational issues identified in the aircraft accident investigation board report . the air combat command assembled a “tiger team” consisting primarily of air combat command headquarters staff augmented with representatives from the 8th air force , air force weapons center , air national guard , and the 552d air control wing . the team divided into three groups: awacs / airborne command and control , visual and electronic identification , and ground command and control . the three groups used the aircraft accident investigation board report as a frame of reference and identified 90 issues , which they studied in depth . the air combat command tiger team issued its report on september 14 , 1994 , making about 140 recommendations , most of which had been completed or were underway when the report was issued . the report also proposed six recommendations for consideration by the air staff or the joint chiefs of staff .