additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . coordinated our work with gsa's oig . we did not evaluate the overall effectiveness of gsa's building security program . we did our work from june 1999 to october 1999 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we have included more details about our scope and methodology in the attachment . in our june 1998 testimony , we said that , because of the unreliability of the gsa's building security upgrade tracking system , neither gsa nor we could determine whether all gsa buildings had been evaluated for security needs . further , we said that we could not make a reliable determination of the status of the building security upgrade program because of errors in gsa's building security upgrade tracking system . in addition , we reported that we could not reliably determine the actual costs or obligations incurred by gsa for security upgrades because gsa's accounting system also contained significant errors . we found in our most recent work that gsa has acted to ensure that its buildings have been assessed for security needs and to correct the data in its upgrade tracking system . it appears that , as a result of gsa's efforts , at least 98 percent of gsa's high - risk buildings and at least 96 percent of its lower - risk buildings have been evaluated for security needs and that the accuracy of gsa's security upgrade tracking system has improved . however , gsa recognizes that its accounting system still contains errors , some of which pertain to funds reported by gsa's oig as inappropriately expended . in may 1998 , gsa's federal protective service ( fps ) directed its staff in gsa's 11 regions to assess each gsa - controlled building to ensure that security evaluations had been completed and verify that the security upgrades in place were accurately reflected in gsa's building security upgrade tracking and accounting systems . subsequently , each fps regional director provided fps headquarters certifications that the directive had been met , and that all buildings in each region had been assessed and the appropriate corrections made to the tracking and accounting systems , with a few exceptions — relating primarily to the errors in the accounting system - - noted . according to fps officials , to do these reassessments , regional fps physical security specialists met with each building's gsa and agency tenant representatives to inspect and evaluate the security needs of the building . a gsa headquarters official told us that at least 97 percent of gsa's buildings were assessed as a result of this initiative . we randomly sampled 300 buildings ( 150 level iv and 150 level i through iii buildings ) from gsa's nationwide building inventory , and contacted each building's physical security specialist , and requested the assessment report for each building .