some of these activities are under investigation . we discussed the nature of the allegations that we investigated with abc's ceo , mr. mills , and the principal attorney for abc . they replied that abc has not knowingly violated medicare law or regulations . they added that the regulations are vague and subject to broad interpretation and selective enforcement . as reported previously by gao , a lack of specificity and ambiguity in hcfa guidelines could invite exploitation of the medicare system . current and former abc employees told us that medical records were altered and forged to ensure continued or prolonged home health care visits . we found instances in which abc's records appeared to justify home visits , but the patient seemed no longer eligible . he stated that his employment agreement also provided for a bonus if he increased the number of patients for abc . medicare patients qualify for visits if they are confined to their home ( except when receiving outpatient services ) , under the care of a physician who approves a plan of home care , and are in need of intermittent skilled nursing care or physical or speech therapy . according to abc's attorney , abc released the former owner because he had declined to give up a part - time position outside abc . a third former owner signed an employment agreement which stated that she would receive $10,000 per month for 5 years . the former owner , who understood that there would be no work required of her , said mr. mills told her she could spend her time tending to her garden and her antiques . neither medicare law nor regulations establish a ceiling on the number of visits a patient may receive . physicians certify the initial need for home health services and recertify the need for continued services at least every 2 months . however , physicians are generally not required to see patients to recertify continued need for home health visits . we found that physicians typically rely on nurses' verbal and / or written recommendations , which are part of the patient's records . in this regard , nurses and aides are required to make notes for the services they performed during each patient visit . at 10 locations , according to current and former employees , abc office managers directed staff to alter nursing notes so that they would not reflect indications of patient improvement . this practice was intended to create the appearance that continued home health visits were needed . in one office , a manager highlighted nurses' notes that the manager wanted changed to make it appear that continued care was necessary and dictated what the rewritten language should be . after one nurse declined to describe the conditions of her patients inaccurately , the manager asked another nurse to change nursing notes although she had not seen these patients . another office manager directed a nurse to record visits that were never made . that manager also forged physicians' signatures on plans of care that described the treatment . in another instance , a local abc quality assurance coordinator traced physicians' signatures onto a physician recertification form .