productivity of the . [oig].” the proposals and final reports submitted by the contractor were substantially the same for both jobs . mr. sato's final report for treasury included 30 recommendations ; his interior report had 26 recommendations . eighteen of the recommendations in both reports were substantially the same . messrs. dempsey and hyland worked with mr. sato on both the interior oig and treasury oig contracts . mr. hyland stated to us that the scope of work on the interior contract was basically the same as that on the treasury contract . according to mr. dempsey , although he conducted more interviews at treasury than at interior , the treasury contract was worth no more than $40,000 , adding that he and mr. hyland could have done “this job in 60 days at $40,000. ms. lau told us that prior to her october 1994 confirmation she had learned that oig suffered severe morale and diversity problems . in the spring of 1995 , she requested opm to conduct a workplace effectiveness study of the oig . the purpose of the resulting opm report was to provide the oig with the necessary information on employee attitudes to assist it in its efforts to remove obstacles to workplace effectiveness . when ms. lau made that request , she had anticipated contracting with opm to develop an implementation plan based on the problems identified in the initial study . however , in april 1995 , opm explained that it was unable to do any follow - on work because of reorganization and downsizing . instead , in july 1995 , opm provided treasury oig a list of 12 consultants who were capable of doing the follow - on work . on july 12 , 1995 , ms. lau's staff gave her a list of 14 possible consultants to perform the follow - on work — opm's list of 12 and 2 others with whom the staff were familiar . ms. lau reviewed the list , added two names , and instructed her special assistant to invite bids from at least the six individuals she had identified on the list . on august 17 , 1995 , opm conducted a preliminary briefing with senior oig staff concerning the nature of the oig problems . thereafter ms. lau told psd that an urgent need existed to hire a contractor to perform the follow - on work . she wanted the contract awarded before the annual oig managers' meeting scheduled for september 14 , 1995 , to prove to her managers that she intended to fix the problems identified in the opm study . ( the final report was furnished to the oig on september 30 , 1995 ; it reported that oig suffered from a lack of communication with its employees , severe diversity problems , and a lack of trust employees had toward management. ) oig staff followed up with the six consultants identified by ms. lau . the staff were unable to contact one consultant , and another consultant could not provide a preliminary proposal by august 30 , 1995 . with respect to the remaining four consultants , oig staff met with each one to orally describe the agency's needs and request written proposals .