this is the same as in the united states . government , pharmacy , and manufacturers' officials stated that pharmacists rarely submit adverse drug reaction reports . thus , the experiences of the 10 other countries do not allow us to assess the benefits from or costs of requiring pharmacists to report adverse drug reactions . however , there is some limited information from the united states that suggests that community pharmacists can , at least in some situations , successfully monitor patients for adverse drug reactions . what are the legal sanctions for failing to provide counseling ? what studies show whether pharmacists in the study countries and the united states counsel purchasers of nonprescription drugs , and what is the quality of that counseling ? what are the requirements and practices of pharmacists in monitoring adverse drug reactions and maintaining patient profiles ? how might recent developments in the practice of pharmacy affect the counseling behavior of pharmacists in the united states ? one reason proponents commonly give for limiting nonprescription drugs to sale in pharmacies ( even if no counseling is required ) is that it allows customers to ask for advice if they want it . table 4.1 summarizes the counseling requirements for nonprescription drugs in the 10 study countries and ontario . only in australia , denmark , germany , and italy are pharmacists required to provide information to patients on the use of nonprescription drugs . in australia , these requirements vary by state: some states require counseling on pharmacist class drugs but others do not . for instance , in victoria , the pharmacist is required to speak with the patient every time a pharmacist - class drug is sold . in denmark , germany , and italy , the pharmacist is required to provide information to patients on their medications ; however , there are no specific counseling requirements . in ontario and the united kingdom , nothing is required beyond the pharmacists' supervision of sales . in france , the netherlands , and switzerland , pharmacists need merely be physically present on the premises of the pharmacy . in sweden , while the pharmacist is expected to promote proper drug usage , there is no requirement that a pharmacist be present when a nonprescription drug is sold . there are no national counseling requirements in canada . in the 6 countries we visited — australia , canada , germany , the netherlands , switzerland , and the united kingdom — and ontario , there is some enforcement of the requirements for pharmacists selling nonprescription drugs , but it is somewhat limited . enforcement is sometimes by a professional association and is sometimes focused on physical aspects of the pharmacy rather than the counseling of patients . the number of inspectors is sometimes small and nonprescription drugs can be less emphasized than prescription products . counseling requirements are set by the states in australia . officials in the state of victoria told us that enforcement is done primarily through three pharmacy inspectors of the pharmacy board of victoria on the basis of professional standards .