( see pp . third , the department argues that the fact that over 70 percent of applicants funded to develop educational materials produced products and continued to offer them is evidence that weea projects serve the purposes of the legislation . there were no general or challenge grants in 1992 . our review was further limited to funded activities because , except for aggregated data , the department of education does not maintain records of unfunded applications . we also found some evidence to question the meaning of at least one of the requirements — funding priorities . based on our interviews with department officials , we understand that the applicants' decision to apply under the selected priorities or “other” class is not questioned . however , in reviewing a sample of proposals for priority and other awards , we were often unable to see differences between the activities proposed under the two groups . ( 4 ) how did changes in program administration affect the ability of the weea program to achieve its legislative purpose ? this study reviews activities funded under weea between 1986 and 1991 , the period for which agency records were available . ( no grants were awarded in 1992. ) although the projects we reviewed are representative of those funded over this 6-year period , they probably do not greatly resemble those funded before 1986 . for example , continuation grants ( applications funded for 2 or 3 years ) were common in the earlier years ( 33 of the 55 grants awarded in 1981 were continuation grants ) , but there were only three continuations in the 6 years from 1986 to 1991 . at the end of this report , we discuss changes in the weea program that were recently enacted as part of the improving america's schools act of 1994 . we believe that the most significant findings of this report still apply to the weea program as reauthorized . thus , this report should be useful to the department of education as well as local and state education officials and other potential weea applicants . when last reauthorized in 1988 , weea authorized the secretary of education to award ( 1 ) general grants for demonstration , developmental , and dissemination projects of national , statewide , or general significance and ( 2 ) challenge grants ( not to exceed $40,000 each ) to support comprehensive and innovative approaches to the achievement of educational equity . the secretary was also authorized to contract for a weea publishing center to disseminate weea products . the weea program was first funded in fiscal year 1976 . appropriation levels grew steadily , from $6.3 million at the onset to $10 million in 1980 , but dropped in the following decade . in the years between 1982 and 1992 , successive administrations aimed to end the program by not including any funds in the president's budget , but some funds were always reinstated by the congress . ( see appendix i for additional information. ) at one end of the spectrum are supporters who credit weea as being responsible for many exemplary projects that have made significant contributions toward attainment of gender equity .