not applicable . step 4: for each nonindex country: ( a ) project the step 3a overstay rate to visitors from the same country who entered the united states on nonqualifying airlines , which produces one set of overstay estimates ; and ( b ) project the step 3b rate of system error to visitors from the same country who entered on nonqualifying airlines , which produces a second set of overstay estimates . conceptually , qualifying airlines are defined as those that regularly fly between at least one index country and the united states . operationally , we defined qualifying airlines as those with at least 1,000 passengers from a single index country in a 6-month period . using data on index countries' air passengers , we estimated system error separately for each “qualifying airline.” conceptually , we defined a qualifying airline as one ( such as american airlines , delta , british airways , sas , swissair , or qantas ) that regularly serves one or more index countries — and has sufficient passengers to allow a reasonably reliable estimate of system error for that airline . operationally , we defined a qualifying airline as one that , during the 6-month period we examined , carried at least 1,000 passengers from a single index country to the united states . warren , robert . “estimates of the undocumented immigrant population residing in the united states , by country of origin and state of residence: october 1992.” revised version of a paper presented at “california immigration 1994,” a seminar sponsored by the california research bureau , 1994 . warren , robert . “annual estimates of nonimmigrant overstays in the united states: 1985 to 1988.” in frank d. bean , barry edmonston , and jeffrey s. passel , undocumented migration to the united states: irca and the experience of the 1980s . washington , d.c.: urban institute press , 1990 , pp . warren , robert . “the ins nonimmigrant information system: assessing the statistics on nondeparture.” in bureau of the census second annual research conference , march 23-26 , 1986: proceedings . u.s. bureau of the census , 1986 , pp . u.s. immigration and naturalization service , statistical yearbook of the immigration and naturalization service , 1990 . in the sample data ins provided to us , we found that , according to our operational definition , there were 29 qualifying airlines . to estimate system error for a specific qualifying airline , such as american airlines , we used the index countries' data for that airline alone . for example , to estimate paa , we first calculated the proportion of uncounted departures ( system error ) for each index country — australia ( paus / aa ) , switzerland ( pswz / aa ) , norway ( pnor / aa ) , and so forth ; then , we took the weighted average of these figures . to complete step 1 , we also calculated the standard deviation of the proportion of uncounted departures across index countries for a specific airline . we then took , as the estimate of system error for a specific airline , the weighted average plus one standard deviation . step 1 was repeated for each of the 29 qualifying airlines .