it builds on two earlier reports . the first , nutrition monitoring: progress in developing a coordinated program ( gao / pemd - 94-23 ) , assessed the nnmrrp's planning activities . although some information is available from state surveys of nonprobability samples of farmers , the usda program adjusts these less dependable estimates so that they aggregate to the more reliable regional and national estimates that are based on a survey of a national probability sample of farmers . hhs has no regular program to produce indirect state estimates , but since 1968 , it has supported the occasional development and evaluation of indirect estimates from national health interview survey data . in addition , hhs produced state estimates from the national natality and national fetal mortality surveys conducted in 1980 using demographic data from the states to adjust the national estimates . for example , the current approach to coordination — the interagency board — is criticized for its lack of authority over the member agencies . in contrast , an independent central authority could have influence over the nnmrrp agencies . the options were considered feasible if they were already used in other programs with similar issues ( such as the lead agency approach for other cross - agency programs ) , past activities of the nnmrrp ( such as the special study approach for information on subpopulations ) , or related current activities by nnmrrp agencies ( such as indirect estimation ) . as described in chapter 2 , a model program would have a mechanism for coordinating the various nutrition monitoring activities to maximize the utility of the data and minimize the costs of its collection . this chapter first reviews the status of current nnmrrp activities to improve coordination . then , two other possible coordination mechanisms — coordination by a central authority and coordination by a single lead agency — are examined . ( table 3.1 provides an overview of the strengths and limitations of the various approaches to coordination. ) as described in chapter 1 , the nnmrrp meets multiple needs for nutrition - related data . yet , historically , these needs have not been met by an integrated program with the capacity for evaluating data needs and making adjustments as those needs change . instead , a fragmented system of activities developed over the decades as new needs for nutrition data were identified . for example , in the early 1930s , usda developed its first national survey of household food consumption because data on the food supply provided no information about the distribution of food at the household and individual levels . similarly , the nutrition component was added to the national health examination survey in the early 1970s in response to a need for more information about hunger , and state - based surveillance systems were established in recognition of the primary role of states in providing services to populations at risk of nutritional problems . to address concerns about the lack of coordination across the agencies involved in nutrition monitoring , the national nutrition monitoring and related research act of 1990 required the secretaries of agriculture and health and human services to implement a coordinated program of nutrition monitoring .