cov . med . cov . med . cov . med . the significant differences in denial rates for medical necessity across carriers give rise to the following question: what accounts for the variations in denial rates ? to address this question , we met with carrier representatives and hcfa officials , who identified five factors that could help explain the variation in denial rates across carriers . the medicare program has since its inception acknowledged the existence of regional variations in medical practice standards and has sought to accommodate these differences in adjudicating claims . one practical consequence of this policy is that hcfa has delegated to carriers the authority to determine whether a rendered service was medically necessary . making such determinations requires that carriers first develop a local medical policy . computer screens are used to suspend a subset of claims , which are then reviewed by claims examiners , who in turn follow local medical policy in making their determinations . utilization and diagnostic screens are two of the more common types of screens . utilization screens measure the number of times a service has been performed against a standard ( for example , services per year ) , and diagnostic screens compare the diagnosis listed on a claim with a defined set of diagnoses that would usually warrant performance of that service . differences in the way that carriers use screens can affect the variability of denial rates in two ways . first , in the absence of an applicable local medical policy or a coverage directive from hcfa to assess the validity of a claim , carriers usually assume that a claim is valid and thus should be approved . it follows that , given comparable billing patterns , a carrier with a screen in place for a specific medical service will deny more claims than a carrier without such a screen in place . carriers differ in the number of services they screen ; we reported earlier that the total number of local screens carriers used in 1988 ranged from 5 to 177 . second , different carriers screening the same service may use different criteria to suspend claims . thus , although two carriers may screen the same service for medical necessity , their respective criteria may result in differing denial rates . to gauge the effect of medical necessity screens on carrier denial rates , we asked the carrier with the highest denial rate for medical necessity for 5 selected services to identify the specific reason for denial for a small sample of 15 to 20 claims denied for lack of medical necessity . in this way , we were able to identify the key screens that most directly caused denial . we selected the 5 services because carrier denial rates for each one exhibited significant variation . for each service , we selected the carrier with the highest denial rate and determined the reason for the denial: x - ray and multichannel blood test ( illinois ) , myocardial perfusion imaging and echocardiography ( southern california ) , and opthalmologic exam ( wisconsin ) .