washington . d.c.: congressional budget office , 1995 . porter , kathryn h. making jobs work: what the research says about effective employment programs for afdc recipients . washington , d.c.: center on budget and policy priorities , 1990 . vol . summary report . princeton , n.j.: mathematica policy research , 1992 . friedlander , daniel . and ( 2 ) what approaches have been effective in increasing employment and earnings or reducing benefit receipt among welfare clients ? the nation's major cash assistance program to poor families , aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) , provides cash benefits to needy families with children who lack support from one or both of their parents because of unemployment , incapacity , absence , or death . funded with federal and state dollars , the program operates as an individual entitlement — that is , everyone who meets the eligibility requirements is entitled to receive benefits . in fiscal year 1993 , afdc benefits supported 5 million families and more than 9.5 million children each month and cost over $25 billion in federal and state funds . the family support act of 1988 created the job opportunities and basic skills training ( jobs ) program , which requires the states to enroll an increasing proportion of their adult afdc recipients ( primarily women ) in the education , training , and employment - related activities they need to get jobs and avoid long - term welfare dependency . the states are permitted substantial flexibility in designing and implementing their jobs programs , but they are required to provide participants with the support services deemed necessary , such as child care and transportation . federal funds to match state jobs expenditures are capped , but most states have not reached the limit of that cap . however , as we reported last december , the share of afdc recipients active in jobs is limited ; only about one fourth of those required to participate were served in an average month in fiscal year 1993 . rapid growth in the afdc caseload since 1989 and concern about program costs and beneficiaries' long - term dependence have led to widespread dissatisfaction with the afdc program and to several congressional proposals to reform it . some provisions of current proposals represent continuity with previous legislative efforts to strengthen the employment focus of the program , such as requiring larger proportions of recipients to participate in a work program . other provisions propose dramatic changes in afdc's structure , such as imposing time limits on the receipt of benefits and replacing the individual entitlement to benefits with a block grant for which federal funding would be fixed . concern about welfare dependency has spurred policy initiatives since the 1970s to encourage or assist welfare clients to get jobs . the states have obtained waivers from existing federal statutes and regulations to test a variety of welfare - to - work initiatives . one condition of the waivers is that the states rigorously evaluate the effects of these initiatives . evaluations conducted under such waivers informed the formulation of the jobs program ; others completed since 1988 can similarly inform the current debate .