we disagree . the definitions we used make it clear that the laboratories were not expected to produce commercial products . our conclusion reiterates that the laboratories' outputs related to commercial product development are “precursors to marketable goods” and that “whether they will achieve commercial application is not known.” we provide a more detailed discussion of all these comments and our response in appendixes vii through xvii . as agreed with your offices , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date of issue , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier . ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) f. private firms or industrial organizations g. laboratory to u.s. government organizations h. laboratory to foreign government organizations i . transfer technology from this laboratory to u.s.firms or industrial organizations j. laboratory to foreignfirms or industrial organizations other ( please specify ) basic research: knowledge base in the field of investigation . a study undertaken primarily to gain fuller knowledge or understanding of a subject and to contribute to the a study directed toward the practical use of knowledge or understanding of a subject to meet a recognized need . development: development of prototypes and processes . research directed toward the production of useful materials , devices , systems , or methods , including the design and i - 7 5 . 1989-92 for each of the research and development - related activities listed below ? "n / a" if the program was not in operation in given year. ) in your estimation , what percent , if any , of your total research subprogram budget was expended each year during fiscal years write ( annual total should equal 100 percent . d. assistance to government agencies f. assistance to private firms or industrial organizations g. this laboratory to u.s. government organizations h. this laboratory to foreign government organizations i. this laboratory to u.s.firms or industrial organizations j. this laboratory to foreignfirms or industrial organizations other ( please specify ) basic research: knowledge base in the field of investigation . a study undertaken primarily to gain fuller knowledge or understanding of a subject and to contribute to the a study directed toward the practical use of knowledge or understanding of a subject to meet a recognized need . development: development of prototypes and processes . research directed toward the production of useful materials , devices , systems , or methods , including the design and i - 8 6 . 1989-92 , which of these technologies did the research of this subprogram support ? research subprograms budget was spent each year for research about these technologies ? estimated percentage for activities checked. ) we identified the technologies listed below using the report of the national critical technologies panel . during fiscal years in your estimation what percentage of the write in the ( check all that apply . pollution minimization , remediation , and waste management other ( please specify ) i - 10 7 . how many of the research and development - related outputs listed below did your subprogram produce each year from fiscal year write "n / a" if the program was not in operation in a given year. )