prob . coeff . prob . coeff . prob . coeff . in our october 1991 report to you entitled highway safety: have automobile weight reductions increased highway fatalities ? ( gao / pemd - 92-1 ) , we presented a number of findings regarding the relationship between car weight and safety . among other things , we found the danger cited by some researchers and agency officials — that the increase in lighter cars on the highways since the 1970's would result in dramatically higher highway death tolls — to be overstated and to have excluded consideration of some important factors . one of these factors was the lowered threat , from reductions in both weight and force of impact , posed to other drivers on the road in multiple vehicle collisions . at the time , we also reported that the safety effects of weight change or any other automotive design factor could be confounded by many other factors , chief among them driver attributes . for example , we discussed in qualitative terms how a driver's age could interact in different ways with car size attributes . if it is true that younger drivers drive smaller cars and also tend to drive more recklessly , then attributing the higher injury rates in smaller cars simply to car size or weight might be misleading . however , if it is true that elderly drivers drive larger cars and , if involved in a crash , are more likely to be injured than younger drivers , then larger cars may appear to be less safe than they really are . you have requested that we investigate these relationships more comprehensively and that we set the discussion of car size and safety into the larger context of the relative contributions to highway safety of driver attributes , vehicle characteristics , and their multiple interactions . our response to your request involved an investigation into two distinct , and sometimes highly divergent , aspects of highway safety: crash involvement and crashworthiness . the study of crash involvement focuses attention on the factors likely to produce a crash . crashworthiness , instead , examines the factors likely to produce serious injury , once a crash has occurred . the present report deals with crash involvement — that is , with the driver or vehicle characteristics that are related to the likelihood of a crash . the attributes we examined included driver age , gender and driving history , vehicle age and size ( weight , wheelbase , and engine displacement ) . a companion report will examine crashworthiness: the factors that affect the likelihood of serious injury once a crash has taken place . a third report will examine the relationship between automobile crashworthiness and crash testing performed by the department of transportation . in the present analysis , we have used a method known as “induced exposure” to estimate the likelihood of crash involvement . this approach assumes that not - at - fault drivers in two - vehicle accidents represent a random selection of drivers and vehicles on the road . the ratio of at - fault to not - at - fault drivers provides a measure of the relative involvement of drivers and vehicles in accident causation .