( see appendix i. ) more states regulated the advertisement of personal care , home health , and home nursing . a title sometimes applied to a paraprofessional home care worker who generally provides basic home health care and incidental personal care services . agencies that are medicare - certified must ensure that home health aides in their employ meet specific medicare training requirements . assistance with health care provided in private residences to persons with disabilities . this designation may include services of professional nurses and therapists as well as those of paraprofessionals , such as home health aides and personal care aides . specific services may include administration of medication , catheter care , wound care , and occupational or physical therapy . housekeeping assistance that may include cooking , cleaning , and laundry and generally does not involve hands - on contact with the consumer . permission to practice or operate in a certain capacity ( for example , as a home health aide ) that is extended only to license holders . licenses may be extended to either businesses or individual workers . they are generally subject to renewal at designated intervals and may presume satisfaction of certain standards or submission to certain oversight processes . a designation given to an entity that is approved for participation in the medicare program and is therefore eligible for medicare reimbursement ( for example , a “certified” home health agency ) . nurse's aides who are qualified to work in nursing homes that participate in medicare or medicaid are also sometimes called “certified” nurse's aides . a title used by professionals who help persons with disabilities to develop , recover , or maintain daily living and work skills or to compensate for loss of function . an occupational therapist may also design or make special equipment needed at home or at work . persons who use this title generally hold a bachelor's degree in occupational therapy . a title sometimes given to paraprofessional home care workers who perform personal care services . people who perform these functions are also sometimes known as personal attendants or personal care workers . functional assistance , including help with basic activities of daily living ( such as eating , bathing , toileting , and transferring from bed to chair ) , that generally involves hands - on contact with the consumer . a title used by professionals who perform tasks designed to improve mobility , relieve muscle pain , and prevent or limit the permanent physical disabilities of patients suffering from injuries or disease . unlike an occupational therapist , a physical therapist focuses exclusively on physical disabilities . physical therapists are usually licensed and graduates of an accredited physical therapy program . a home care worker who cares for the sick , injured , convalescing , and handicapped under the direction of a physician or registered nurse . such workers perform tasks such as taking vital signs , treating bedsores , administering injections and enemas , providing assistance with personal care , giving alcohol rubs and massages , and inserting catheters . we completed our survey between august 1994 and april 1996 . we received responses from 49 states and the district of columbia .