we disagree . the cdc has indicated that the nis was not intended to identify pockets of need and consequently does not do so . the nis may actually deflect attention from some serious problem areas because they are incorporated in larger areas for survey purposes . for example , the seattle - king county department of public health and the university of washington conducted a separate household survey of central and southeast seattle using the same age group and reference dates as the nis , but finding that 57 percent of children in this part of the city were fully immunized , in contrast to the nis rate of 79 percent up - to - date for all of king county in the same time period.11 . because of the wide margins of error of survey estimates , the nis is probably not sufficiently sensitive to permit evaluation of interventions or policy changes in particular areas or subgroups . although national changes in immunization coverage may be monitored with greater precision , changes in national or local immunization coverage might be attributable to factors other than policy changes ( for example , trends in the demographic characteristics of children to be immunized ) . moreover , policy changes typically occur in groups and are implemented gradually , which would make it quite difficult to attribute any observed movements in immunization coverage to a single change or a combination of changes . in this context , it seems inadvisable to draw conclusions about particular state activities based solely on the results of the nis . when combined , these factors sometimes reduce to below 50 percent the effective response rates for key questions ( for example , how many times has your child received a polio vaccine ? we agree that the nis is technically capable of detecting the rapid and dramatic changes in coverage that typically accompany the recommendation of new vaccines . , raising concerns about the accuracy of resulting estimates . the potential to use household surveys for the collection of childhood immunization data is limited by the accuracy with which household respondents can supply information on children's immunization status.data available to cdc before the initiation of the nis , including a report commissioned by the agency in 1975 to review the united states immunization survey , questioned the assumption that parents could accurately recall immunization history . even as the nis was initiated in 1994 , nchs had a study in progress to assess the accuracy of responses to the immunization supplement of the nhis . it is well documented that survey respondents have trouble accurately recalling the occurrences of , distinctions among , and number of , events that are not particularly salient , or that are similar in nature , or that are repeated more than a few times over a long time period . as a result , when surveyed , they sometimes forget when the events occurred and are confused as to how many of which types of events occurred . as a rule , if events are socially desirable , respondents tend to overreport them . the nis asks about the receipt of 14 different immunizations , given in repeated sets , varying in number , over a 1- to 3-year period .