safety belts . crash type . the patterns of injury by crash type are very different for drivers 65 and older and for younger drivers . figure 3.2 shows that , in our analysis , nearly four fifths of the drivers 65 or older who were hospitalized or killed were injured in collisions with cars or light trucks , while only about one fifth were injured in one - car crashes ( and almost none were hurt in one - car rollovers — just 3 percent ) . we disagree . as the findings presented in this chapter demonstrate , the nass data set we constructed clearly was adequate for uncovering a number of statistically significant relationships ( the analyses are described in appendix i ) . in addition , our findings are similar to nhtsa's findings from statistical analyses of state accident databases ( particularly concerning the effects of the weights of both vehicles in two - car collisions ; see klein , hertz , and borener , 1991 ) and to nhtsa's findings from statistical analyses of a slightly different nass database ( see table i.1 and nhtsa , 1992a , p. 72 ) . safety researchers have consistently found that women automobile occupants have a greater risk of injury in a collision than men and that the risk of injury increases with occupant age . for example , nhtsa ( 1992a ) found that women vehicle occupants involved in tow - away crashes are 36 percent more likely than men to suffer an injury categorized as moderately severe or worse . nhtsa also found that the risk of moderate injury increases about 2 percent for each year of age , meaning that , compared with 20-year - olds , 30-year - olds have a 21-percent greater risk of injury and 60-year - olds are more than twice as likely to be injured . similarly , evans ( 1988b ) reported that 30-year - old women have a fatality risk in traffic crashes about 31-percent higher than 30-year - old men and that the risk of fatality increases about 2 percent for each year of age . our analysis of the nass data set of police - reported tow - away crashes produced similar findings . for statistically equivalent crashes , we found that women drivers are about 29 percent more likely to be hospitalized or killed than men drivers . we also found that drivers 65 and older are about 4.5 times more likely to be seriously hurt than drivers 16 to 24 years old in equivalent crashes . ( see table i.1. ) one explanation for the greater vulnerability of women drivers and older drivers emphasizes their inherent physical frailty . this view postulates that the same degree of physical trauma is more likely to produce injury in women than in men and in older automobile occupants than in younger ones , because women and older people are physically less resilient than men and younger people . indeed , there is some support for the view that women are physically more vulnerable than men ( evans , 1988b ) , and that older people are more fragile than younger ones is well documented ( for example , mackay , 1988 ; pike , 1989 ) .