how is cholesterol measured ? ( see chapter 2. ) what is known about the accuracy and precision of cholesterol measurement techniques ? ( see chapter 3. ) what factors influence cholesterol levels ? ( see chapter 4. ) what is the potential effect of uncertain measurement ? ( see chapter 5. ) to answer these questions , we identified and reviewed relevant scientific literature published mainly since 1988 and synthesized data across studies to address these questions . we selected this period because it covered the time since the first ncep cholesterol measurement goals were issued , permitting a benchmark by which later testing could be judged . we conducted our bibliographic search using on - line data bases of medical literature . other sources included articles recommended by experts in the field and the bibliographies of articles published in medical and related research journals . we identified and reviewed approximately 125 books and articles relevant to cholesterol measurement in this manner . we supplemented our review of the medical literature with interviews with a range of individuals who have expertise in the field . these included government agency officials involved with cholesterol measurement and testing issues at cdc , the food and drug administration ( fda ) , hcfa , nih , and the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) . we also interviewed manufacturers of analyzers in private industry , university researchers , and representatives of organizations that conduct proficiency testing for laboratories . in order to have a better understanding of the testing process , we visited a major hospital laboratory facility to discuss quality control issues and challenges facing practitioners . we also visited a major manufacturer of analyzers to learn more about the production process ( quality control procedures , analyzer calibration , potential sources of inaccuracy ) as well as industry concerns about the accuracy and precision of cholesterol testing . we did not , however , independently evaluate laboratory performance in any of the different settings where cholesterol tests are conducted across the country . in this chapter , we answer the first evaluation question: how is cholesterol measured ? the discussion begins with an overview of cholesterol's role in the body and analyzes how total cholesterol , hdl , ldl , apolipoproteins , and triglycerides are measured , focusing on laboratory techniques . we also describe the range of settings where cholesterol testing is done and review the type of analyzers for sale in the u.s. market . cholesterol measurement focuses mainly on determining levels of total , hdl , and ldl cholesterol . triglyceride levels are also included in lipid profiles . cholesterol is commonly tested in a variety of settings ranging from large health fairs to more specialized clinical laboratories . no national data are available on the number of laboratories that conduct cholesterol tests , the number of cholesterol testing devices in use in laboratories , or the number of such tests that are done each year . the universe of u.s. laboratories that conduct different types of medical tests is large , however , with some 154,403 having registered with hcfa by october 1993 .