elec. - comm . the shipbuilding and repairing industry data differ from those of the other industry groups . the strength of the relationship between budgets and productivity is weaker , and the direction of the relationship in recent years is positive . what are the trends in the financial indicators of major defense contractors over time ? what is the relationship between indicators of defense spending and indicators of the financial status of major defense contractors over time ? the industries in our analysis include u.s. manufacturers of items for major dod procurement programs . dod and other executive agencies have identified them as “defense - dominated” industries , or industries in which the output is largely purchased for defense purposes: aircraft , guided missiles , ammunition and ordnance , tanks , ships , and electronics and communications equipment . where the industrial output of these manufacturing industries is not purchased by dod , it may be purchased by commercial companies , other u.s. government agencies , or international companies . we designed a macro - level evaluation to describe overall trends and patterns and to provide a basis for the additional phases of the work that you requested . the highly aggregated nature of much of the existing data and information about defense industries also in part required that we adopt a macro - level approach . since our focus was global , we did not examine specific disparities , differences , or nuances in the data . the aggregate nature of the data did not permit us to offer definitive explanations for the trends these data reveal . we collected , integrated , and analyzed published and unpublished data across the period 1975-95 from the executive agencies that maintain information on defense industries — dod , the department of commerce , and dol . this resulted in multiple data sources and multiple measures . we used those that were the most comprehensive with respect to that time period and the aspects of defense industry that we focused on . we interviewed individuals and reviewed studies at commerce , dod , and dol as well as at private research and consulting organizations , wall street firms , and major defense contractors . ( a list of the offices we contacted is in appendix i. ) for example , defense industry analysts at the center for strategic and budgetary assessments indicate that there are at least 12 ways to conduct financial assessments of the defense industrial base . we interviewed wall street business analysts , reviewed the procedures dod recommends for conducting financial assessments , and spoke with defense contractors and industry experts . they agreed that financial viability is best assessed with multiple indicators . we used sales and cash flow because they are conventional indicators and because information on them could easily be retrieved from standard and poor's compustat database . other measures or variables from company income statements that can be used to analyze financial viability include gross income , operating income , and net income . our sample of defense companies included those among the top 100 that received the largest dollar amount of dod prime contract awards in 1994 .