( see p . we agree with fda that our report “deals only with calculations of averages and percentiles” — that is , with means , medians ( or 50th percentile ) , as well as the 5th and 95th percentiles . however , fda's suggested additions do not extend beyond such descriptive statistics . we also agree that mean review times in the presence of numerous open cases may not be meaningful . nonclinical data are included as appropriate . however the answers to the fundamental questions of safety and effectiveness are determined from data derived from clinical trials . fda also regulates research conducted to determine the safety and effectiveness of unapproved devices . fda approval is required only for “significant risk” devices . applicants submit applications for such devices to obtain an investigational device exemption ( ide ) from regulatory requirements and approval to conduct clinical research . we use the median for two reasons . for an ide , unlike pmas and 510 ( k ) s , it is the proposed clinical study that is being assessed — not just the device . modifications of medical devices , including any expansion of their labeled uses , are also subject to fda regulation . applications to modify a device that entered the market through a pma are generally linked to the original pma application and are called pma supplements . in contrast , modifications to a 510 ( k ) device are submitted as new 510 ( k ) applications . references may be made to previous 510 ( k ) applications . fda uses several measures of duration to report the amount of time spent reviewing applications . in this letter , we use only three of those measures . if these lengthy reviews were arbitrarily closed at may 18 , 1995 ( the cutoff date for our data collection ) , the mean would increase to 285 days . in contrast , the median review time ( 230 days ) would remain the same regardless of when these open applications were completed . the second reason for using the median is that the distributions of review time for 510 ( k ) , original pma , and pma supplement applications are not symmetric , that is , having about the same number of applications requiring short reviews as lengthy reviews . the median is less sensitive to extreme values than the mean . as a result , the review time of a single application requiring an extremely lengthy review would have considerably more effect on the mean than the median . figure 7 shows the distribution for 510 ( k ) s submitted in 1993 , the most recent year in which at least 95 percent of all 510 ( k ) applications had been completed . the distribution is skewed with a mean review time of 269 days and a median review time of 222 days for all completed applications . mean = 269 median = 222 to provide additional information , we report on the mean review times as well as the median . the discrepancy between the two measures gives some indication of the distribution of review time .