approval . if fda is satisfied that a drug is safe and effective , it approves the drug for marketing for its intended use as described in the label . approvable . what distinguishes ndas that are approved from those that are not ? additionally , as you asked , we obtained the most recently available data on how long it takes for drugs to be approved in the united kingdom and compared them with approval times in the united states . because gao has access to all applications , both those that have been approved and those that have not , our report is the first to present comprehensive data on review time for all ndas submitted to fda . the process of bringing a drug to market is lengthy and complex and begins with laboratory investigations of the drug's potential . for drugs that seem to hold promise , preclinical animal studies are typically conducted to see how a drug affects living systems . if the animal studies are successful , the sponsoring pharmaceutical firm designs and initiates clinical studies in which the drug is given to humans . at this point , fda becomes directly involved for the first time . before any new drug can be tested on humans , the drug's sponsor must submit an investigational new drug application to fda that summarizes the preclinical work , lays out a plan for how the drug will be tested on humans , and provides assurances that appropriate measures will be taken to protect them . unless fda decides that the proposed study is unsafe , clinical testing may begin 31 days after this application is submitted to fda . while clinical trials progress through several phases aimed at establishing safety and efficacy , the manufacturer develops the processes necessary to produce large quantities of the drug that meet the quality standards for commercial marketing . when all this has been done , the pharmaceutical firm submits an nda that includes the information fda needs to determine whether the drug is safe and effective for its intended use and whether the manufacturing process can ensure its quality . the first decision fda must make is whether to accept the nda or to refuse to file it because it does not meet minimum requirements . once fda has accepted an nda , it decides whether to approve the drug on the basis of the information in the application and any supplemental information fda has requested . fda can approve the drug for marketing ( in an “approval letter” ) or it may indicate ( in an “approvable letter” ) that it can approve the drug if the sponsor resolves certain issues . alternatively , fda may withhold approval ( through a “nonapprovable letter” that specifies the reasons ) . throughout the process , the sponsor remains an active participant by responding to fda's inquiries and concerns . the sponsor has the option , moreover , of withdrawing the application at any time . for each nda submitted between 1987 and 1994 , we obtained from fda information on the dates of its significant events between initial submission and final decision as well as the last reported status of the application as of may 1995 .