we have incorporated these into the text where appropriate . as discussed with your office , we will be sending copies of this report to the subcommittee chairman , to other interested congressional committees and agencies , and to the department of health and human services and the health care financing administration . we will also send copies to others who request them . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me or sushil k. sharma , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-3092 . the major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . kathleen c. buckwalter , ph.d. , university of iowa robert butler , m.d. , mount sinai medical center , n.y . donald m. keller , project manager venkareddy chennareddy , referencer we wish to acknowledge the assistance of r.e . canjar in collecting and organizing the data and richard c. weston in ensuring data quality . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the 49 states with medicaid waiver programs all responded to our questionnaire . we conducted our work in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for example , the financial eligibility rules of some states may obviate the need to ask about all the topics in the economic resources domain . such repetition of topics would make the assessment unreasonably burdensome for the clients as well as for those programs with relatively limited resources ( staff , time , or money ) . less comprehensive instruments should be evaluated in the context of their particular programs to determine if sufficient information is collected about the client's physical and mental health , functional status , social and economic supports , and home environment to develop an appropriate care plan . we found that although most assessments are conducted as face - to - face interviews , only 35 percent of the instruments specify the wording of any of the interview questions that assessors ask the clients . further , when the wording is not specified , it is often unclear in what order different elements of information are to be gathered .