industry . industry's progress also varies . petroleum and coal facilities have the largest percentage of cleanups under way at high - priority facilities — 87 percent — while metals manufacturing facilities have the smallest — 51 percent . electrical , gas , and sanitary facilities have the highest percentage of completed cleanups — 11 percent — regardless of priority , while metal manufacturing facilities have the lowest — 5 percent . appendix iii details cleanup progress , by category , for states , epa regions , and industries . four key factors are hampering cleanups , according to the cleanup managers we spoke with at epa and the companies . first , the rcra cleanup process is time - consuming and costly . second , epa , the states , and companies often disagree on how to approach cleanup at a facility , including the standards and remedies that facilities should use . third , because cleanups under the corrective action program are expensive and drawn - out , unless epa or a state directs a company to begin cleanup under the program , a company tends to initiate cleanup at its facilities only when it has economic incentives to do so . finally , epa and some states lack the resources needed to direct more companies to begin cleanups at the facilities not yet in the program and to provide timely oversight of cleanups already under way . according to cleanup managers from each of the 23 companies we reviewed , the rcra cleanup process is sometimes unnecessarily time - consuming and costly . according to epa officials , the complexity of many rcra facilities — especially the high - priority ones — adds to the time and cost of cleanups . however , the industry representatives stated that the duplicative and restrictive nature of the cleanup process epa and the states have implemented adds more time and cost than warranted . these representatives believe that the corrective action process forces epa's cleanup managers to become overly prescriptive in monitoring a cleanup , concentrating on whether the facility has complied with every step in the cleanup process rather than on whether it has met the cleanup's overall goals and objectives . for example , according to the cleanup managers of one chemical company , the company has numerous , similar facilities with underground storage tanks that need to be cleaned up . the managers commented that , although epa and the states typically require the same cleanup method at each facility , program protocol requires each facility to conduct a thorough investigation and corrective measures study , with all of the requisite data collection , reports , and plans . the managers believe that this is a heavy , costly , and unnecessary paperwork burden . similarly , representatives of a chemical facility we visited reported that prior to epa's involvement in the cleanup , the facility spent $10 million to investigate the contamination and initiate its own cleanup activities , which epa later approved as sufficient . epa regions . the regions differ significantly in the percentage of cleanups they have under way or completed .