103-403 , sec . resulted in our not knowing the potential for duplication of similar work funded by another agency . since funding for the navy's sbir phase ii awards is set at about $750,000 , this figure amounts to $150,000 and is having a significant effect on motivating companies to take commercialization seriously . as of september 1994 , doe had supported four special training sessions intended to help its awardees market their sbir - developed products . all sessions were conducted by dawnbreaker , a private firm from rochester , new york , that assisted individual phase ii awardees in preparing a business plan for potential sponsors and presenting it at a conference to several dozen decisionmakers from large corporations and venture capital firms . doe's sbir manager has tracked the results of the project . he told us that the second session , conducted in 1991 , has proven very successful . he noted that 43 percent of the companies participating in the session have received phase iii funding , which has totaled $14 million as of july 1994 and that an extra $24 million is expected over the next 3 to 5 years . he also believes that the sessions in 1993 and 1994 will eventually prove successful but indicated that more time is needed for results to emerge . in dod's commercialization efforts , we found several new initiatives . the most striking was the special strategy adopted by the navy's sbir manager . the navy is emphasizing the importance of commercialization by making a plan for such commercialization ( both within dod and in the private sector ) a requirement for receiving the last 20 percent of each phase ii award . this requirement went into effect in 1994 . the navy's sbir manager said that the navy retains the money until the company develops a testing and evaluation plan or an r&d plan as it relates to commercialization . sba and agencies' sbir officials cited a wide variety of reasons for not implementing the technical assistance provision . these reasons , in conjunction with the optional nature of the provision , make its future implementation uncertain . independent of the technical assistance provision , however , agencies have taken other steps to foster commercialization of research results . sbir officials at dod , nsf , and nasa told us that they are still considering steps to implement the technical assistance option . however , they noted the difficulties involved in implementing it and remain uncertain whether the problems can be overcome . officials at dod and nsf stated that among other steps taken by agencies to foster commercialization , the joint dod - nsf national commercialization conferences have played an important role in helping sbir companies market their products . dod and nsf sponsored two of these conferences in 1993-94 and are planning another major conference to be held in anaheim , california , during march 1995 . duplicate funding of similar proposals submitted to more than one agency has become a problem .