( see app . i for information on publicly owned commercial and general aviation airports that are privately managed. ) in some cases , local governments that own airports also do not control land next to or in the immediate vicinity of their airport and must have the cooperation of other local governments to meet the land - use assurance . the exposure of a private owner or lessee to noise and environmental liability arising from lawsuits presents an additional business risk . for example , public owners have been found liable for damages from noise caused by airport operations . therefore , a private airport owner or lessee could be liable for damages from noise . determining liability for airport noise and environmental damages is , for the most part , a local issue . although airports must conform to federal safety and security requirements , regardless of their ownership and whether they receive federal grants , these requirements do not pose significant barriers to privatization . under faa's safety requirements , airports must be certified by faa to service various categories of commercial aircraft . similarly , airports must meet faa's security requirements . because of sovereign immunity , a public owner may have greater protection from lawsuits claiming that the airport failed to adhere to safety or security requirements . a private owner would not have this immunity and would need to obtain private insurance or self - insure against liability unless specifically indemnified as part of any transfer . all of these sources of capital are affected by federal policies . figure 1.2 depicts the average percentage contribution of each of these sources of capital at 53 large and medium hub airports in 1994 . the percentages for large hubs do not add to 100 because of rounding . for smaller airports , federal grants constitute a larger portion of their total capital because the other sources are not as accessible . our prior work has shown that an inverse relationship exists between an airport's size and its reliance on federal grants . since 1946 , the federal government has helped finance airport development with more than $23.5 billion in grants . since 1970 , airport grants have been financed by the airport and airway trust fund , which is financed from taxes on domestic and international airline travel , domestic cargo transported by air , and noncommercial aviation fuel . aip , the current federal airport grant program , was established by the airport and airway improvement act of 1982 , as amended , and is administered by faa . aip grants help finance projects that enhance airports' capacity , safety , security , and noise mitigation . there are two categories of aip grants — apportionment and discretionary . apportionment grants are distributed by formula to commercial airports ( with more than 10,000 annual passenger enplanements ) and states . discretionary grants can generally be used for any eligible airport development project . the congress has earmarked or “set - aside” some aip discretionary funding for certain types of projects or airports . about 3,300 ( 18 percent ) of the nation's airports are eligible to receive aip grants .