( fig . 1 shows a typical tank farm under construction. ) storing , managing , and cleaning up these wastes pose many challenges . some tanks , for example , contain flammable gas or potentially combustible organic compounds . we also developed and compared data on waste samples planned and accomplished , since sample data are essential for completing characterization . in addition , we documented other activities doe accomplished that could help in meeting characterization objectives and included many of them in our report . we believe that we have adequately emphasized that doe recently has made more progress in taking and analyzing samples and in completing other characterization activities . doe and westinghouse were concerned that our report could be interpreted to mean that because of problems with the characterization program , doe could not ensure that the tanks are safe . doe and westinghouse officials believe that the tanks are safe because of the controls they have put in place over tank farm operations , including sampling activities . these controls are designed to prevent harmful releases due to such conditions as high temperature and / or flammability risks . we did not evaluate the level of safety associated with the tank wastes and did not intend to imply that the tanks are unsafe because of deficiencies in the characterization program . we revised our report to clarify that doe believes the tank wastes are being safely stored . however , our report does explain that the safety board has directed doe to conduct additional characterization of tank wastes to ensure that they are safely stored . until those characterization activities are complete and the waste constituents are better understood , doe has placed controls over the tanks to provide an added level of assurance . while doe officials agreed with the value of having an outside technical review of the characterization program , they noted that doe had recently begun such an effort with one of its contractors , pacific northwest national laboratory . specifically , doe is planning to fund a study team to help resolve critical uncertainties related to the safety of the tank wastes . the team will also develop an approach to integrate data needs to support all aspects of the tank waste program , from current operations to treatment and disposal of the wastes . this proposal was drafted in december 1995 , after we completed our field work . on the basis of the initial documentation doe provided , it appears the study team will focus on resolving uncertainties related to tank safety rather than evaluate the viability of the characterization program . we continue to believe that a group , independent of ongoing tank waste and related doe activities , needs to address the technical feasibility of the characterization strategy . doe and westinghouse disagreed with our view that difficulties in characterizing the wastes could affect the remaining steps in the disposal program , including the design and construction of facilities to treat the wastes . doe said that at sampling rates achieved since march 1995 , it expects characterization of the wastes to be complete by 2004 , which doe believes is adequate to support the disposal program .