we believe these efforts are commendable . by notifying each other about rejected shipments and making each other aware of which processing plants have passed or failed inspection , the united states and canada could build on the current system and better ensure that unsafe food does not enter either country . furthermore , inspection coverage of foreign food - processing plants could be more comprehensive if the two countries coordinated inspections . to better ensure the safety of imported foods and to make better use of limited resources , we recommend that the secretaries of agriculture and of health and human services take the lead in developing , in concert with their canadian counterparts and to the extent necessary with the u.s. customs service , a more comprehensive system for sharing crucial information on and coordinating activities for unsafe imported foods . as part of this comprehensive system , the agencies should consider coordinating u.s. and canadian inspections of foreign food - processing plants . while developing a comprehensive bilateral system will take some time , there are shorter - term steps that u.s. agencies could take to tighten control over unsafe food that has been rejected by one country and routed to the other . specifically , we recommend that the secretaries of agriculture and of health and human services direct that fsis and fda ensure that available information on rejected shipments being sent to canada is transmitted to the canadian government and that information from the canadian government on such shipments being sent to the united states is consistently followed up . we discussed a draft of this report with fsis' director , review and assessment programs , and fda's director , division of import operations policy . they generally agreed with the information we presented , and we incorporated their suggestions where appropriate . in developing information for this report , we spoke with and obtained documentation from fda and fsis officials at headquarters and at selected regional and port sites in the states of washington , california , and new york . we provided relevant parts of this information to our counterpart oag team . in turn , we received from the oag team information from officials at agriculture and agri - food canada , fisheries and oceans canada , and health canada in headquarters and corresponding regional locations . we conducted our review between november 1993 and october 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; interested members of congress ; the canadian parliament ; the secretaries of agriculture and health and human services ; the commissioner , food and drug administration ; the acting administrator , food safety and inspection service ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . robert a. robinson , associate director edward m. zadjura , assistant director karla j. springer , project leader keith w. oleson , adviser marci d. kramer , evaluator donya fernandez , evaluator carol herrnstadt shulman , communications analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each .