( see fig . cafeteria managers reported large variations in the amount of waste from eight different types of food that may be included as part of the school lunch . for each food type , managers reported how much of the portions served , on average , was wasted . on the basis of the managers' responses , we estimate that the average amount wasted ranged from a high of 42 percent for cooked vegetables to a low of 11 percent for milk . the majority of those with an opinion did not perceive it as a problem . however , 23 percent of those with an opinion reported that it was at least a moderate problem . figure 1 presents cafeteria managers' perceptions of the extent to which plate waste was a problem in their school . by school level , we found some variation in cafeteria managers' perceptions of plate waste . as figure 2 shows , managers at elementary schools were more likely than those at middle or high schools to report that plate waste from school lunches was at least a moderate problem during the 1995-96 school year . by school location and by schools serving different proportions of free and reduced - price lunches , we found no statistically significant differences in cafeteria managers' perceptions of plate waste . we also considered the extent to which cafeteria managers perceived plate waste as a problem by asking them to compare the amount of waste from school lunches with the amount of waste from packed lunches from home . sixty - three percent of the managers were able to make this comparison . of these , 79 percent believed that the amount from school lunches was less than or the same as the amount from packed lunches . figure 4 shows our estimate of the average percent of waste for each of the eight food types . by school level , the amount of waste varied for all food types except canned or processed fruits . in general , the waste reported for each food type was highest in the elementary schools and lowest in the high schools . ( see fig . by school location , the amount of waste varied for three food types — cooked vegetables , raw vegetables / salads , and milk . for example , for each of these food types , the urban schools reported more waste than the rural schools . ( see fig . by schools serving different proportions of free and reduced - price lunches , the average amount of waste varied for four food types — raw vegetables / salads , fresh fruits , canned or processed fruits , and milk . ( see fig . when responding to a list of possible reasons for plate waste at their school , the cafeteria managers most frequently selected a nonfood reason — “student attention is more on recess , free time or socializing than eating.” when responding to a list of possible ways to reduce plate waste , the managers most often viewed actions that would involve students , such as letting students select only what they want , as more likely to reduce plate waste than other actions .