we agree . such an evaluation could help faa determine whether it is meeting the needs of the traveling public and whether it should improve , refine , or expand its safety information , as well as improve the quality of the underlying data . it might also incorporate considerations of the extent to which the public finds these data easily usable , in view of the complexity and size of the posted databases . while it is too early to conduct an evaluation , faa could begin the planning necessary to ensure that its evaluation produces meaningful results . we provided dot and faa with copies of a draft of this report . we met with dot and faa officials , including the manager of faa's safety data services division , acting on behalf of the deputy assistant administrator for system safety . dot and faa officials agreed with the draft report's overall message and provided editorial and technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate . ( 2 ) what has been the public demand for faa's aviation safety information ? ( 3 ) what are faa's plans to expand the aviation safety information available to the public ? in addition , you asked us for our observations about faa's progress in making safety information available to the public . faa is responsible for setting standards , assessing compliance , and taking enforcement actions to ensure that the airlines meet safety standards . to carry out this responsibility , faa monitors the airlines' compliance with the federal aviation regulations through periodic inspections . those regulations set the standards for the airlines' operations and maintenance functions . a number of possible indicators of aviation safety exist . in a 1988 report , we identified and assessed potential ways of measuring the airlines' performance in areas important to safety . the accident rate is a widely recognized measure of overall aviation safety . however , because accidents occur so infrequently , there are no statistically significant differences in the accident rates among similar airlines . also , because accident rates reflect what has already happened , their relevance to accident prediction or prevention can be limited . among the other measures discussed in that report were information on inspection results , unsafe incidents , airlines' financial condition , pilots' competence , and maintenance quality . safety - related aviation information varies in the extent to which it is available to the public . in general , “availability” indicates whether or not information is protected from dissemination by federal law . for example , the national transportation safety board , the official source of information on airline accidents , routinely publishes information on aviation accidents . on the other hand , the public can obtain some other information only after making a request through the freedom of information act ( foia ) . according to faa , information on the enforcement actions against regulated entities ( i.e. , air carriers , airports , manufacturers , schools , or repair stations ) has generally been available to the public only through foia requests , or when faa elects , on a case - by - case basis , to publicize an enforcement action .