where appropriate , we have done so . finally , we have incorporated hud's position that the reason designating housing for the elderly has had little impact on housing opportunities for persons with disabilities is that hud worked closely with these phas to ensure that they were able to address the needs of the members of all the groups affected by designations . comments on our analysis on section 8 certificates and vouchers: hud believed that because of the length of time taken by the submission and approval of applications and by the execution of annual contributions contracts , many phas were not in a position to issue the certificates and vouchers they were awarded from either of the two notices of funding availability published in april 1997 until late october or early november . ( fig . to further assist the residents moving out of the developments newly designated for the elderly , the housing authority contacted local landlords to find those willing to rent to people with disabilities . housing authority staff told us that landlords were typically more willing to accept section 8 individuals who were physically disabled than they were to accept families receiving section 8 assistance . advocates for people with disabilities in dallas said that the housing issues their clients face are usually related to accessibility rather than to the availability of assisted housing . although the allocation plan did not result in as many of the younger residents with disabilities moving out of the buildings designated for the elderly as the housing authority had anticipated , officials said complaints from elderly residents had declined even though occupancy had not changed dramatically . designating housing for the elderly has not affected waiting time for units . the waiting time for those needing an elderly / disabled unit is about 60 to 90 days , though the wait may be as long as 6 months if the applicant needs a studio or an accessible unit . this contrasts with an average waiting time of about 60 days for a regular public housing unit . the longer wait for elderly / disabled units stems from the lesser availability of those units , however , not from the impact of the allocation plan . corinth is a city with a population of fewer than 12,000 in alcorn county in northeastern mississippi . public housing is administered by both the housing authority of the city of corinth and the tennessee valley regional housing authority ( tvrha ) , which serves alcorn and nine other counties . tvrha also administers section 8 certificates and vouchers for its 10-county area . in 1995 , tvrha submitted an allocation plan to designate all 50 units in the development in corinth known as fort robinett manor as elderly - only . hud approved the plan on march 30 , 1995 . tvrha designated fort robinett for elderly residents because 96 percent of its units were occupied by the elderly and the development has amenities ideally suited for the elderly . tvrha officials also told us that mixing elderly and younger persons with disabilities is not always a good idea .