ii. ) according to faa and industry officials we interviewed , efforts to address specific safety issues were generally unsuccessful when one group failed to coordinate its work with that of other groups that had important roles in aviation safety . many of these reports issued during the 1990s set specific goals for reducing the overall fatal accident rate or for addressing specific aviation safety problems that result most often in fatalities . they also included numerous specific recommendations to faa and the aviation industry to help meet these goals . among the key reports were the following: in 1993 , the flight safety foundation led an international task force on cfit , the leading cause of fatal commercial aviation accidents worldwide . the task force provided specific recommendations and training aids aimed at reducing cfit accidents . the task force set a goal of reducing these accidents 50 percent worldwide by 1998 and other goals targeting improvements in the regions of the world with the highest cfit rates . in january 1995 , over 1,000 government , industry , and union officials attended an faa - sponsored safety conference . the officials agreed that they shared responsibility for pursuing a goal of zero accidents . their report identified 173 high - priority safety initiatives in the areas of crew training , air traffic control and weather , safety data collection and use , applications of emerging technologies , aircraft maintenance procedures and inspections , and development of flight operating procedures . following the may 1996 valujet crash , an faa task force recommended in september 1996 that faa target agency resources to safety risks , improve the certification and oversight of new air carriers , and address concerns about inspector guidance and resources . in february 1997 , the white house commission on aviation safety and security recommended that the government and the aviation industry establish a national goal to reduce the aviation fatal accident rate by a factor of five ( meaning 80 percent ) within 10 years . to achieve that goal , the commission made specific recommendations for reengineering faa's regulatory and certification programs.the commission did not explicitly state whether the national goal should apply to all types of aviation operations . in december 1997 , the national civil aviation review commission recommended that the government and the aviation industry work together to achieve the white house commission's goal of an 80-percent reduction in the accident rate over the next 10 years and recommended specific safety improvements for achieving that goal.while the commission did not explicitly state whether the 80-percent goal should apply to all types of aviation operations , the commission specifically discussed the accident rates for large jets , commuter air carriers , general aviation operations , and air taxis . both the white house commission on aviation safety and security and the national civil aviation review commission called for faa and the aviation industry to work together on aviation safety issues . on april 14 , 1998 , the vice president , the secretary of transportation , and the faa administrator announced the safer skies initiative , a new aviation safety program committed to reducing the fatal accident rate by 80 percent by 2007 .