we disagree . the asci red supercomputer is used only 43 percent of the total available time , including its use for all large - scale applications . the 80-percent utilization rate cited by doe represents the portion of the 43 percent total use devoted to large - scale programs — in other words about 34 percent . thus , a large proportion of this machine , up to 57 percent of total available time , is still available for use by others . with regard to the sharing of the asci machines , they were originally planned and are being installed to allow just this type of sharing . the three asci supercomputers are designed to have both classified and unclassified modules that can also , after following proper procedures , be linked together to run the largest programs . in fact , one of the requirements of the asci red supercomputer was that it could be switched between classified and unclassified uses in less than 30 minutes . in addition , asci program documents state that 10 percent of the capacity of these machines will be available to users from outside doe's laboratories , such as the universities participating in the asci program's research . doe has not effectively overseen the acquisition and use of supercomputers , and its proposed implementation of the clinger - cohen act will not improve its oversight . the department does not have a process in place to ensure that supercomputer acquisitions are fully justified and represent the best use of funds among competing priorities . instead , its existing program planning , project management , and budget formulation processes focus more on overall research projects than on the acquisition of supercomputers that support those projects . as a result , new systems are planned and acquired without doe oversight , while substantial unused and underutilized capacity already exists within doe . in april 1998 , doe outlined plans for a new process to comply with the clinger - cohen act , which requires that federal agencies implement a comprehensive , efficient approach to acquiring and managing information technology . doe's new process separately manages administrative and scientific computers , leaving the responsibility for scientific computers — including supercomputers — to individual program offices . as envisioned , this approach may allow doe's program offices to continue acquiring supercomputers outside the department's normal process for implementing the clinger - cohen act . this approach , contrary to what is envisioned in the clinger - cohen act , effectively places the vast majority of doe's information technology resources outside the purview of the department's chief information officer . doe has established criteria for designating projects as “strategic systems” if they cost over $400 million , are an urgent national priority , are high risk , have international implications , or are vital to national security . the purpose of designating strategic systems is to ensure informed , objective , and well - documented decisions for key events , such as changes to baseline costs and schedules .