eric a . marts , assistant director carol anderson - guthrie , evaluator - in - charge kirk menard , senior evaluator terri russell , evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . both are responsible for complying with the terms of the contract with hud . in 1979 , hud began tracking housing authorities' performance and providing corrective action for those that performed poorly . according to the contract's statement of work , the strategic plan should have contained policies and procedures for operating hano . hud's current monitoring system — the public housing management assessment program ( phmap ) — evaluates 12 performance indicators , calculates a numerical score for each , and relates the total score to a 100-point scale . he stated that residents , for example , should have been interviewed because they are the consumers and have definite opinions on the services that they should be receiving . to address our objectives , we relied on our analysis of the documented historical record of housing conditions and management problems at hano . included in that record are minutes of scheduled meetings held by hano's board of commissioners at which residents and other interested parties were given the opportunity to participate and share their views and concerns . the audit reports show a continuous decline in hano's management performance and the condition of hano's housing stock . nevertheless , on the basis of this success , the mayor said that hano is planning to implement the police substation concept in hano's other housing developments . to identify hano's major operational problems , hud's actions to address these problems , and the problems' underlying causes , we collected data from many sources . we reviewed pertinent legislation , documentation on the housing program , minutes of hano's board meetings , and hud's regulations on the operation of public housing authorities . we discussed management and oversight issues with hud officials in washington , d.c. , including officials at the office of public and indian housing , the office of distressed and troubled housing recovery , the office of the inspector general , and the office of general counsel .