( app . i provides additional information on funding sources for the nine srfs. ) for the most part , the congress gave the states flexibility to develop srf loan assistance programs that meet their particular needs . however , the states must ensure that the projects funded with loans issued up to the amount of the federal capitalization grants meet two types of federal requirements . for example , pennsylvania increased the amount lent by 17 percent , from $267 million to $311 million . the other three states increased their amount of funds lent by 30 percent or more . the largest change — 95 percent — was in arizona , which increased from $50 million to $99 million . as figure 2 shows , seven of the nine states increased their percentage of funds lent between 1995 and 1996 . to determine the percentage of funds lent by each state as of the end of 1995 and 1996 , we divided the total amount of funds lent by the total funds available to lend , both as of the end of the year . we defined the total funds available as including the following six components: federal srf grants , state matching funds , funds obtained through leveraging , transfers of unused funds from the construction grants program , loan repayments , and investment earnings . we obtained information on loans made and funds available from each state through a questionnaire and follow - up contacts . in addition , we compared the states' data on the amount of federal srf grants with the data we obtained from the environmental protection agency ( epa ) . our methodology was based on the approach used by the ohio water development authority in conducting annual srf surveys during 1992 through 1995 . thus , wetlands used to filter wastewater as part of the treatment process are an eligible expense under the act . however , other lands , such as the land upon which a treatment plant would be built , are not eligible . according to the official , because purchasing land for a wastewater treatment facility represents a large portion of the facility's cost but is ineligible for srf financing , some communities are discouraged from seeking srf loans . in pennsylvania and arizona , the amount of funds lent was limited by decisions on how to manage the loan fund . these decisions related to how to use srf funds in pennsylvania and how to publicize the program in arizona . pennsylvania established a state - funded program , independent of the srf , in march 1988 to help communities finance wastewater and other projects . in the early years of the srf program , pennsylvania officials decided to finance about $248 million in wastewater projects with these state funds rather than wait for srf funding to become available , according to state officials . these are state matching funds , borrowed funds , unused funds from the construction grants program , repayments of loans , and earnings on invested funds . all nine states received federal grants and provided state matching funds . these two sources generally accounted for most of the money in the nine states' revolving funds .