park units are authorized to do this . the park cooperating associations were created to aid the park service in its mission of education and service . they provide noncash benefits to park units in the form of salaries for the nonpark personnel working in bookstores in visitors' centers , compensation for the volunteers who help with interpretive and other educational programs , and the publication of park unit newspapers . the cooperating associations may also provide cash donations to the park units . in fiscal year 1994 , the benefits from the cooperating associations at the six park units we visited were valued at $2.8 million . with one exception , the benefits the cooperating associations provided supported education and service to the park units and their visitors as authorized . for example , at the jefferson national expansion memorial , the cooperating association provided the park with 44 full - time and part - time paid cooperative staff to assist visitors in the museum of westward expansion , the old courthouse , the park library , and at various other exhibits . in addition , the association paid for travel and training for park service employees in the interpretive branch for a total donation of $985,000 in fiscal year 1994 . at grand canyon national park , donations valued at $1.2 million from the cooperating association provided a stipend and paid other expenses , such as uniforms and supplies , to students who worked part - time in all areas of the park and paid for about seven full - time association employees who spent about half of their time providing information to visitors in stores run by the cooperating association . in addition , the association provided a new trailside exhibit and renovated the historic kolb studio's bookstore and art gallery . we are referring to these funds as special account funds . park service headquarters officials identified eight special accounts and provided us financial data for these accounts . the total value of these accounts was about $45 million in fiscal year 1994 . of the eight accounts , five are authorized to recover the costs of particular in - park activities . the other three accounts are not designed to recover costs , but provide park units with cash and noncash benefits to be used for a variety of purposes within the parks . donations to an individual park unit include cash from the general public that is put in the donation boxes at visitors' centers as well as checks that are mailed by individuals , corporations , or other groups . if a donation is not marked for a specific purpose , the park unit manager has discretion in how to spend it . in fiscal year 1994 , the donations at 273 park units totaled $8.2 million . cooperating associations generally support a park unit by providing staff at bookstores , volunteers who assist in interpretive programs , and / or cash . park unit managers work with cooperating association staff to determine the types of support to be provided . nationwide , there are 65 cooperating associations serving almost every park unit . in fiscal year 1994 , the services and cash these associations provided were worth $16.4 million .