many state and other officials shared this perception . however , we believe that the type of “triage” suggested in our recommendation , which would elevate complex problems for senior management's attention when disagreements could not ( or should not ) be resolved at lower levels , would help to address this difficulty . the regulatory reinvention team's director also indicated that our recommendation to include outcome - based evaluation components for each initiative may be impractical because measuring environmental outcomes may not be possible in all cases . we agree and modified this recommendation to avoid calling for outcome - based measures in all cases . he maintained that it is unclear at this point whether these differences can be resolved . as of june 1997 , epa — in consultation with ecos — expects to publish a new draft proposal in the federal register for public comment later this year . despite some differences between various stakeholders and epa management over the future direction of reinvention , all participants in the process we interviewed — both within and outside epa — agreed that achieving full commitment to reinvention by the agency's rank and file will be difficult and will take time . the special assistant for reinvention efforts in epa's office of prevention , pesticides , and toxic substances reflected many of these views when he told us that it will take time for culture change to filter down to epa line staff and to see if the change takes hold . the three epa regions we visited are taking different approaches to achieving commitment by line staff to reinvention . for example , the atlanta office encourages staff to participate voluntarily in ad hoc media teams that are working on reinvention initiatives . while this region has not formally revised its reward system to emphasize reinvention activities , the regional administrator has made it clear to the staff that he views reinvention as a top priority and values participation . even so , the office's deputy regional administrator acknowledged that the reaction of the regional staff to reinvention has been mixed , noting that the staff that participate in these initiatives are generally those that accept change more readily . he noted that some staff have raised various issues about reinvention , including concerns that ( 1 ) some reinvention projects may not provide adequate protection for the environment and public health and ( 2 ) some projects may not be legal under current statutes . he acknowledged that although some of these concerns may be well founded , others stem from a desire to maintain traditional ways of regulating . the chicago office also encourages staff to voluntarily participate in reinvention efforts through cross - media teams . according to regional office management , as teams are formed to focus on various reinvention efforts , participation is “spreading like roots” through the regional office . progress with csi has also been slower and more difficult than originally expected . according to a february 1997 contractor study , csi participants representing all industrial sectors and stakeholder groups expressed concern over the pace of the csi process , noting that it has taken longer than expected to develop working relationships among the participants and to reach consensus on issues .