( app . ii provided additional information on the port needs study ) . the first is geography . for example , blind corners , sharp bends , and strong currents in the mississippi river make it more difficult for vessel operators to both see each other and avoid collisions . the second is the sheer volume of vessels transiting and mooring in the area . the port region has many miles of warehousing facilities and barge mooring on both banks of the river . at ports being considered for vts 2000 , to what extent do major stakeholders support acquiring and funding it ? if major stakeholders are not supportive of vts 2000 , to what extent are they interested in acquiring and funding other vts systems ? what other issues , if any , could affect the establishment of vts systems that are privately funded ? we conducted our work at 8 of the 17 ports that the coast guard is considering for vts 2000 . while the views of these 8 ports may not be representative of the views at all 17 , we selected the ports that we thought would yield the most useful information in response to the subcommittee's questions . four locations were chosen because the coast guard identified them as most likely to benefit from a new vts system . we chose the other four because they currently operate a privately funded system or have expressed an interest to do so . ( see app . i for general background on all eight ports. ) at each port , we obtained the views of a set of key stakeholders identified by the coast guard . a vts system is one of several methods for improving navigational safety and protecting the marine environment . these key stakeholders included representatives of ( 1 ) ship and barge companies doing business at the port , ( 2 ) marine pilots , and ( 3 ) port authorities . it helps determine the presence of vessels in and around ports and it provides information to vessels on such matters as traffic , tides , weather conditions , and port emergencies . other safety measures include training vessel operators , improving navigational aids ( such as buoys and markers ) , dredging wider and deeper channels , and inspecting vessels . under the authority of the ports and waterways safety act of 1972 , as amended , the coast guard operates vts systems in eight ports around the united states . operations and maintenance costs for these systems , which totaled about $19 million in fiscal year 1995 , are borne by the coast guard and are not passed on to the ports or the shipping industry . in consultation with your offices , we focused our work on the following four questions: what is the current status of the coast guard's development of vts 2000 ? two other ports , los angeles / long beach and philadelphia / delaware bay , have radar - based systems funded by their users . these systems are sometimes called “vts - like” systems to distinguish them from the coast guard's systems , but for consistency , we refer to them as vts systems in this report .