pantex does not store plutonium that is not in pits . ( see fig . the former weapons production sites have different amounts and forms of plutonium not in pits . for example , the rocky flats environmental technology site , with about 12.7 metric tons of this plutonium , has the largest inventory of plutonium and many of the more unstable forms , including residues , while the other four sites have different amounts and forms of plutonium , as shown in table 1.1 . even though the united states no longer manufactures new nuclear weapons , some of doe's plutonium is still needed to support the u.s. nuclear weapons stockpile . the plutonium pits in doe's custody that are needed for national security purposes are stored primarily at the pantex plant . as part of the u.s. nuclear strategic reserves , these pits will be retained for an indeterminate amount of time , in case the plutonium is ever needed for use in nuclear weapons . in 1994 , both doe and the defense nuclear facilities safety board noted safety problems with doe's storage of plutonium not in pits . doe subsequently developed an implementation plan to address these safety problems by having much of this plutonium stabilized and packaged for safe long - term storage by may 2002 . in march 1994 , the secretary of energy requested that doe's office of environment , safety and health conduct a comprehensive assessment to identify the risks of storing plutonium in doe facilities and to determine which were the most dangerous and urgent . the assessment , which considered both plutonium not in pits and plutonium in pits , identified such vulnerabilities as the degradation of plutonium materials and packaging and weaknesses in facilities and administrative controls . these vulnerabilities are important because they could cause inadvertent releases of plutonium , which could expose workers . in april 1994 , the defense nuclear facilities safety board issued a report describing problems with plutonium storage safety at four of the department's sites with large inventories of plutonium . subsequently , in may 1994 , the board recommended that the department take action to safely store its plutonium . in this recommendation , the board expressed concern that the cessation of nuclear weapons production had left plutonium in an unsafe state that should be remediated . for example , when packaging the plutonium not in pits , some sites used plastic inner liners , which could react with the plutonium to form a buildup of hydrogen gas that could bulge and even rupture the outer containers or cause the plutonium to spontaneously ignite . doe is currently reviewing alternative designs developed by lawrence livermore , sandia , and pantex and plans to have a decision by april 1998 . the department's preliminary estimates of the costs to repackage 12,000 pits into retrofitted al - r8 containers range from $35.5 million to $59.4 million . these estimates are based on the cost to purchase the containers ( ranging from $20.5 million to $40.4 million ) , as well as start - up costs ( from $1.2 million to $1.6 million ) and operating costs ( from $13.8 million to $17.4 million ) for repackaging the pits .