( see app . i for a listing of each program's components. ) the volunteer must publish a variety of notices in a local newspaper , obtain public comments , and hold public meetings . the state may require activities such as publishing a notice in a local newspaper , holding public meetings , or creating local mailing lists , depending on conditions at the site and the level of public concern . eileen r. larence , assistant director mary pniewski marca , senior evaluator katherine siggerud , senior evaluator rosa maria torres lerma , staff evaluator elizabeth r. eisenstadt , communications analyst fran featherston , senior social science analyst richard p. johnson , attorney the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . all of these programs have been established in the last 9 years . state legislatures established 31 of these programs by statute , and state environmental agencies created the other 4 through regulation . ten of these programs have negotiated agreements with epa which state that the agency will generally not plan to take further action at sites involved in the program except in limited circumstances . figure 1 shows the status of voluntary cleanup programs throughout the nation at the time of our review . most of the voluntary cleanup programs we reviewed were administered either as part of a state's superfund program or as an alternative to it . we reviewed studies on voluntary cleanups conducted by other organizations . the voluntary programs we reviewed varied considerably in their requirements for monitoring a site after its cleanup has been approved . ( see app . ii for a description of each state's monitoring requirements. ) as table 3.7 shows , 2 programs required extensive monitoring , 5 programs required no monitoring , and 10 programs required some monitoring . two of the programs we reviewed monitored cleanups at voluntary sites on a regular basis . every 5 years , the voluntary program in california and the ordered site program in washington review sites where follow - on operations and maintenance are necessary or land use is restricted . this approach parallels the superfund program's requirement that epa conduct 5-year reviews of similar cleanups . officials in these states said they would not feel comfortable releasing volunteers from liability unless the volunteers performed some monitoring .