implement the strategy for change . use performance data to improve efforts to promote change . appendix iv lists supporting actions that organizations could take to apply these nine components to change their culture . faa's primary reform effort for cultural change , the integrated product development system ( ipds ) , began in november 1994 . we found that faa has made some progress in implementing its cultural change effort . a key area of concern is faa's difficulties in gaining the strong commitment to ipds agencywide . as currently designed , this new system does little to address how faa can gain this commitment . ipds is at the core of faa's effort to improve its management of atc acquisitions and its ability to provide modern and reliable atc equipment . although other initiatives underway elsewhere in the agency will probably affect its organizational culture , this system was designed explicitly to effect cultural change . a key component of the ipds is the establishment of integrated product teams ( ipt ) . these teams are designed to be cross - functional and responsible for research , development , and acquisition as well as for ensuring that new equipment is delivered , installed , and working properly . develop and communicate a vision for the future . identify the factors that will impede change . neutralize impediments to change . identify and teach the skills required to make the change successful . develop performance indicators to measure the extent to which the organization has achieved change . ipt members include systems and specialty engineers , logistics personnel , testing personnel , contract personnel , and lawyers as well as representatives from the organizations responsible for operating and maintaining the atc equipment . in a complementary action , to mirror the structure of the ipts , the divisions responsible for operating and maintaining atc equipment have restructured their units that determine requirements . ipds evolved from matrix management teams that faa established in 1990 to promote cross - functional collaboration . responsible for developing and implementing projects , matrix teams consisted of staff and resources from various faa functional divisions . however , faa's management recognized that the matrix teams had continuing weaknesses , such as the lack of empowerment and accountability as well as the persistence of stovepiping . faa managers developed and proposed ipds to apply the successful parts of matrix teams while addressing their weaknesses . we found three reasons why this new system would likely prove more successful than the former matrix teams . for one , the new system recognizes the need to change the acquisition culture . secondly , ipds incorporates many aspects of the model strategy we present in this report . for example , to equip ipt members with the skills required in the new environment , faa developed a training program for the teams that includes training on working together effectively , collaborative decision - making , and conflict resolution . similarly , to convey their commitment to cultural change , managers in faa's research and acquisitions division ( ara ) piloted a rewards program that recognizes teams as well as individuals for behaviors that lead to desired outputs .