ii. ) in 1996 , cleanup completions averaged 10.6 years for nonfederal operable units and 6.6 years for federal operable units . see comment 17 . also , we note that our report does present data on “discrete milestones.” for example , it presents information on the times taken to complete preliminary assessments , site inspections , the selection of remedies , and other steps in the superfund process . the data mentioned by epa from figure 3 represent the average time taken to clean up 17 distinct operable units in 1986 . the data in figure ii.2 represent the average time taken to select a remedy for 82 other distinct operable units for that same year . these data are not inconsistent or inappropriate , as epa implies , because they represent two distinct universes . see comment 3 . the congressional budget office's ( cbo ) 1994 study is based on “estimated” average durations from the proposal for listing through the completion of construction , while our data represent actual durations for operable units and sites from the final listing through the completion of the remedial action . the main finding of cbo's report was that the average time between the proposal for listing and the completion of construction will be at least 12 years for the first 1,249 sites . cbo obtained its data through interviews with remedial project managers . the managers estimated that the completion time for the nonfederal sites proposed for listing from 1981 through 1983 would average 12.9 years , while the completion time for the nonfederal sites proposed from 1984 through 1992 would average 9.6 years . cbo's report said that the difference between the two estimates ( of 12.9 years and 9.6 years ) “may merely be evidence of the overoptimism suspected by officials at epa headquarters . the sites listed more recently have generally not progressed as far through the superfund pipeline ; for example , only 16 percent of those with actual or estimated completion dates had been finished by 1993 , compared with 31 percent of the early sites.” 25 . we continue to believe that epa's efforts to expedite cleanups are steps in the right direction . however , enough time has now elapsed for epa to evaluate the progress and effects of the program to date . over 4 years have elapsed since epa formally initiated sacm , and over 2 years have elapsed since the agency proceeded to fully implement the program . as indicated in this report , our review of non - time - critical removals showed limited use of this sacm component in epa's regions . we have revised our report to indicate in the agency comments section that epa regards factors such as budget shortfalls , legislative and administrative weaknesses in the current program , and a continuing influx of large and complex sites as barriers that undermine its efforts to increase the pace of assessments and cleanups . see comment 9 . the presumptive remedy for municipal landfills was issued by epa in september 1993 . an epa directive with the same date stated that presumptive remedies were expected to be used at all appropriate sites .