avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . cents per passenger mile ( constant dollars ) ( continued ) avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . cents per passenger mile ( constant dollars ) ( continued ) avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . cents per passenger mile ( constant dollars ) ( continued ) avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . cents per passenger mile ( constant dollars ) ( continued ) avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . avg . additional detailed information on our scope and methodology can be found in appendix i . before 1978 , the former civil aeronautics board regulated airlines , controlling the fares they could charge and the routes they could fly . concerned that these practices caused economic inefficiencies and inhibited the growth of domestic air transportation , the congress deregulated the industry in 1978 . deregulation was expected to result in fares that more accurately reflected airlines' costs and , overall , more vigorous competition throughout the nation . since deregulation , numerous new airlines have started operations , while established airlines have expanded into new markets . many new airlines that began operations shortly after deregulation have failed , as have some long - established carriers , such as eastern and pan am . nevertheless , a few airlines that were formed in the wake of deregulation still operate , including america west and midwest express . in the early 1990s , over a decade after the industry was deregulated , a second wave of new airlines emerged . airlines such as vanguard , spirit , airtran , and frontier now compete with established carriers in selected markets throughout the united states . these new entrants' cost structures tend to be lower than those of their established competitors , permitting them to charge lower fares to a variety of destinations . in recent years , we have reported that these airlines' ability to enter and compete in selected domestic markets has resulted in lower fares and better service in these markets . however , we also found that many other communities have not yet experienced vigorous competition and have not realized these fare and service - quality benefits . in 1990 , we reported that from 1979 — the earliest year for which reliable data on fares were available — through 1988 , the average fare per passenger mile , adjusted for inflation , declined by 9 percent at airports serving small communities , 10 percent at airports serving medium - sized communities , and 5 percent at airports serving large communities . in 1996 , we reported that the average fare per passenger mile , adjusted for inflation , continued to fall across all sizes of communities but that regional variations were evident . the largest decreases in fares since deregulation occurred at airports located in the west and southwest , and increases in fares were noted at airports located in the southeast and in the appalachian region .