a corps manual ( no . 1110-2-1913 , mar . 31 , 1978 ) provides that levees are expected to be exposed to flood flows for only a few days or weeks per year . embankments that will be exposed to flows for longer periods must meet more stringent criteria for earthen dams . water standing against a levee for an extended period may move through or under the levee , leading to problems such as sinkholes or sandboilson the landward side . the higher pressure of the floodwater will eventually overcome the materials within the levee and its foundation , and a breach may occur . to determine whether a levee performed to its design capacity , we attempted to compare its design flow capacity with actual or estimated flows during the flood . if the levee's flow capacity was not available , we used the levee's flood level capacity . corps district officials agreed that these measures were acceptable bases for assessing a levee's performance . as an additional criterion , we considered the length of time the levee withstood saturation from flooding . we asked the corps to give us the design capacity of , and the flow rates or water levels at , the 193 levees involved in the flood . district personnel told us that all or some of the data were not readily available for 12 levees . they said that corps field staff or local officials advised them that the land behind the 12 levees was not flooded . therefore , they said they can reasonably assume that these 12 levees performed within their design capacity . none of the 12 levees were designated as overtopped on corps levee repair schedules . appendix ii lists the levees for which insufficient data were available for our comparison . of the 181 levees for which comparative data were available , 177 clearly performed up to their design capacity and sometimes exceeded it during the 1993 flood . we made changes to the report where appropriate . we will make copies available to others on request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7756 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix vii . the 1993 midwest flood , termed “the great flood of 1993,” was unprecedented in the united states in terms of the amount of precipitation , the recorded river levels , the duration and extent of the flood , the damage to crops and property , and the economic impact . see appendix vi for a summary . that levees increase flood levels is subject to little disagreement . whether this increase is significant varies from location to location , but whether unprotected lands are more likely to be flooded than protected lands depends on the increase in flood levels after the construction of a levee . proponents of levees point out that the impact of a levee should not be isolated because the net effect of all flood control projects has been to reduce flood levels and prevent billions of dollars in flood damage . levees are only one of many natural and man - made factors that help determine the peak level of a flood .