( app . i shows how class i and non - class i rail mileage changed in montana , north dakota , and west virginia from 1980 to 1997. ) in 1995 , the congress passed the icc termination act of 1995 , which abolished the icc . the act transferred many of icc's core rail functions and certain nonrail functions to the board , a decisionally independent adjudicatory agency that is administratively housed in dot . among other things , the board approves market entry and exit of railroads ; approves railroad mergers and consolidations ; determines the adequacy of a railroad's revenues on an annual basis ; adjudicates complaints concerning rail rates on traffic over which a railroad has market dominance ; adjudicates complaints alleging that carriers have failed to provide service upon reasonable request ; and exempts railroad transportation from economic regulation under certain circumstances . the icc termination act made several significant changes to railroad regulation . for example , the act eliminated the requirement for railroad tariff filings . however , the act did not alter railroads' authority to engage in demand - based differential pricing or to negotiate transportation service contracts containing confidential terms and conditions that are beyond the board's authority while in effect . several of the board's functions are particularly relevant to this report: the ( 1 ) responsibility for determining the adequacy of a railroad's revenues , ( 2 ) jurisdiction over rail rate complaints , and ( 3 ) jurisdiction over complaints alleging that carriers have failed to provide service upon reasonable request . first , the board is required to determine the adequacy of railroad revenues on an annual basis . in addition , the board is required to make an adequate and continuing effort to assist railroads in attaining adequate revenues — that is , revenues that under honest , economical , and efficient management cover total operating expenses plus a reasonable and economic profit on capital employed in the business . second , the board is also responsible for protecting shippers without feasible transportation alternatives from unreasonably high rail rates . where the board concludes that a challenged rate is unreasonable , it may order the railroad to pay reparations on past shipments and prescribe maximum rates for future shipments . the board does not have authority over rail rates for car movements made under contracts or for movements that it has exempted from economic regulation . only about 18 percent of the tonnage moved in 1997 was subject to rate reasonableness regulation by the board . the remainder was either moved under contract ( 70 percent ) , according to the association of american railroads ( aar ) ,or was exempt from economic regulation ( 12 percent ) . furthermore , rates on rail traffic priced below the 180-percent revenue - to - variable cost threshold are not subject to regulation by the board . according to the board , over 70 percent of all rail traffic in 1997 was priced below this threshold . third , the board has the authority to adjudicate service complaints filed by shippers .