ii. ) figure 1 shows our estimates of conditional foreclosure rates based on loans that remained active until a given year and were assigned during a 17-year period ( fiscal years 1977 through 1994 ) . we estimate that conditional foreclosure rates will increase sharply over the first 7 years after a loan is accepted into the program , peaking at about 13 percent . the program's conditional foreclosure rates substantially exceed those experienced on fha's nonassigned single - family loans during the same 17-year period . options are available to the congress to change the assignment program that would reduce the losses incurred by the program . these options include directing hud to shorten the 36-month relief period , set a time limit on eliminating delinquencies , and accept into the program only those borrowers who can afford half or more of their mortgage payments . information provided by officials from four mortgage lending or purchasing institutions indicates that these institutions provide borowers in default a shorter time period to begin full mortgage payments under the original loan or a modified loan and to repay delinquent amounts . they also use techniques different from hud's that could improve the effectiveness and reduce the cost of the program . va usually capitalizes the delinquency and reamortizes the new loan balance ( i.e . extends the time period for payment of the loan principal ) as soon as it acquires the loan . in addition , va will reduce the interest rate on the reamortized loan to as low as 3 percent below the current market rate if a reduction is necessary to bring the veteran's payments to an affordable level . va may also acquire loans for borrowers who are not able to resume payments immediately if they show the ability to be able to do so in a reasonable period of time . va field stations have significant discretion in deciding what constitutes a reasonable period ; however , it is usually not extended beyond the point at which the loans reach a full year's delinquency . during this period , va may provide relief by agreeing to accept payments of less than a full installment or by extending complete forbearance . hud's records show that of the 39,600 borrowers , 26,000 ( 66 percent ) are current with repayment agreements while the remaining 34 percent are not current . of the 26,000 borrowers who are current with repayment agreements , 36 percent are current with original mortgage payments . the remaining borrowers ( 64 percent ) are current with repayment agreements that call for reduced or suspended payments . cbo's fte estimates and gao's cost per loan and total cost estimates are shown in table ii.1 , which illustrates that the administrative cost for the 68,695 loans assigned between fiscal year 1989 and the end of fiscal year 1994 totals about $451 million over the life of these loans , about 8 percent of the costs incurred by fha's fund . total cost ( in millions over the life of the loan ) salary costs , which averaged $48,017 per fte in fiscal year 1994 , are used for all ftes listed .