additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . doe's comments are included in appendix i . to determine what criteria doe uses to guide the identification and disposal of excess property and whether doe's property records reflect what is no longer needed to carry out its missions , we reviewed the federal property management regulations and doe's property management regulations and guidance . in addition , we interviewed officials from doe's offices of worker and community transition , procurement and assistance management , field management , environmental management , energy research , and defense programs , and we reviewed documentation provided by them . we also interviewed officials from doe and contractor property management organizations at the hanford site and reviewed their procedures . to determine what challenges doe encounters in identifying excess property and to identify innovative approaches being used to dispose of this property , we reviewed doe's fiscal year 1997 federal managers' financial integrity act report and supporting documentation , reports from doe's office of the inspector general , and the january 1996 materials in inventory report . we interviewed officials from doe's offices of worker and community transition , procurement and assistance management , field management , environmental management , energy research , and defense programs . we also interviewed officials from doe and contractor property management organizations at the hanford site and reviewed documentation they provided . we performed our review from july 1998 through september 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the secretary of energy . we will also make copies available to others on request . the property amounts include only those items costing $25,000 or more . items that cost less than $25,000 are expensed for financial statement purposes ; doe contractors held an additional $3.4 billion of such personal property at the end of fiscal year 1997 . in doe's fiscal year 1997 federal managers' financial integrity act report accompanying its financial statements , the department indicated that it had extensive inventories of real and personal property that is no longer necessary and that disposal of this property could save future storage , security , and maintenance costs . in addition , doe reported problems with the management of personal property . for example , the rocky flats field office in colorado identified problems that included a contractor's inadequate property records systems , incomplete inventory records , and requests made for new work space while comparable space at the site was being designated as excess . ( see the bibliography for a list of gao and inspector general reports on doe property management issues. ) the federal property management regulations specify that executive agencies should dispose of real and personal property that is excess to their needs and include guidelines for determining when real property is unneeded or underutilized .