( see fig . borrowers of fha - insured mortgages are more likely to have lower incomes , be first - time home buyers , or be minorities than are borrowers of privately insured loans . for example , while fha insured about 15 percent of all mortgages used to purchase homes in 1994 , it insured 20 percent of all home purchase mortgages made to low - income borrowers , 24 percent of those made to minorities , and 21 percent of those made to first - time home buyers . in addition , in 1994 fha insured more home purchase mortgages in nine states than did private mortgage insurers or the department of veterans affairs ( va ) . in 1995 , fha's mortgage insurance on loans for multifamily properties helped finance the construction of 17,113 new rental units ; the purchase or refinancing of 32,383 existing rental units ; and the construction , substantial rehabilitation , and purchase or refinancing of 12,888 units of group housing and health care facilities . combined , these multifamily activities represented over $2.3 billion in mortgage insurance written in 1995 . ginnie mae , a wholly owned government corporation , was established to expand affordable housing in america by providing liquidity to certain lenders through an efficient government - guaranteed secondary market for federally insured or guaranteed loans . its programs facilitate the financing of single - family , multifamily , and manufactured homes . specifically , ginnie mae guarantees the timely payment of principal and interest on privately issued securities that are backed by pools of fha - insured and va - and rural housing service ( rhs ) - guaranteed mortgages . in fact , according to ginnie mae , nearly all fha - insured , va - guaranteed , and rhs - guaranteed mortgages are in ginnie mae pools . ginnie mae's mortgage - backed securities program provides a means of channeling funds from the nation's securities markets into local housing markets . according to ginnie mae , the u.s. government's full - faith - and - credit guaranty of these securities makes them widely accepted in sectors of the capital markets that would not otherwise be likely to supply funds to the mortgage market . approximately 70 percent of the funds used to purchase ginnie mae - guaranteed securities come from nontraditional mortgage investors , including pension and retirement funds , life insurance companies , and individuals . the maturities on these guarantees are for up to 40 years . as shown in figure 3.2 , as of september 30 , 1995 , ginnie mae - guaranteed securities represented 26 percent of all single - family and multifamily mortgages held in mortgage pools . at the end of fiscal year 1995 , ginnie mae had outstanding guarantees of mortgage - backed securities totaling $464 billion . ginnie mae's programs had negative net outlays — or profits — of $464 million in fiscal year 1995 . under s. 1145 , hud would no longer insure multifamily mortgages or guarantee mortgage - backed securities , and the agency that would replace fha would be limited in how it could insure mortgages .