i am committed to improving accountability . a big challenge for this agency.” in our 1992 report on the techniques that companies use to change organizational culture , we cited two keys to successful cultural change: ( 1 ) top management must be totally committed to the change in both words and actions and ( 2 ) organizations must provide training that promotes and develops skills related to their desired values and beliefs . despite its knowledge of many of the shortcomings in the contracting process discussed in this report , the forest service has not moved aggressively to make improvements . it is critical that the forest service establish effective internal control over contracting activities to give the agency reasonable assurance that resources are safeguarded and expended judiciously . in addition , procurement reforms that hold the promise of lowering costs and improving quality , such as performance - based service contracting , need to be more effectively implemented . the current organizational structure of the contracting function , which limits direct accountability , as well as the culture of local autonomy , appear to have resulted in an inertia that frustrates the implementation of effective internal control and important procurement reforms . given these obstacles and the agency's history of problems with enforcing accountability , committed , aggressive leadership and sustained oversight will be required to effect significant improvements . in commenting on our draft report , usda disagreed with our identification of the organizational structure for contracting as an impediment to reform . while acknowledging that we had not made a recommendation in this area , usda said it did not agree with the suggestion that the existing organizational structure is somehow defective . usda said that additional management emphasis and accountability can improve the acquisition process within the existing organizational framework . we are not suggesting in this report that the organizational structure should change . rather , we believe that the organizational structure for contracting at the forest service does not provide clear lines of authority or effective reporting relationships between contracting staff and managers and thus impedes direct accountability . the forest service is a decentralized organization . decentralization has fostered an independent organizational culture in which contracting staff have become accustomed to operating autonomously . both inspectors said that they too did not monitor all the contracts . we found that progress reports required by the contract provisions were not submitted by the contractor and that , for one of the contracts , work on some task orders was completed up to 2 years after the required completion dates . headquarters officials and several contracting officers and cors told us that training is needed to emphasize the importance of monitoring and to improve monitoring skills . poor documentation has practical consequences . incomplete files make it difficult to analyze key contract actions and put the forest service at risk in the event of a legal challenge . for example , in january 1997 , the forest service lost a bid protest from a company alleging that the award of the contract was improper because the agency's evaluation of bids from competing companies was inconsistent with the criteria it had established .