additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the monroe housing authority has 383 units . according to the executive director , the combined phas have reduced operating costs because of a centralized maintenance and administrative staff . contact: al braddock , executive director , ( 706 ) 267-6591 . one staff of 84 persons operates both the decatur and dekalb housing authorities . yet each authority is governed by its own board of commissioners . a benefit of this arrangement highlighted by housing authority officials is that consolidated management produces greater economies of scale by spreading administrative costs across two authorities instead of one . for example , when private contractors provide services and goods to both of the housing authorities , the fixed costs of hiring a contractor are spread out among the two , instead of having one authority bear the cost . contact: david smotherman , executive director , ( 404 ) 377-0425 . the yarmouth housing authority has joined a consortium of five phas that collectively purchase consultant services for studies on sites's compliance with the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) and other goods and services whenever feasible . in addition , the yarmouth housing authority and two other housing authorities are filing a joint application under hud's fss program to fund a single fss social service coordinator to manage the use of social service agencies for the three phas . contact: marilyn e. ( penny ) tanner , executive director , ( 508 ) 398-2920 ext . these four types of partnerships or arrangements are summarized below . our study of 29 phas found eight instances of phas' working together to jointly purchase goods and services or consolidate management and thereby achieving cost savings or increased efficiency . by purchasing items together , phas can share the costs of the goods and services rather than bearing the costs separately . for example , one group of phas split the costs and use of consultants to help comply with regulations governing services for handicapped residents . in another case , a group of over 80 phas jointly purchased items such as major appliances — which , according to pha officials , has increased the efficiency of operations by reducing the administrative burdens of time and paperwork in the purchasing process . similarly , two housing authorities estimated that they saved $25,000 in staff and travel costs by jointly operating a community development program . according to several pha officials with experience in consolidating management , consolidation enables phas to obtain the benefits of sharing the use and costs of employees and services . for small housing authorities , this partnering can greatly reduce the cost of additional staff and overhead . for example , one large housing authority in our study took over the management of three nearby small housing authorities without increasing the size of its staff . the executive director of the large housing authority said that the consolidation has resulted in reduced overhead and maintenance costs , reduced staff costs , higher productivity , and greater satisfaction by residents at the three smaller authorities .