doe has also recognized this . , outsource ) training courses to qualified vendors . outsourcing can reduce the cost for providing contractor training . for example , the contractor at one location contacted outsourced about 65 percent of its training to a qualified vendor at an estimated savings of more than $0.6 million over a 2-year period . use training course materials from other doe locations rather than develop courses independently . for example , the $3 million savings is based , in part , on reported cost savings of about $1.7 million by doe's national environmental training office in aiken , south carolina , for developing training courses that were then used at other doe locations . the six offices provided us with the estimates of completed idps shown in table 2.1 . for the six offices combined , only 33 percent of the employees had completed an idp . recognizing that few of its employees had completed an idp , doe training officials established a goal in november 1998 of having 90 percent of doe employees with an approved idp by december 31 , 1999 . doe's headquarters offices , field offices , and contractors all have their own training programs and training budgets . for doe's training plan to be successful , according to doe , support and funding will be needed from offices throughout the department . we found , however , that the plan does not explain how or according to what formula these doe offices will be asked to commit funds to finance the plan . moreover , we found that few doe offices have actively participated in the development of the performance expectations contained in that plan . thus , when the plan is completed , it is unknown whether support and funding will be available throughout the department for the plan . according to doe , each office within the department is responsible for implementing the plan and will be held accountable for carrying out the expectations in it . in addition , each office will commit resources to ensure that the performance expectations in the plan are met . the plan does not specify , however , how , or according to what formula , these offices will be asked to commit resources to finance the plan . instead , the plan indicates that doe's training and development management council will determine sometime in the future how the plan will be funded . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please contact me on ( 202 ) 512-3841 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii . within the department of energy ( doe ) , federal and contractor employee training is provided through a decentralized training structure . doe's headquarters offices , field offices , and contractors all have their own training programs and budgets and dedicated staffs . a comparison of doe's training expenditures with other federal agencies and with the private sector indicates that doe's training expenditures could be lower . because doe emphasizes decentralized management , it assigns the main responsibility for employee training to individual doe offices and contractors .