we did not independently verify these data . to facilitate the comparison of accidents with incidents in our analysis of the types and frequencies of safety - threatening events , we made two adjustments to the data . first , because of differences in the way information is recorded in these databases , we matched the similar categories contained in both databases and used these categories in our analysis . for example , both ntsb's and faa's databases contain the category “on ground collision with object,” which means an airplane struck an object , such as a vehicle or structure , while moving on the ground . second , because the occurrences of events in accidents closely conform to those in incidents , we used the events that occurred in each of the 169 accidents as our unit of analysis . in our analysis of crew resource management ( crm ) deficiencies , we used the accident as the unit of analysis because ntsb's findings of crm deficiencies were by accident and not by the individual events that occurred within accidents . to characterize the prevalence of pilot performance as a factor in safety - threatening events over time and between airlines , we examined faa's incident and pilot deviation databases . we used these two databases because they are the only such sources with adequate numbers of observations to make such comparisons . to determine the extent to which the inadequate use of crm by pilots contributed to accidents and incidents , we performed a content analysis of the textual information found in the factual reports , briefs , and final reports of the 169 accidents investigated by ntsb from 1983 through 1995 . we then classified crm deficiencies according to the classification framework presented at a national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) / ames workshop in 1980 . specifically , we agreed to address the following: ( 1 ) what are the types and frequency of accidents in which an airline pilot's performance was cited as a contributing factor , including those in which failure to use crm principles was identified , and ( 2 ) how adequate is faa's guidance for and oversight of the airlines' implementation of pilots' training for crm ? we limited our review to the accidents and incidents experienced and training implemented by the 10 major u.s. airlines — those generating $1 billion or more in revenues annually . airline travel is one of the safest modes of public transportation in the united states . the current level of airline safety has been achieved , in part , because the airline industry and government regulatory agencies have implemented rigorous pilot training and evaluation programs . moreover , we found crm deficiencies in half of the serious accidents in which there was at least one fatality . about 46 percent of these crm deficiencies involved a lack of coordination among members of the cockpit crew , as well as the captain's failure to assign tasks to other crew members and to effectively supervise the crew . generally , these crm deficiencies illustrated the importance of effective communication .