ii. ) for example , california's contribution of $16.8 million for the san joaquins route , which carried 688,000 passengers between oakland and bakersfield , reduced this route's loss from $35 to only $11 per passenger in fiscal year 1997 and improved its financial performance to second best among the 40 routes ( behind the profitable metroliners ) . similarly , north carolina's payment of $3.2 million for the piedmont route , which carried 43,000 passengers between raleigh and charlotte , reduced this route's loss from $116 per passenger to $42 per passenger . amtrak has sought state support primarily for shorter routes whose service benefits residents in one or two states . 1 and app . like all major national intercity rail services in the world , amtrak receives substantial government support . the administration's fiscal year 1999 budget proposal would provide amtrak with $621.5 million for capital expenses and no separate funding for operating expenses . at the direction of the administration , amtrak established the goal in december 1994 of eliminating its need for federal operating subsidies by fiscal year 2002 , except for federal contributions to retirement payments for railroad employees , and established a “glidepath” of decreasing federal operating subsidies for each intervening year . to implement this goal , amtrak's strategic business plans have targeted opportunities for reducing expenses by closing some routes and reducing the frequency of service on others . these plans have had varying degrees of success . in addition , amtrak projects substantial revenue growth from the introduction of high - speed rail service between washington , d.c. , and boston , massachusetts , in fiscal year 2000 and from the expansion of mail service and express service for transporting higher - value , time - sensitive merchandise . the surface transportation board currently is considering the terms and conditions under which the union pacific railroad and other freight railroads must make their track and facilities available to amtrak for its express merchandise service . the taxpayer relief act of 1997 , enacted in august 1997 , makes a total of $2.2 billion available to amtrak in fiscal years 1998 and 1999 to acquire capital improvements and to pay certain equipment maintenance expenses , among other things . enacted in december 1997 , the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 authorized federal funding for amtrak's capital and operating expenses through fiscal year 2002 and repealed several provisions of federal law that limited amtrak's ability to manage costs and maximize revenues . among other things , the act also established an amtrak reform council to evaluate amtrak's performance and make recommendations to amtrak for financial reforms and further cost containment and productivity improvements . in passing the act , the congress found that intercity passenger rail service is an essential component of a national intermodal passenger transportation system . as shown in table 1 , amtrak's expenses were at least 2 times greater than its revenues for 28 of its 40 routes in fiscal year 1997 . in addition , 14 routes lost more than $100 per passenger carried .