we concur with this position . we performed our review between october 1993 and january 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . all dollar amounts in this report have been adjusted to constant 1993 dollars . additional details on our scope and methodology are contained in appendix iv . as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of transportation ; the administrator , faa ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . we will make copies available to others on request . this report was prepared under the direction of allen li , associate director , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-3600 . other major contributors are listed in appendix v . to address our objectives , we performed work at faa headquarters in washington , d.c. we also met with officials at faa's central region in kansas city , missouri ; its northwest mountain region in seattle , washington ; southern region in atlanta , georgia ; and western - pacific region in los angeles and san francisco , california . we visited 17 airports of varying size throughout the country . we interviewed executives and former executives of aviation industry associations , including those representing the interests of airports , airlines , and pilots . we attended a major conference in nashville , tennessee , at which we communicated our understanding of access control issues and sought the knowledge of airport managers . we attended meetings of the aviation security advisory committee ; the committee's universal access system subgroup ; and rtca , incorporated special committee 183 . we conferred privately with these groups' members , which included senior faa officials , aviation industry representatives , and system experts . at our request , faa surveyed all 258 regulated airports to gather detailed data on the costs that airports and airlines have incurred to date and on costs that they anticipate incurring through the year 2003 for access control systems . we worked closely with faa during all phases of its survey to understand the validity of the information . finally , we reviewed the agency's regulations , policies , and procedures governing access control systems . randall b. williamson , assistant director lisa c. dobson dana e. greenberg the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .