( app . i contains additional information on the number and types of violations detected during the task force's and subsequent inspections. ) epa's inspection coverage . although the task force's report recommended that epa adopt some of the task force's inspection procedures so that epa could better scrutinize industry's compliance with the agency's regulations , epa did not fully implement the recommendation . in particular , the task force's inspectors used a new checklist that expanded the checklist used during epa's routine inspections . this new checklist was designed to evaluate the effectiveness and not just the presence of employee training programs , contingency responses , and emergency plans . furthermore , interviews of employees during the task force's inspections assessed employees' knowledge of environmental requirements and employees' ability to carry out contingency plans and emergency procedures . but in general , during routine inspections , epa or the states only review employers' records to ensure that employers have a training program and that plans are on file . after the task force made its recommendations in december 1990 , an epa assistant administrator sent a memo to regional administrators asking that they distribute the task force's inspection checklist and employee interview guide to their staff and the states . epa's technical assistance branch chief also orally instructed regional enforcement section chiefs to include items from the task force's checklist in the regions' routine inspections . in addition , epa included the new checklist in the agency's inspection training manual and training courses . however , some of the epa regions and states did not adopt the task force's checklist as suggested or directed because , according to regional compliance and enforcement officials , they were not aware of headquarters' instructions . the remainder of the inspections were unprogrammed . osha's inspections rely on inspectors' observations as well as interviews with employees and reviews of records . osha expects this requirement to become final in december 1994 . osha intends that the proposed regulation will result in workers' reduced exposure to hazardous substances and thus will help prevent fatalities and illnesses . under the proposed regulation , all employees working on - site and exposed to hazardous substances and health or safety hazards will receive osha's accredited training . however , osha has no method to ensure that ( 1 ) all hazardous waste facilities submit training programs for accreditation and ( 2 ) all facilities' programs are accredited . osha and the states plan to rely on inspections to verify that facilities are complying with the requirement . however , since 1990 , osha and the states have conducted few inspections at hazardous waste incineration facilities , and given the relatively low risk that the agency assigns to incinerators , osha and the states would only conduct inspections at incinerators if they were randomly selected or in response to complaints , referrals , or accidents .