( app . iv presents data on the distribution of the sites with and without reported cleanup actions among states and responsible federal agencies. ) epa , other federal agencies , and the states have completed removal actions or interim , partial response actions ( not characterized by survey respondents as final cleanup solutions ) , including changing the water supplies of affected residents , at 576 of the 686 sites with cleanup actions . at the other 110 sites , responding officials told us that some cleanup is under way , but they are not sure if it will be a final response . in addition , we received only partial information from new york for 54 of its 56 potentially eligible sites . table ii.1 shows the 16 states that either did not respond to our survey or responded only in part , and the number and percentage of potentially eligible sites in each state for which we did not receive fully completed surveys . epa regions i and v notified us that because of time and resource constraints , they had taken a generic approach to answering certain survey questions: that is , they answered certain questions in a standardized manner for all sites in the region rather than on a site - specific basis . questions addressed in this manner included , among others , those relating to the likely placement of sites on the npl and the risks posed by the sites . for example , for most sites , region i answered our questions about the degree of human health or environmental risks posed by each site by responding that it is “too early to tell / more information is needed to answer” because , according to region i officials , “risk assessments are not conducted for most cerclis sites , and thus the current risks posed by these sites are difficult to determine.” epa region ii responded to key survey questions in a similar manner . consequently , because neither epa regions i , ii , and v nor three states in those regions — massachusetts ( 190 sites ) , new jersey ( 66 sites ) , and new york ( 54 sites ) — provided complete survey information , we could not characterize the conditions at these sites with the same degree of accuracy as for other sites . for example , these three states account for 54 percent of the sites for which we could not obtain an official's estimate of the risks to human health and the environment . we conducted pretests of our surveys with officials in six states , at two federal agencies , and in five epa regional offices . each pretest consisted of a visit with an official by gao staff . we attempted to vary the types of sites for which we conducted pretests and the familiarity of the respondents with the sites . in some cases , the respondent used only site records to answer our survey . in other cases , the respondent knew most of the answers without consulting records . the pretest attempted to simulate the actual survey experience by asking the official to fill out the survey while gao staff observed and took notes .