remediation has not begun at any of these areas . when examined on a project - by - project basis , planning for removal actions also appears to be cheaper and faster than planning at comparable sites for the other environmental restoration processes . many of doe's waste sites fit into one of three categories: burial grounds , contaminated soil , or contaminated water . burial grounds may contain radioactive and / or hazardous solid and / or liquid waste . buried in them are such things as barrels of chemicals and other material and equipment from doe facilities . ( see fig . soil may have been contaminated by leaks or spills or by using liquid waste disposal facilities , such as trenches and waste ponds , to disperse contaminated liquids . ( see fig . surface water or groundwater may have been contaminated by radioactive or hazardous materials leaching through the soil from spills and leaks or through normal operations . ( see fig . at hanford and inel , where more complete comparative information was available , we analyzed the removal actions that fell into these categories . we found four instances in which removal actions had been used at sites where conditions were reasonably comparable to those at sites that had been addressed under interim remedial measures ( see table 2 ) . in each case , planning for the remediation was accomplished much more quickly and at substantially less cost using a removal action . while the projects being compared are not identical , their similarities provide a reasonable basis for comparing the relative time and cost required to complete the planning that precedes remediation . the relative speed of removal actions can provide other advantages to doe . because removal actions progress to actual cleanup more quickly than other cercla processes , removal actions can provide information about waste sites that is useful in focusing other types of remediation . for example , one removal action at hanford involved cleaning up a liquid disposal area near one of the shutdown reactors . the project manager for the removal action said important information obtained during the removal action on the extent and spread of contamination through the soil will be used to plan and conduct cleanups near other shutdown reactors , saving both time and money . removal actions may also reduce the cumulative risk to human health and the environment . for example , hanford's removal action in a trench near the columbia river reduced the concentration of uranium in the groundwater from up to 28 times the drinking water standard to below the drinking water standard . without the removal action , uranium would have continued to leach into the groundwater for at least 3 years before a planned water treatment facility was completed . at oak ridge , the epa region 4 administrator praised a recent removal action that successfully reduced radioactive strontium releases by about 40 percent . he noted that the projects were completed in less time , at less cost , and with equal or greater effectiveness than the “typical” decision - making process would have allowed . he also attributed the results to teamwork and cooperation between doe and the regulators .