we did not revise the report . fda stated that our draft report implied that fda's kansas city district office did not impress upon kdhe that the consultant was not acceptable and notes that both fda's district office and kdhe had ample reason early on to question the consultant's capability . we continue to believe that fda did not adequately share information about the consultant's past performance . while the district office raised questions about the consultant's sampling and testing plan , it provided no information to kdhe reflecting its concerns about the consultant's past performance . this information was available elsewhere within fda , but was not shared with the district office officials who were advising kdhe . in fact , kdhe officials later learned that the consultant was the subject of an ongoing fda investigation . they said that had they known this earlier , they would not have allowed food to be shipped to the minnesota salvager . we did not revise the report . fda contends that kdhe officials are familiar with proper techniques for collecting and safeguarding samples . kdhe officials agreed that this is true for samples collected by their own food inspectors . this laboratory was not affiliated with the consultant . on the basis of this information and subsequent laboratory results indicating that the tested food was not contaminated , kdhe allowed the food to be shipped , under embargo , to a minnesota salvager . kdhe officials later learned from fda that the consultant himself was the subject of an ongoing fda investigation concerning the falsification of laboratory data . they said that if they had known this earlier , they would not have allowed the food to be shipped to minnesota . after the food shipments to minnesota began , the minnesota department of agriculture asked fda to test a truckload of cheese . minnesota state food inspectors were concerned because the containers were covered with dust and smelled of smoke . fda's test results showed that some hazardous chemicals , including toluene , were present in the cheese . however , according to an fda official , the levels of chemicals found did not pose a health hazard . the remaining food held by the salvager was retested by a private laboratory , judged to be safe for consumption , and eventually sold to the public . officials from kdhe and the minnesota department of agriculture told us that no illnesses have been attributed to this food . fda has published guidance on food sampling to ensure the credibility , accuracy , and reliability of analytical data from private laboratories . this guidance , which primarily concerns fda's regulation of imported foods , was provided to kdhe's state laboratory but not to the kdhe officials managing the food salvaging operations . the food sampling processes kdhe used in the salvaging operations following the fire lacked some important controls , thereby creating the risk that unsafe food might be released to the public . for example , food owners selected food samples without a kdhe official or other disinterested third party present . in addition , the consultant discussed earlier maintained control over food samples that were to be tested for chemical residues .