( fig . 2.2 shows the average ranking that cgcs gave to each activity , with 1 being the highest possible ranking. ) all 40 cgcs stated that they knew of germplasm samples that would increase the genetic diversity of the npgs collections and that should be added to them . for example , the wheat cgc's 1996 report to npgs cited three critical collection needs for the npgs wheat collection and specified where much of this germplasm could be obtained , including landraces ( seeds passed down by farmers from one generation to another to produce desired plant characteristics ) from guatemala , where they have not been collected before , and wild wheat relatives from albania , greece , and the former yugoslavia . similarly , the sweet potato cgc wanted to enhance the limited genetic diversity of the npgs sweet potato collection by obtaining a representative sample of germplasm from the international potato center in peru . this collection contains about 6,500 germplasm samples of sweet potato , compared with about 1,170 in the npgs collection . although most cgcs reported that their npgs collections overall are sufficiently diverse at this time , they cited several concerns with the collections that may account for the importance they place on increased acquisition . first , most cgcs reported that at least one of the following types of germplasm in their collections is insufficiently diverse for reducing crop vulnerability: wild and weedy relatives of cultivated crops , landraces , and genetic stocks . only obsolete and current cultivars , the fourth type of germplasm samples in a collection , are considered to be sufficient by most cgcs . specifically: wild and weedy relatives of crops were reported to be insufficient by almost half the cgcs , including those for major crops such as corn and soybeans . wild relatives have often been used to improve crops , such as tomatoes , and sometimes to develop new ones . landraces — many of which are grown from selected quality seed passed down by farmers from one generation to another — were reported to be insufficient by 12 of the 40 cgcs . landraces are rich sources of genes for traits such as resistance to pests and pathogens . genetic stocks are insufficiently diverse , according to over half the cgcs , including those for major crops such as alfalfa , peanuts , and grapes . such losses have occurred in the past . the irish potato famine of the 1840s was a major factor in the death , impoverishment , and emigration of millions of irish people . a single variety of the potato became ireland's staple food after its arrival from south america in the eighteenth century . the widespread use of this single variety increased the potato crop's vulnerability to a previously unknown blight , which devastated a number of successive potato harvests . while the united states has not experienced such a widespread loss , several sizable crop failures have occurred as a result of a crop's vulnerability to a particular disease . for example , in the late 1950s and early 1960s , about 70 percent of the wheat crop in the pacific northwest was wiped out by a disease known as stripe rust .