is too large . however , if we fail to cover an activity [with a measure] the contractor may not give the attention needed to the activity.” doe and its laboratories are still attempting to develop the right number of measures . for example , we found that the number of performance measures in the laboratory contracts we examined ranged from a low of 7 measures at the ames laboratory in iowa to about 250 at the idaho national engineering and environmental laboratory in idaho . doe and its contractors are also working to develop measures that reliably address the most important activities of the laboratories . according to a field official , doe's early attempts at developing performance measures resulted in contractors focusing only on those activities that were tied to performance fees , while neglecting other important activities . another doe site official stated , “erformance - based contracting tends to focus too much on the monetary reward . and less on an analysis of performance . the incentive at the labs should be good science , not more dollars.” developing the right number and type of performance measures is an evolving process between doe and its contractors . most doe and contractor representatives told us that they are making progress in finding measures that accurately and reliably reflect performance , particularly in management and operations activities . measuring a contractor's performance in science and technology is more difficult . science and technology measures are broader in scope and typically rely on peer reviews and a contractor's self - assessment for evaluating performance . although performance fees are a major feature of performance - based contracting , only 9 of the department's 18 laboratory contracts have them . nine of the remaining laboratory contracts operate under doe's traditional fixed - fee arrangement , and one laboratory contract has no fee . fixed fees are earned regardless of performance and were commonly used before doe adopted performance - based contracting as its normal business practice . appendixes i and ii summarize laboratory fee arrangements and illustrate the wide variety of fee arrangements in use . in commenting on a draft of this report , doe said that by the end of calendar year 1999 , the majority of laboratory contracts that provide fees will have performance - based fee structures . performance fees were introduced as a way of encouraging superior performance and can include an incentive and an award fee . an incentive fee is usually applied to activities for which progress can be accurately measured , for example , cleaning up 40 barrels of toxic waste within a prescribed period of time . an award fee is usually applied to tasks that are harder to measure and require a more subjective judgment of performance , for example , assessing a contractor's attention to community relations . performance fees represent the amount of a contractor's total fee placed “at risk” since the fee that could be earned is determined by how well the contractor performs . as the following examples show , some laboratory contracts include both types of performance fees , while others rely solely on an incentive fee or an award fee . still others have neither and use only fixed fees .