this situation is not new . over the past 30 years , more than a dozen major reviews by independent experts as well as the park service have concluded that resource management must be guided by more scientific knowledge . from the so - called “leopold” and “robbins” reports of 1963 to the report on the 75th anniversary symposium on the national park service ( the “vail agenda” ) in 1992 to a natural research council report of 1992 , concerns have been raised about the lack of scientific data on park resources . similar concerns have been echoed by park advocacy groups , such as the national parks and conservation association , and by two former park service directors . overall , managers at the culturally oriented parks we visited , such as the statue of liberty national monument and ellis island in new york and hopewell furnace national historic site in pennsylvania , reported that ( 1 ) the condition of cultural resources was declining and ( 2 ) the location and status of many cultural resources — primarily archeological — are largely unknown . ellis island is an example of a park where the condition of cultural resources is declining . it was reopened in 1990 as the country's only museum devoted exclusively to immigration . while a few of the island's structures have been restored , 32 of 36 significant historic buildings have seriously deteriorated . in the meantime , park managers often make decisions about the parks' operations without knowing the impact of these decisions on the resources . for example , according to a park manager at yosemite national park , after 70 years of stocking nonnative fish in various lakes and waterways for recreational purposes , park officials realized that indiscriminate stocking had compromised the park's waterways . nonnative fish introduced into the park now outnumber native rainbow trout by four to one . according to a park official , this stocking policy , which continued until 1990 , has also resulted in a decline of at least one federally protected species . table 2.3 provides examples of the conditions of natural resources at each of the 12 parks included in our review . the national park service is mandated to provide for the enjoyment of visitors to some of the nation's greatest natural and cultural resources and , at the same time , to preserve and protect those treasures . however , cutbacks in the scope and quality of services provided to visitors and a lack of sufficient information about the condition of many natural and cultural resources within national parks are affecting the park service's ability to meet its mandate . while a visit to the nation's parks is still an enjoyable and pleasant experience for most visitors , reduced park operating hours , less frequent or terminated interpretation programs , fewer law enforcement personnel , and less timely attention to visitors' safety needs is seriously diminishing the quality of this experience . moreover , the park service's lack of progress in addressing a decades - old problem of collecting scientific data to properly inventory park resources and monitor their condition and trend over time is threatening its ability to preserve and protect the resources entrusted to it .