unpublished . spring 1997 . newman , sandra and joseph harkness . “the effects of welfare reform on housing: a national analysis.” presented at the policy research roundtable on the implications of welfare reform for housing , sponsored by the fannie mae foundation in collaboration with the institute for policy studies at the johns hopkins university ( work in progress ) . july 22 , 1997 . for updated information , see “the effects of welfare reform on housing: a national analysis” in newman , sandra j . ( ed. ) the home front: implications of welfare reform for housing policy , washington , d.c.: the urban institute press , forthcoming . “technical paper: welfare reform budgeting.” u.s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) . washington , d.c.: oct. 4 , 1996 . “estimated pha income loss due to proposed afdc cuts.” st. paul public housing agency , unpublished . “impact of welfare reform on program costs.” new jersey department of community affairs' section 8 housing program . unpublished . nguyen , mai , charles kastner , and ashley lommers - johnson . “welfare reform: status of washington state's welfare reform plan ; effects on residents , the seattle housing authority , and neighborhoods ; and prospects for employment and rent income.” presented at hud headquarters , washington , d.c. dec. 17 , 1996 . “potential impact of calworks.” housing authority of the city of los angeles . unpublished . fall 1996 . “impact of welfare reform in public housing.” david m. griffith & associates , ltd . sponsored by the public housing authorities directors association . “welfare act impact analysis: district of columbia housing authority ( dcha ) — final report.” david m. griffith & associates , ltd. apr . “welfare reform impact study.” minneapolis public housing authority . unpublished . spring 1997 . welfare reform impacts on the public housing program: a preliminary forecast . u.s. department of housing and urban development . office of policy studies and research . rockville , md. , mar . “welfare reform program and financial analysis.” miami - dade housing agency . unpublished . paul cullinan , chief , human resources cost estimate unit , congressional budget office ( cbo ) shelia dacey , analyst , cbo debra devine , social science analyst , office of policy development and research , u. s. department of housing and urban development ( hud ) katherine l. meredith , program examiner , housing branch , executive office of the president , office of management and budget ( omb ) charles nelson , assistant division chief for income and poverty , housing and economic household statistics division , bureau of the census , u. s. department of commerce don oellerich , acting deputy chief economist , office of the assistant secretary of planning and evaluation , u. s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .