washington , d.c . this appendix describes the econometric model we developed and the analysis we conducted to estimate the associations between early foreclosures and several explanatory variables . the explanatory variables we tested were the loan - to - value ratio , loan amount , contract interest rate , city where the property was located , and neighborhood income . the equation we estimated used all of the fha - insured single - family loans endorsed in calendar years 1992 through 1994 in six cities — atlanta , georgia ; baltimore , maryland ; chicago , illinois ; dallas , texas ; san bernadino , california ; and washington , d.c. we excluded loans made for properties within the metropolitan statistical area ( msa ) but outside the city's boundaries . , urban or rural ) , whether the borrower is a first - time homeowner , and the borrower's marital status . it is generally agreed that many life - changing events — such as the arrival of children , divorce , and death — may also be related to the probability of foreclosure . however , it should be noted that prior research has associated these other factors only to ultimate loan foreclosure , not to early foreclosure . to determine if early foreclosure rates were different in lower - income communities , we obtained information on the aggregate income and the total population for each census tract within the borders of the cities we studied . we computed the ratio of the per capita income for each of the tracts to the per capita income for the relevant city to obtain the tract - to - city income ratio . we anticipated that people living in lower - income tracts might have more difficulty meeting their mortgage payments than people in higher - income tracts and that the rate of early foreclosure would , then , be higher in the lower - income tracts than elsewhere . as the per capita income in the census tract in which the property was located increased relative to the per capita income in the entire city , the odds of early foreclosure decreased . for example , the odds of foreclosure for loans on properties located in areas whose per capita income was 91 percent of the citywide per capita income were about 1 percent lower than the odds for properties in areas whose per capita income was 90 percent of the citywide income . larger mortgages were negatively correlated with the probability of early foreclosure . the odds of early foreclosure were estimated to decrease by about 1 percent for each additional $1,000 borrowed . the loan - to - value ratio was significantly and positively correlated with the odds of early foreclosure . when the loan - to - value ratio increased by 1 percentage point , the odds of early foreclosure increased by about 6 percent .