( see app . iii for a copy of epa's comments. ) the agency asked us to clarify that it used various statutory authorities to fund the different types of brownfield activities it conducted . for example , the agency noted that it used either cercla section 311 ( c ) or rcra section 8001 to make awards for brownfield research . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . epa began funding these pilot projects in september 1993 . through the creation of the joint center for sustainable communities , provide local elected officials with advice , information , and financial support on sustainable community development issues , such as brownfield redevelopment and curbing urban sprawl . develop a model brownfield redevelopment plan for member mayors to use to adapt to their unique situations . hold six consultations to increase the awareness of locating hazardous waste sites in low - income neighborhoods and communities of color , and publish the results and findings of those consultations . conduct research , convene meetings , provide training , and issue publications on state and epa issues related to the superfund program , such as state requirements for cleanup programs and brownfield revitalization . research and publish 20 case studies on the cleanup and reuse of brownfield sites and share the results with targeted groups of local leaders through at least two constituent meetings . to help reduce the health risks and other problems associated with brownfields , conduct a series of activities , including — monitor changes to brownfield and other cleanup legislation and publish information on these changes to educate constituents , and — publish “how - to” booklets on environmental site cleanup , workforce development , and other issues important to brownfield cleanup and redevelopment . conduct conferences , develop models , and issue research papers on federal barriers to brownfield redevelopment and ways to achieve smart growth while protecting public health . ( continued ) major activities covered by award conduct forums to promote public discussion on brownfield redevelopment . form a brownfield oversight community action team to learn about and monitor the progress of community brownfield cleanups , as well as educate communities and publicize information on associated health effects , redevelopment barriers , and other brownfield issues . compile and disseminate information , such as lessons learned , on epa's brownfield pilot projects .