atmosphere . by the earth's surface and warms it . earth's surface . additional atmospheric warming — called the enhanced greenhouse effect or global warming — appears to be associated with human activities . during the past century , as industry , agriculture , and transportation have grown , so , too , have atmospheric concentrations of heat - trapping greenhouse gases ( see app . at the same time , the earth has gotten warmer , according to historical data . recorded temperatures for the period from 1860 through 1993 show a warming trend that generally coincides with the increased use of fossil fuels during the industrial revolution — and , hence , with the increased emission of greenhouse gases . during the past 50 to 100 years , volcanic eruptions have combined with the increased combustion of fossil fuels and emission of greenhouse gases to increase the concentration of aerosols in the lower atmosphere . scientists believe that because these aerosols deflect sunlight , they have partially offset the effects of global warming . as a result , scientists surmise , temperatures have not reached the levels projected by gcms , which do not include the aerosols' effects . to help understand the global climate system's response to emissions of greenhouse gases , scientists use three types of gcms: atmospheric , oceanic , and coupled . in general , atmospheric gcms predict the physical behavior of the atmosphere . oceanic gcms represent the physics of the ocean . coupled gcms , which scientists regard as the most advanced of the models , physically join atmospheric and oceanic gcms and treat the evolution of the climate in both domains . to improve predictions of the future climate , modelers are also striving to couple , and to some degree have coupled , ( 1 ) the land surface to the atmosphere and ( 2 ) the antarctic sea ice to both the ocean and the atmosphere . all types of gcms process vast quantities of data on variables affecting climate . using complex mathematical equations to represent the actions and interactions of these variables , the gcms process the data to project patterns of climatic conditions . ( app . ii shows how a coupled gcm works. ) to test the accuracy of a model's projections , modelers run the model with their best estimates of historical climatic data and compare the resulting projections with records of actual climatic conditions for the period being modeled . modelers assume that if the model can accurately simulate actual climatic conditions for prior periods , then it can be used to accurately project future climatic conditions . although the earth's gradual warming since the mid - 19th century is generally consistent with gcms' estimates of the effects of greenhouse gases ( when adjusted for the effects of aerosols ) , scientists have not been able to attribute the warming conclusively to the enhanced greenhouse effect or to quantify its effects . specifically , they have not been able to uniquely and quantitatively distinguish the effects of higher concentrations of greenhouse gases from the effects of other factors that can change the climate .