that is , the demonstration project is to be cost neutral . as part of the process for ensuring cost neutrality , the act requires the secretary of agriculture and the state of minnesota to agree upon methodologies for estimating what the food stamp benefit and administrative costs would have been had there been no demonstration project . furthermore , minnesota has agreed to return to the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) any funds it received in excess of those that would have been paid under the traditional food stamp program . second , to allocate administrative costs that are eligible for federal reimbursement for mfip , minnesota agreed to use the methodology it currently uses for allocating allowable administrative costs among the food stamp and other federal and state programs . this methodology uses data from the state's time study survey , which measures the amount of time county employees spend on various federal and state welfare programs . the results of this survey are used to allocate administrative costs across 14 federal and state programs . the formal agreements on the cost - neutrality methodologies for food stamps are between minnesota and hhs , not between minnesota and usda . however , according to usda officials , usda participated in the negotiations regarding the cost - neutrality methodologies and agreed to them . the formal agreements are between minnesota and hhs because hhs has assumed the lead role for welfare reform demonstration projects that include its programs — afdc and medicaid — and usda's food stamp program . hhs has taken the lead role because the main focus of these welfare reform demonstration projects is changing afdc . in this role , hhs formally negotiates the terms and conditions for those projects , including cost - neutrality provisions , and is responsible for ensuring that these cost - neutrality requirements are carried out . as of november 6 , 1995 , hhs had the lead responsibility for overseeing 36 approved welfare reform demonstration projects , including mfip , that involve usda's food stamp program . usda and hhs have no documented procedures on how they are to work together on mfip or on these other welfare reform demonstration projects . the cost - neutrality requirements for mfip are more restrictive than those for more recently approved welfare reform demonstration projects . according to an hhs official , while mfip must be cost neutral separately for benefit and administrative costs for the food stamp program and for afdc , demonstration projects are now typically only required to be cost neutral to the federal government overall . under these latter circumstances , costs for the food stamp program and afdc would be considered in total in determining overall federal cost neutrality . in addition , in september 1994 , hhs formally announced more flexible cost - neutrality principles and procedures to be used for welfare demonstration projects . in accordance with this announcement , hhs generally determines the cost neutrality over the life of a demonstration project , not annually as is required for mfip . because the cost - neutrality requirements for mfip are mandated by the food stamp act , the recent changes in cost - neutrality policy and practice cannot be applied to mfip .