i for a complete list ) . a number of these modifications called for making long - term contracts consistent with short - term contracts in such respects as timber sale planning , environmental assessment , and the administration of road credits . other provisions of the act added new environmental requirements , such as leaving timber buffers at least 100 feet in width along designated streams . four months after the act was passed , and pursuant to one of the act's requirements , we issued a report to the senate committee on energy and natural resources and the house committee on interior and insular affairs . that report described the forest service's revisions to the long - term contracts for each of the nine modifications and discussed whether the changes reflected the modifications specified in section 301 ( c ) of the act . we concluded that , with the exception of dealing with the administration of road credits , the contract changes complied with the act's requirements . we also concluded that more time would be needed to determine how these changes were actually carried out . you requested that we review the forest service's implementation of certain contract modifications and other provisions of the tongass timber reform act . as agreed with your office , we focused this report mainly on two issues — road credits and timber buffers . more specifically , we determined whether credits that timber harvesters receive for building harvest - related roads are used consistently between long - term and short - term timber sale contracts and whether buffers of standing timber have been left along designated streams as the act requires , and how the forest service monitors the buffers' effectiveness . during our review , we also noted inconsistencies in the forest service's documentation of the environmental significance of changes to timber harvest unit boundaries after environmental impact statements had been prepared . as agreed with your office , we included an analysis of this issue in this report . to address the first objective , we analyzed the use of road credits by short - term contractors in fiscal years 1990-93 and compared this usage with road credits used by long - term contractors . using forest service accounting data , we also determined the extent to which the long - term contractors had applied road credits against the cost of purchasing tongass timber since the inception of the long - term contracts through the end of fiscal year 1993 . to address the second objective , we reviewed and analyzed the results of buffer monitoring conducted in 1992 and 1993 by the forest service and the alaska department of fish and game , reviewed the monitoring reports for 1991-93 from the forest service's alaska region and visited the craig and thorne bay ranger districts within the tongass national forest to observe stream buffers . we also reviewed changes made in buffer - related policies and procedures by the forest service's alaska region in 1993-94 . to address the third objective , we reviewed and compared the planned harvest unit boundary maps included in the environmental impact statements with maps of the actual harvest boundaries .