doe will require repayment of this amount . doe subsequently agreed to provide another $11 million in additional funding and may require that this amount be repaid , as well as any additional future funding provided under this contract . doe's original contractual commitment of about $50 million is not subject to repayment . according to doe officials , the department also may provide for the recovery of any federal contributions in excess of the original $50 million commitment under another contract in the advanced reactor design certification program . the other program — the “first - of - a - kind” engineering program — involves a cooperative agreement between doe and the advanced reactor corporation . according to doe , in the development of this program , the participating electric generating utilities made a major commitment to provide cost - share funding and overall direction and technical advice to achieve a plant design that they would be willing to acquire at some future time . because of their direct , substantial contributions to the plant designs , the utilities require reactor vendors to pay them royalties from the sale of the plant designs or technology to other customers . since the utilities were going to require royalty payments , doe decided to also require royalties proportionate to its share of the project's total costs . the cooperative agreement requires that doe be repaid up to its total investment from the revenues received by the advanced reactor corporation from the sale or use of the plant designs or technology developed under this program . the repayment period runs up to 20 years , or until the federal investment , which is expected to total $100 million , is repaid . a repayment policy provides both advantages and disadvantages . the main advantage is the recovery of the federal investment . we believe that many of the disadvantages and arguments against repayment can be mitigated by structuring a flexible policy that provides criteria and factors to consider in determining the application of repayment to individual programs or projects . the projects are carried out under cooperative agreements . industry is required to provide at least 30 percent of the funding , and doe provides the balance . industry participants establish a holding company for each project for the purpose of holding patents , licensing technology , tracking technology sales and use , and collecting and distributing licensing fees and other income . the officials generally indicated that repayment should be more applicable to projects with a large federal investment where the federal contribution is easily identified , projects involving technologies that are close to commercialization , and projects in which the federal investment serves to reduce the costs and risks of providing the technology to potential users . the officials also said that technologies that have a large potential market and technologies that are likely to be commercialized in foreign countries are good candidates for requiring repayment of the federal investment . some officials said that repayment should be directed at projects that have large , well - financed industry teams . doe officials indicated , for example , that the reservoir class field demonstration program might be appropriate for repayment if future projects are undertaken .