additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we also interviewed ferc and industry officials about these policies . to learn the opinions of various industry segments on ferc's regulatory approaches , we reviewed comments filed by industry officials with ferc . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . we also spoke to various ferc officials and representatives of several natural gas trade associations , including the american gas association , the american public gas association , the independent petroleum association of america , the interstate natural gas association of america , the natural gas supply association , and the national association of utility consumer advocates . to examine how doe plans to intervene in state regulatory proceedings , we reviewed various doe documents and spoke to doe officials and officials from several state utility commissions . we also spoke to doe and ferc officials about how doe may interact with ferc in implementing its strategy on participation . jackie a. goff , senior counsel the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . this approach is known as cost - of - service regulation . before ferc's order 636 ( described below ) , the costs of gathering services were incorporated into the rates that pipeline companies charged for sales and transportation service . in contrast , the rates charged for the gathering services provided by producers and other entities are not under ferc's regulation . the structure and workings of market hubs are still evolving . as a result , according to ferc's director of the office of pipeline regulation , ferc has not dealt with the issue . in a 1992 order , ferc articulated a policy on pipeline companies' gathering affiliates . most of the industry representatives with whom we spoke agreed that it is too early to determine how market hubs should be regulated , if at all . however , the commission added that it would not exercise its jurisdiction to regulate the rates charged by gathering affiliates except in response to a customer's complaint that an affiliate was acting in an anticompetitive manner . this approach was referred to in the industry as “light - handed” regulation . according to an official with the american gas association , none of its members have voiced complaints about operations at the hubs . moreover , the association maintains that ferc should generally rely on market forces unless it finds compelling evidence of market failures . however , some marketers have expressed concern that some hubs are being administered by competing marketers . according to those concerned , these hub administrators may have an incentive to use their access to information about competitors' deals at hubs to their competitive advantage .