( app . i contains detailed information on u.s. exports to euratom and japan. ) to determine what data bases contain data on nuclear material exports , we interviewed officials at doe's energy information administration ( eia ) ; the program manager for doe's nuclear materials management and safeguards system ( nmmss ) , and nmmss officials at the oak ridge operations office in oak ridge , tennessee ; officials at the customs exodus command center ; nrc officials in the office of international programs , division of nonproliferation , exports , and multilateral relations ; and u.s. nuclear industry representatives , including the nuclear energy institute , general electric , energy resources international , inc. , and edlow international , inc. on the basis of these discussions , we found that the best data available on u.s. nuclear exports are contained in the nmmss data base , which accounts for u.s. nuclear material exports controlled under the u.s. - euratom agreement . the information on exported nuclear materials and u.s. - origin materials transferred from japan to euratom in the nmmss data base is collected from doe and nrc forms . these forms are filled out by parties involved in the shipment of these materials . according to an nmmss official , the data in the nmmss data base reflect the amounts of nuclear materials that were actually exported or transferred from one country to another country . to obtain the doe / nmmss export information , we worked with doe / nmmss staff at the oak ridge operations office in oak ridge , tennessee , and nrc officials in the office of international programs , division of nonproliferation , exports , and multilateral relations . however , we did not independently verify the accuracy of these data . to determine the dollar value of uranium and plutonium exports to euratom countries and japan , we obtained available data ( 1989-aug. 1994 ) from the department of commerce's national trade data bank . the accuracy of these data depends largely on the accuracy of the reporting by shippers in their export declarations . we did not independently verify the accuracy and completeness of the data . we recognize that doe's and the department of commerce's data show different quantities of nuclear material exports . both doe and department of commerce officials also acknowledge the differences in these data . however , it was not within the scope of this review to determine why the various data bases differ . according to a doe official , doe is attempting to determine why the two data bases differ . according to department of commerce officials , they may , at a later date , examine why these differences exist . we interviewed nuclear industry officials , nrc officials , doe / nmmss staff , eia officials , and officials from the state department to obtain information on the nuclear commerce subject to the u.s. - euratom agreement . we also interviewed usec officials to obtain available data ( fys 1989-93 ) on the value of enrichment services provided by doe and usec . our work was performed between september 1994 and may 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .