( see app . i for a discussion of our scope and methodology , including the statistical methodology we used for evaluating oversight of ream contracts. ) as agreed with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the secretary of housing and urban development . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . figure 3 illustrates the conditions at two of these properties . if contractors do not accurately report on the condition of properties , hud may lack vital information on which to make disposition decisions and to address safety hazards . as a result , the government may sell properties for less than they are worth or incur unnecessary holding and maintenance costs because the properties are not marketable . furthermore , we found that about 38 percent of the properties we visited in massachusetts had either no hud signs or signs that were difficult to read . the ream contract requires contractors to post hud signs on properties in a conspicuous location . failure to post appropriate signs can make it difficult for neighbors to determine whom to contact when problems concerning a hud - owned property arise . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . one group of properties was located relatively close to the hud office , while the second group was located several hours away from the office . in addition , we made site visits to ream contractors' offices in each field location to review their property and subcontractor files . we also discussed contract obligations and contractors' policies and procedures with ream representatives . to identify what actions hud has planned or under way to change its handling and disposition of the single - family properties in its inventory , we gathered information on hud's planned and ongoing efforts from hud documents and discussions with the director , single - family property disposition , other single - family housing officials , and hud's office of inspector general . this section describes the sampling methodology and statistical precision of the estimates we used in our review of single - family property files . to review documentation on oversight of ream contracts , we used an automated data collection tool to compile standardized information from a sample of single - family property files at hud's illinois , massachusetts , and texas state offices .