, will not be reported . in addition , as we have previously noted , we revised our report to reflect the recent efforts undertaken by the interagency wetlands working group to reconcile the differences in the two inventories' estimates and produce a single wetlands status and trends report . the information presented in this section is merely to provide the purpose ( s ) for which the various task forces were established . vii. ) section is also creating a wildlife refuge primarily focused on waterfowl habitat in a moist soil managed wetlands in el paso , texas . about $834,000 and six full - time - equivalent staff - years were associated with these wetlands - related activities in fiscal year 1997 . the national aeronautics and space administration is involved in a number of wetlands - related activities . these activities include restoration , construction , research , mapping , delineation , and education . in fiscal years 1990 through 1997 , the agency spent about $1.6 million ( in constant 1997 dollars ) and six full - time - equivalent staff - years on these activities . the national science foundation was involved in a number of wetlands research and research - related activities . although research accounts for a majority of its activities , the national science foundation was also involved in wetlands mapping , restoration , and education / public outreach activities . in fiscal years 1990 through 1997 , the national science foundation spent almost $47 million ( in constant 1997 dollars ) and 27 full - time - equivalent staff - years on its wetlands research and research - related activities . the office of surface mining's mission is to carry out the requirements of the surface mining control and reclamation act of 1977 , as amended , in cooperation with the states and tribes . therefore , we did not add the additional material provided by epa . we did not revise the title of our report because we believe that it accurately reflects the current situation . although we recognize that the administration has recently undertaken efforts to resolve the wetlands data problems identified in our report , these actions will not be completed for several years . the estimates presented in our report for the nri are the 1982-1992 nri wetlands estimates . as noted in our report , questions and concerns about the nri's 1992 estimates were raised by officials from both the national wetlands inventory and epa . the section in question provides supporting details for our finding that the consistency and reliability of the estimates made by the two federal resource inventories and the data reported by the agencies on their accomplishments are questionable . usda may be correct in its assertion that users of inventory data incorrectly add figures to the inventory estimates and cause overstating of accomplishments . however , as this section points out , the current reporting practices of the agencies include the double counting of accomplishments as well as a lack of consistency in the use of terms and the inclusion of nonwetlands acreage . we revised the report to reflect the development of an action plan by the interagency wetlands working group .