see comment 1 . see comment 1 . the statement suggested by doe has not been included because this section of our report only addresses the building sector and because the adoption rate of new technologies for the transportation sector was questioned by officials of the american automobile manufacturers association . this sentence was clarified to note that , because the entry - level housing market is so cost - sensitive , the national association of homebuilders questioned whether builders of entry level housing would install the higher - initial - cost but more energy - efficient technologies described in the study . the study in question does not use the term “strategic investments” to describe the capital budgeting practices of firms , as suggested by doe . the study does indicate that the capital budgeting practices of firms varied based on the size of the project , with large projects having capital recovery rates ranging from 15 to 25 percent , medium - sized projects , from 25 to 40 percent , and small projects , from 35 to 60 percent . we have added a clarifying note that doe's interpretation of the study in question is that , under the most aggressive scenario , investments in energy - efficient technologies would be on the lower end of the range ( according to doe , about 15 percent for large projects and 35 percent for small - and medium - sized projects ) . doe's views have been added to this section of the report . due to a typographical error in the draft sent to doe , the words “resulting in” were omitted , which distorted the meaning of the sentence . we have revised the report accordingly . the information suggested by doe has been added to this section of the report . although our draft report already noted that doe laboratory officials disagreed with the american petroleum institute report , we added doe's suggested language about the analyses supporting the five - lab study's assessment of conversion costs . we agreed with this comment and have added a clarifying note to this section of our report . william f. mcgee , assistant director mehrzad nadji , assistant director , economic analysis group james r. beusse , evaluator - in - charge philip l. bartholomew , evaluator hamilton c. greene , jr. , evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .