the study did not address the 50-percent discount . the study used data from two other studies as well as ozone concentrations measured in allegheny county , pennsylvania , as factors in two computer models . one computation showed that ozone would be reduced only by 1.7 percent if im - 240 testing were introduced . thus , the study concluded , among other things , that ( 1 ) im - 240 testing in pennsylvania would lead to negligible reductions in ozone emissions , ( 2 ) centralized emission testing is significantly more costly than decentralized testing , and ( 3 ) achieving emission reductions from mobile sources appears to cost more than achieving similar reductions from stationary sources . according to the principal researcher , this ongoing study , subtitled results of the continuous atlanta fleet evaluation , is in final draft form and should be completed early in 1996 . the data are being developed by the georgia institute of technology in association with 11 other organizations , including the georgia department of natural resources and epa's office of research and development . while the study addresses the 50-percent discount , its primary purpose is to evaluate the effectiveness of the atlanta , georgia , i&m program . both of these studies are discussed in appendix ii . epa officials also pointed out that the agency recently assisted virginia in analyzing previously collected data from its test - and - repair program . while not a special study of the 50-percent discount , this analysis compared the effectiveness of virginia's test - and - repair network to that of minnesota's test - only network to determine how much credit virginia's program should receive during the 18-month period allotted for collecting new data under the new statute . according to epa , the analysis indicated that virginia's program is effective enough to receive full credit during the 18-month interim period . epa pointed out that the agency plans to meet with virginia and other affected states in march 1996 to help these states develop appropriate methodologies for assessing the effectiveness of their interim i&m programs in reducing emissions . we did not identify any other studies to collect quantitative data on the 50-percent discount that had been completed since november 1992 by the 23 states required to implement enhanced i&m programs . as states have changed the plans for their i&m programs , their needs for data have also changed . these studies' findings are summarized in appendix ii . they further suggested that we point out early in the report that recent legislation has eliminated any automatic discounts of test - and - repair networks . this information already appeared near the beginning of our report ; however , we added a citation identifying the relevant legislation and noted that epa had provided guidance to its regions . finally , the officials suggested that we include an i&m contractor's observation supporting the effectiveness of the test - only sites in a state that is not required to implement an enhanced i&m program . although we included this observation in appendix i , we did not incorporate it into the body of the report because it does not fall within the scope of our review .