ii. ) since 1995 , the corps' efforts to mitigate the decline of salmon stocks on the lower columbia and snake rivers have been guided by nmfs' 1995 biological opinion . many of the monitoring , evaluation , research , design , and construction projects and studies identified in the biological opinion are included in the corps' columbia river fish mitigation program . the corps' decision - making process for selecting , setting priorities for , and funding specific fish mitigation projects and studies is a cooperative effort between the corps and regional interests and is known as the regional forum process . the regional forum is a group with broad regional representation , including federal agencies , states , and native american tribes from the columbia river basin . the forum , which includes the corps , tries to reach consensus among its members in making decisions on fish mitigation actions . however , if consensus cannot be reached , the corps , as the action agency responsible for implementing its fish mitigation program , makes the decisions . annually , the corps , with input from the regional forum , estimates the costs of its fish mitigation actions and requests funding for their implementation as part of its normal budget process . if the congress appropriates less money than the corps requests , the corps seeks recommendations from the regional forum to help the corps make its decisions on which projects and studies should be funded , at what levels , and in which years . in march of 1995 , nmfs issued its biological opinion on the operation of the federal columbia river power system proposed by the corps , bonneville power , and the bureau of reclamation for 1995 and future years . the biological opinion concluded that the proposed operation , which included planned mitigation activities , was likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the three species of snake river salmon protected under the endangered species act . pursuant to the act's requirements , the biological opinion recommended a “reasonable and prudent” alternative to the proposed hydropower system's operation . nmfs concluded that implementing the reasonable and prudent alternative would not jeopardize the survival of the listed salmon . the reasonable and prudent alternative includes time frames for completing certain fish mitigation projects and studies and identifies the corps as one of three action agencies responsible for implementing the fish mitigation activities identified in the biological opinion . bonneville power and the bureau of reclamation are the other action agencies . in response to the biological opinion , in march 1995 , the corps issued its record of decision for reservoir regulation and project operation , 1995 and future years . in the record of decision , the corps stated its intention to carry out the requirements of the biological opinion . the corps carries out many of the measures it is responsible for under the biological opinion through its columbia river fish mitigation program . while the corps has been conducting salmon mitigation efforts under its fish mitigation program since the mid - 1980s , currently , the primary focus of the program is the implementation of the actions specified in the biological opinion .