nhtsa currently does not have such emphasis or programs . nhtsa officials told us that they have limited authority to encourage the states to enact stronger safety belt laws — primary enforcement , higher fines for nonuse , and coverage for all occupants of vehicles . additionally , nhtsa officials told us that the current political environment that favors local and state initiatives over federal efforts has further reduced the agency's ability to influence state and local activities . the state officials we interviewed reflected the attitude that the states welcome federal funds but not federal requirements or advice . they told us that the states still want federal funds for their programs but do not want any federal influence on how the funds are spent . they generally agreed that federal financial and technical assistance have helped them increase belt use , thereby reducing deaths , injuries , and the related costs to society . several said that the positive changes might not have occurred without nhtsa's influence and the conditions under which the states could accept federal funds under istea . while nhtsa's focus has been on encouraging the states to enact and enforce laws on safety belt use , other federal agencies have required , through federal regulations and an executive order , that certain occupants of vehicles use safety belts . the federal aviation administration requires each occupant over 2 years old in an airplane to use safety belts during takeoff and landing . likewise , the federal highway administration requires commercial drivers of interstate trucks and buses to use safety belts . furthermore , executive order 12566 , issued in september 1986 , requires federal employees to use safety belts when driving on official duty . federal efforts have been effective in encouraging federal employees to use safety belts in motor vehicles . for example , 48 federal organizations reported a rate of at least 90-percent belt use during 1993 based on observational surveys . although federal and state officials often disagree on the roles that federal and state agencies should play in traffic safety , several recent polls indicate general public acceptance of laws on mandatory safety belt use . a recent nationwide public opinion poll of 1,000 people by mckeon and associates found strong support for safety belt laws . a large majority opposed any weakening or repeal of the laws . these results support findings in individual states . the data from codes are consistent with the data from other studies . our may 1992 report on the effectiveness of safety belts presented the results from eight studies containing data on the effectiveness of safety belts in reducing hospital charges . all the studies showed that hospital costs were lower for the vehicle occupants using safety belts than for the occupants not using belts . the victims who used belts had average hospital costs that were from 27 to 87 percent lower than those of the victims who did not use belts ; most of the studies showed costs between 60 and 80 percent lower . stated another way , most of the studies showed the hospital costs for the crash victims who did not use belts to be 2-1 / 2 to 5 times the cost for the victims who used belts .