audits are unannounced . for processors , the frequency ranges from daily audits in plants that are temporarily out of compliance to audits every 6 months for a high level of proven compliance . the entry level in the haccp program calls for audits every 2 weeks . fda plans to review the seafood - processing plants about once every 2 years on average . these inspections have occurred nearly once per year , on average , for the highest - risk fish and seafood firms and about once every 3 to 4 years , on average , for low - risk firms . all of the plant's records must be maintained by the firm for a period of 6 months beyond the expected shelf life of the product and must be accessible at all times to nmfs' inspection personnel . records required by the regulations shall be retained at the processing facility or importer's business for at least 1 year after preparation for refrigerated products and 2 years for frozen , shelf - stable , or processed products . all records shall be available for official review and copying by fda inspectors . nmfs has fees and charges to recover costs for administering the haccp program . fees are collected for preplan consultation , plan review and validation , inspections , and laboratory analysis of samples . travel and per diem charges are added . fda will not fund the additional work on haccp's compliance with user fees . edward m. zadjura , assistant director john m. nicholson , jr. , evaluator - in - charge dennis richards karla springer carol herrnstadt shulman the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . four agencies did not have any comments . fda disagreed with our characterization of haccp systems as a fundamental change for the agency . fda officials , including the strategic manager for haccp policy , viewed the changes planned for the seafood inspection program as a continuation of historical efforts by the agency and cited their low - acid canned food program and their issuance of good manufacturing practices as examples . while we recognize that fda's approach to food safety has evolved over the years , we continue to believe that the move to haccp represents a significant shift in fda's policy . we further believe that our characterization of this shift is consistent with fda's previous characterizations .