i for details. ) the lessons learned from these problems could be applied to future incineration projects to prevent similar problems from arising . however , epa has no formal mechanism to ensure that other incineration projects can benefit from the times beach experience . epa officials agreed that they should be sharing the lessons learned from each site . these incinerators are constructed and operated by contractors . cercla exempts any portion of a cleanup action conducted entirely on - site , including incineration , from the need to obtain any permit . however , cercla requires epa to apply legally applicable or relevant and appropriate environmental standards from other federal laws , including rcra , to superfund cleanups . accordingly , epa requires incinerators at superfund sites to meet rcra's substantive requirements , such as the act's standards for emissions . epa relies on four principal methods to ensure the safe operation of incinerators used to clean up superfund sites . these methods are ( 1 ) setting site - specific standards for emissions and operations , ( 2 ) incorporating safety features into an incinerator's emergency systems , ( 3 ) monitoring emissions at the incinerator's stack and along the site's perimeter , and ( 4 ) providing 24-hour on - site oversight . ( see app . i for more details on the safeguards at the three incinerators in operation at the time of our review. ) epa establishes specific cleanup standards for each incinerator used at a superfund site . these standards are based on studies of the site's characteristics ( eg , the type and concentration of contamination present ) conducted during the incinerator's design and construction . standards can be adopted from other environmental programs or laws , such as rcra or the toxic substances control act . typically , rcra's standards for fixed facility hazardous waste incinerators are applied . rcra's standards govern the extent to which an incinerator must destroy and remove contaminants and set limits on emissions from the incinerator . epa establishes the operating parameters needed for the incinerator to achieve the emissions standards and tests the parameters through a “trial burn” required under rcra . the operating parameters can include the temperature of the kiln , the minimum oxygen levels needed to break down contaminants in the kiln , and the maximum carbon monoxide levels that may be produced . air monitoring at the site includes continuous monitoring from the stack , the excavation site , and other areas of the site , and samples are taken daily for more complete chemical analysis . according to corps officials , emissions have never exceeded regulatory levels . in addition , epa region vi had two rcra inspections completed at the bayou bonfouca site . in addition , dioxin is present at the site , leaving few off - site treatment possibilities because regulations limit the locations at which dioxin - contaminated material can be treated . the operation of the incinerator at the baird and mcguire site began in june 1995 and is expected to be completed in april 1997 . the incinerator was designed specifically to remediate the high levels of metal contamination at the site . ( see fig .