, off shelves . pictures fall off walls . shaking felt by all . many frightened and run outdoors . persons walk unsteadily . windows , dishes , glassware broken , knickknacks , books , etc. furniture moved or overturned . weak plaster and low - quality masonry cracked . small bells ring ( church , school ) . trees , bushes shaken ( visible or heard to rustle ) . shaking felt outdoors . duration estimated . sleepers wakened . liquids disturbed ; some spilled . small unstable objects displaced or upset . doors swing open , close ; shutters , pictures move . pendulum clocks stop , start , change rate . hanging objects swing . vibration like passing of heavy trucks ; sensation of a jolt like a ball striking the walls . standing motor cars rock . windows , dishes , doors rattle . glasses clink . crockery clashes . in the upper range of modified mercalli intensity ( mmi ) level 4 , wooden walls and frames creak . shaking felt indoors . hanging objects swing . vibrations like passing of light trucks . duration estimated . many of the errors may have been data entry errors rather than mistakes in selecting zip codes . the following are gao's comments on the federal emergency management agency's letter dated september 25 , 1997 . gao revised the report to address fema's comments numbered 1 through 12 . fema's current policy does provide for the award of home repair funds when damages are more than a $100 minimum . however , our report notes that fema's ig reported that fema was accepting damages of over $100 as evidence of an uninhabitable house , and that fema was also paying for repairs apparently not related to making the residence habitable , such as carpet replacement , rain gutters , drywall finishing , wall tiles , and paint . because the statement is that of the fema ig , rather than gao , we did not change the language involved . fema's updated figures were confirmed with table 1 . gao revised the report to address fema's comment . in the agency comment section on page 23 of the report , we note fema's comments about its recent efforts to strengthen its registration , inspection , and processing capability for future disasters and to raise the threshold at which fema would consider implementing the fast track process . difficult to stand . shaking noticed by drivers of motor cars . hanging objects quiver . furniture broken . damage to low - quality masonry , including cracks . weak chimneys broken at roof line . fall of plaster , loose bricks , stones , tiles , cornices . some cracks in ordinary - quality masonry . concrete irrigation ditches damaged . may not be recognized as earthquake . shaking felt by persons at rest , on upper floors , or favorably placed . shaking not felt . marginal and long - period effects of large earthquakes . we analyzed the payments that fema designated for recovery to determine if they were concentrated in zone improvement plan ( zip ) codes that were erroneously designated for the fast track process .