ii ) . hud provides housing assistance through three types of programs — public housing , the section 8 certificate and voucher programs , and the section 8 project - based program . nationwide , there are 1.2 million units of public housing , 1.4 million units rented to holders of certificates and vouchers who receive section 8 tenant - based rental assistance , and 1.7 million units with project - based rental assistance . in fiscal year 1997 , hud spent $23.8 billion on these programs . because housing agencies do not administer the project - based program , it is not discussed in this report . local public housing agencies own and operate public housing for low - and moderate - income households . the housing agencies operate under state and local laws that set forth their organization and structure , but state governments do not oversee public housing . in many cities , the mayor appoints a governing body or board of commissioners that hires the housing agency's executive director , who oversees the agency's day - to - day operations . housing agencies enter into contracts with hud , under which the agencies agree to abide by federal regulations and hud agrees to provide subsidies for public housing and rental assistance for low - income households residing in private housing . as discussed previously , housing agencies may also compete for grants from hud to provide supportive services . to calculate a housing agency's operating subsidy , hud uses its performance funding system . under this system , the amount of the subsidy , determined at the beginning of the housing agency's fiscal year , is based on projections of the agency's future funding needs , as well as the total congressional appropriation for operating subsidies . this method is known as forward funding . projections of the housing agency's future funding needs are based on assumptions about the agency's future income and expenses , which , in turn , are based on assumptions about future conditions , including the number of eligible units , tenants' incomes — tenants generally pay 30 percent of their adjusted income for rent — the rate of inflation , and other factors that affect income and expenses . if the amount of the operating subsidy is insufficient for the housing agency's needs during the year , the housing agency must reduce its spending . after the end of each fiscal year , certain adjustments are made on the basis of the housing agency's experience during the year . the section 8 certificate and voucher programs allow eligible households to select their own units in the private housing market and receive subsidies to cover part of their rent . hud operates the certificate and voucher programs by entering into contracts and providing payments to local and state housing agencies , including public housing agencies . housing agencies use these payments to provide rent subsidies to the owners of private housing on behalf of the assisted households . hud also pays each housing agency a statutorily determined administrative fee for tasks involved in managing the program , including certifying applicants for eligibility , inspecting units found by tenants for compliance with housing standards , and verifying that the terms of leases meet hud's requirements .