ii , 1997 ) . purchase surplus butter , cheese , and nonfat dry milk from dairy processors to support the price of milk . ii , 1997 ) . provide price support loans to producers of peanuts . 7 u.s.c 7271 , 7281 ( supp . ii , 1997 ) . provide income support payments to producers of selected crops ; available through fiscal year 2002 . program is intended to transition producers from deficiency payments . 7211 ; 7281 ( supp . ii , 1997 ) . provide price support loans to producers of tobacco . provide price support payments to producers of wool and mohair . program ended 12 / 31 / 95 . ( table notes on next page ) some of the entries in this column are not programs per se but represent significant activities related to ccc's income and commodity support operations . ii , 1997 ) . agency for international development ( titles ii & iii ) provide direct financing or grants of u.s. agricultural commodities to developing countries and emerging democracies . market access program provide cost - share payments to eligible trade organizations that implement programs to develop or expand foreign markets for u.s. commodities . 5623 ; 5641 ( c ) ( supp . ii , 1997 ) . ( table notes on next page ) this program is authorized under section 416 ( b ) of the agricultural act of 1949 and is commonly referred to as the section 416 ( b ) program . ccc administers four export credit guarantee programs: ( 1 ) supplier credit guarantee program — ccc guarantees a portion of the financing that exporters have extended directly to importers for up to 180 days ; ( 2 ) export credit guarantee program — ccc guarantees credit extended by private banks or exporters for up to 3 years ; ( 3 ) intermediate export credit guarantee program — ccc guarantees credit extended by private banks or exporters for up to 10 years ; and ( 4 ) facility guarantee program — ccc guarantees credit for financing manufactured goods and services exported from the united states to improve or establish facilities for handling , marketing , processing , storage , or distribution of imported agricultural commodities or products in emerging markets . consolidate payments for production flexibility contracts and the conservation reserve , wetlands reserve , and environmental quality incentives programs into one payment for eligible producers who agree to ( 1 ) forgo income and commodity support payments for 10 years and ( 2 ) adopt a conservation farm plan . provide land rental payments , for 10 to 15 years , to producers who agree to convert environmentally sensitive land to approved vegetative cover ( usually grass or trees ) . program also offers cost - share assistance to establish vegetative cover on enrolled land . provide cost - share and technical assistance to producers who agree to enter into 5 to 10 year contracts to implement conservation practices , such as livestock waste containment . ( continued ) provide assistance to states with existing farmland protection programs to purchase conservation easements . 3830 , note .