these are listed below . to improve the likelihood that aboveground oil storage tanks are built to the industry's standards and decrease the chances of future damaging oil spills , we recommended that the administrator amend the applicable regulations to require that aboveground oil storage tanks be built and tested in accordance with the industry's or other specified standards ; facilities plan how to react to a spill that overflows their boundaries ; and storm water drainage systems be designed and operated to prevent oil from escaping through them . ( app . i lists the applicable recommendations contained in our 1989 report. ) as arranged with your offices , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier . upon release , we will send copies to the administrator of epa and will make copies available to others on request . if you have questions , i can be reached at ( 202 ) 512-6111 . other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . in 1989 , we made seven recommendations to the administrator of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) in order to improve the regulation and inspection of aboveground oil storage tanks . to better ensure the safety of the nation's aboveground oil storage facilities and decrease the chances of oil being discharged into the environment , we recommended that the administrator strengthen epa's aboveground oil storage facility inspection program by developing , in coordination with state and local authorities , a system of inspection priorities on the basis of a national inventory of tanks ; developing instructions for performing and documenting inspections ; defining and implementing minimum training needs for inspectors ; and establishing a national policy for fining violators . as requested by your offices , we are providing data on various characteristics of aboveground storage tanks from studies done by the environmental protection agency , the american petroleum institute ( api ) , and the environmental defense fund ( edf ) . the data provide broad estimates on the numbers , ages , and locations of oil storage facilities ; the construction and operation of aboveground tanks at these facilities ; and estimates of leaking tanks and their potential adverse effects . we did not assess the accuracy or reliability of the information presented . epa officials told us that because of a lack of data on asts , and in view of several oil pollution incidents , such as the contamination of property in fairfax , virginia , the agency in recent years has undertaken several ast studies . in a january 1991 study , epa estimated the numbers of facilities in 16 industrial categories that meet the storage capacity requirements of the oil spill prevention , control and countermeasures ( spcc ) program established under section 311 ( j ) of the clean water act . in response to proposed october 1991 revisions to the agency's oil pollution prevention regulation , epa refined its estimate of the number of facilities covered by the spcc program's requirements by excluding certain facilities with underground tanks that were covered under other epa regulations .