abstract: h.r . 3967 would change how the federal government's helium needs are met by shifting helium refinement from the interior department's bureau of mines to the private industry . in addition , the bill would repay the helium program debt . whether the federal budget will be helped or harmed by this legislation will depend on whether private industry can sell refined helium to the government at a lower price . revenues from the disposal of the existing helium inventory could also affect the federal budget . the choice between interior and the private industry to meet federal helium needs is ultimately a public policy decision . gao believes that h.r . 3967 provides a viable alternative for meeting current and foreseeable federal needs for helium with the potential for budgetary savings and repayment of the helium program debt . mineral resources: hardrock mining reclamation . gao / t - rced - 93-67 . august 5 , 1993 . abstract: more than five years ago , gao reported that it would cost nearly $300 million to reclaim abandoned , suspended , or unauthorized hardrock mining operations on federal land in 11 western states ; cleanup estimates since then have ranged as high as $71.5 billion . gao / rced - 92-181r . may 20 , 1992 . background: pursuant to a congressional request , gao provided information on the bureau of land management's ( blm ) fiscal year ( fy ) 1991 and fy 1992 budget and staff allocations for nine western states in management programs addressing oil and gas , coal , rangeland , cultural resources , wilderness , recreation resources , and resource planning . gao noted that: ( 1 ) the blm resource allocation process , including its budget development phase , takes place over 3 fiscal years ; ( 2 ) blm state offices adjust current budgets for such factors as inflation , administrative priorities , and initiatives , to develop new budgets ; ( 3 ) numerous blm , department of the interior , and office of management and budget officials review and revise the proposed budgets over the 3-year development period , as well as the president and congress ; ( 4 ) total blm fy 1992 budget allocations for the nine states ranged from $29.8 million to $53.2 million ; and ( 5 ) total blm fy 1992 staff allocations ranged from 510 full - time equivalents ( fte ) to 975 fte . rangeland management: results of recent work addressing the performance of land management agencies . gao / t - rced - 92-60 . may 12 , 1992 . background: gao discussed its work on public rangeland management , focusing on: ( 1 ) its response to a consultant's critique of three gao reports issued between 1988 and 1990 on rangeland management ; and ( 2 ) other reports it has issued regarding rangeland monitoring and livestock grazing activity .