( see fig . while hud's procedures do not require field reviews for appraisers doing a higher volume of appraisals , hud had little assurance that they were conducting accurate and thorough appraisals without performance information on these individuals . 10 to 19 appraisals ( 2,174 ) 20 to 29 appraisals ( 889 ) philadelphia and denver hoc officials told us that several factors contributed to problems with field review coverage . these factors included ( 1 ) hud's reliance on contractors to conduct field reviews and the unavailability of contract funds during the first several months of the fiscal year ; ( 2 ) the reassignment of personnel during hud's reorganization , which , in some instances , left no one responsible for ordering field reviews ; and ( 3 ) the lack of emphasis that some field offices placed on field reviews once they knew their functions would be transferred to the hocs . while the legislation did not address this issue , hud's regulations stated that lenders who selected their own appraisers were equally responsible , along with the appraisers , for the accuracy , integrity , and thoroughness of the appraisals . in may 1996 , hud repealed these regulations as part of a larger federal effort to reduce regulations . according to hud , the regulations were not necessary because many of the standards in the regulations were already in hud's handbook guidance and mortgagee letters issued to lenders . ( 4 ) how does hud ensure that the appraisers on its roster are qualified to perform fha appraisals ? however , we did not estimate the impact that hud's oversight of the appraisal process might have on the financial health of fha's mortgage insurance fund . to address these issues , we focused on the activities of hud's headquarters and its philadelphia and denver homeownership centers ( hoc ) . hud established four hocs to administer the single - family housing functions formerly performed by its 81 field offices . together , the philadelphia and denver hocs account for about half of fha's single - family home loan activity . each year , fha helps hundreds of thousands of americans finance home purchases . ( 3 ) to what extent is hud holding lenders responsible for the quality of the fha appraisals they use ? established under the national housing act , fha insures private lenders against losses on mortgages for single - family homes . fha plays a particularly large role in certain market segments , including low - income borrowers and first - time homebuyers . the loan amount that fha can insure is based , in part , on the appraised value of the home . if a borrower defaults and the lender subsequently forecloses on the loan , the lender can file an insurance claim with hud for nearly all of its losses , including the unpaid balance of the loan . after the claim is paid , the lender transfers the title to the home to hud , which is responsible for managing and selling the property . most of the mortgages are insured by fha under its mutual mortgage insurance fund ( fund ) .