x. ) commerce , whose comments are included in appendix xi , said that the report ( 1 ) contained information which incorrectly characterized tapp , mep , and the role of nist in implementing tapp and ( 2 ) did not provide an adequate context from which to determine the lessons learned from tapp and how those lessons fit into an overall concept of technical assistance . how should the program be financed ? while the authorizing legislation stated an ultimate goal for tapp — increasing the innovativeness and competitiveness of small businesses through improved technology — it did not specify what level of increase was desired or how results could be measured . the law did say that the purpose of the program was “increasing access by small businesses to on - line databases that provide technical and business information , and access to technical experts , in a wide range of technologies...” however , it did not define these terms nor did it specify which , if any , segments of the small business community were to be targeted . from the beginning , nist and the sbdcs differed on the objectives and scope of tapp . as noted in our earlier report , nist was concerned that the services provided had too much of a marketing , rather than a technical , orientation and that many tapp clients were small , local , retail businesses rather than technical or manufacturing concerns . nist officials had hoped that , while there was no such requirement in the law , eventually 50 percent of the information provided by tapp centers would be technical in nature . taking a broader view of technology in the context of tapp , sbdc officials said that an underlying objective always must be the continued viability of the firms seeking assistance . these officials maintain that it is important not just to disseminate pure technology but also to encourage all businesses to take advantage of whatever technical information is available . this may mean using tapp databases to obtain marketing information heretofore unavailable to them . the issue seems to have resolved itself within the current program . projects during fiscal year 1994 were evenly divided between technical and nontechnical information , according to nexus associates . nist officials said they were pleased with the progress the centers had made toward giving tapp a more technical focus . tapp was not a new idea ; technology assistance programs for small businesses have been available for some time . for example , both the missouri and pennsylvania sbdcs already had limited programs that were similar to tapp in place when they received tapp grants . other states , such as new mexico and north carolina , have developed “technical” sbdcs on their own to promote and enhance technology transfer . minnesota's project outreach , which was the model for tapp , has never received federal funding . teltech is a private company that has provided technical services under contract to other organizations — including project outreach and tapp centers — on a fee - for - service basis . generally , the sbdcs appear to agree that they should offer technical assistance to their clients and have begun to establish programs .