( app . i provides information on projects and expenditures by state. ) many projects that the water and sewer program supported also received funding from sources other than usda , including the community itself , the state and county , and other federal sources , such as epa . figure 2.1 shows the amount and percentage of support provided by these sources and usda . epa ( $6.3 ) usda ( $27.7 ) the $27.7 billion provided by usda's water and sewer program represents about 70 percent of the total expenditures on these projects from fiscal year 1965 through june 1995 . the extent of all other funding sources varied widely by state — from 8 percent in new jersey to 62 percent in vermont . according to usda officials in one of the four states we visited , they encouraged and aided applicants for the projects in soliciting funds outside of the usda program . projects in that state and in two others that we visited averaged over 30 percent in all other sources of funding . however , when direct indicators of need are available , their use may more precisely target funds . a state's ability to raise revenues from its own resources — its fiscal capacity — is also an important factor found in many federal allocation formulas . the rationale for including an ability - to - pay factor is that a greater share of funds should go to recipients who are least able to finance their needs from their own resources . copies are available to others upon request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-5138 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . many of the 62 million people living in over 2,300 rural counties in the united states lack access to a supply of clean water and sanitary waste disposal facilities . in 1937 , the congress created a program that provided low - cost loans to ranchers , farmers , and rural residents of 17 arid and semiarid western states for water storage projects . since that time , the congress has changed the program to also fund water distribution systems and waste disposal facilities and to provide grant funds in addition to loans . currently , the program , known as the water and waste disposal program , offers grants and loans to construct or modify water and / or sewer systems in rural communities that cannot obtain funding from other sources . administered by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , this program is now the major federal program providing such loan and grant funds to rural america . usda administers the water and waste disposal program — referred to in this report as the water and sewer program — through its rural utilities service . to be eligible for this program , a rural community must have a population of 10,000 or less and be financially needy , meeting low - income criteria . usda headquarters allocates both loan and grant funds to its state offices through an allocation formula that it established through regulations .