additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we did not review any of the 10 pending applications . in addition , we reviewed faa's criteria , procedures , and other documents used to certify new airlines and discussed them with a selected sample of 37 faa inspectors working in the flight standards district offices we visited . we also conducted detailed reviews of a judgmental sample of files on 16 of the 57 airlines that began operations after january 1990 in order to validate how faa's certification process was implemented . we selected the 16 airlines because they represented a mix of carriers , including different types of airlines , fleet sizes , aircraft , and proposed operations . while examining ost's and faa's criteria , documentation , and procedures for certifying new airlines , we looked for possible deficiencies in the certification processes . ( 2 ) what processes does dot have in place to certify new airlines ? and ( 3 ) how much does it cost to certify new airlines and how are these costs distributed between the government and the applicants ? the federal aviation act of 1958 , as amended , gives dot responsibility for promoting new airlines' operations , while at the same time determining whether applicants proposing to provide air transportation services for compensation or hire meet federal economic and safety standards before commencing operations . within dot , this responsibility is shared by ost and faa . all applicants must obtain separate authorization from both offices before starting their operations . ost's certification process when ost receives an application , it administers a three - part test to determine whether the applicant is “fit , willing , and able” to properly perform the proposed services . first , ost assesses whether the applicant's key personnel and management team as a whole possess the background and experience necessary to perform the proposed operations . second , it reviews the applicant's operating and financial plans to determine whether the applicant has access to or a plausible plan for raising sufficient funds to pay all of its start - up expenses and maintain a working capital reserve equal to 3 months' normal operating costs . finally , it reviews the applicant's compliance record to determine whether the applicant or its key personnel have a history of safety violations or consumer fraud and may thus pose a risk to the traveling public , or whether other factors indicate that the applicant would not be likely to comply with federal rules , laws , and directives . if ost finds that the applicant meets these criteria , it issues a “show cause” order tentatively finding the applicant fit to operate . interested parties , including competitor airlines and members of the public , are given an opportunity to raise concerns or objections about the applicant's fitness to conduct the proposed operation . if no objections are filed that convince ost that its tentative findings were incorrect , it will issue a “final” order finding the applicant fit .