( see fig . almost one - third of the population in the border region lives in the san diego / tijuana metropolitan area , while another third is distributed among the following four large metropolitan areas along the rio grande in texas: el paso / ciudad juarez , laredo / nuevo laredo , mcallen / reynosa , and brownsville / matamoros . this progress has primarily been made through ( 1 ) establishing binational workgroups and ( 2 ) setting joint binational priorities within these groups through negotiations with their mexican counterparts and with input from key environmental stakeholders in the border region . although we agree that epa has made progress , as noted in our report , the agency did not use its available data on media and programs to comprehensively assess the border region's environmental needs before negotiating joint binational priorities with its mexican counterparts . such an assessment is needed to prioritize projects within as well as across binational workgroups to ( 1 ) allow the relative merits of competing projects to be ranked by decisionmakers according to their urgency and ( 2 ) maximize the use of limited funding to achieve the greatest environmental benefits . epa officials also provided us with a copy of its u.s. / mexico border xxi program: draft framework document after we had submitted our draft report to them for comment . this new program details the plans of epa and other key u.s. and mexican federal entities for the border region and will build on current binational efforts . the draft program's objectives include plans to inventory all existing environmental information on the border region and develop environmental indicators to measure whether environmental policy is addressing the most urgent environmental problems there . the program also states that each year the program's priorities will be weighed against available funding . this program is a good start towards addressing shortcomings identified under epa's integrated environmental plan for the mexican - u.s. border area ( first stage , 1992-1994 ) because it includes plans to organize environmental information , expand public participation , and address environmental health concerns . however , the draft program does not clearly state that it will sequentially do the following within as well as across the nine binational workgroups: use the inventory to establish criteria , use these criteria to set priorities , and then use these priorities to determine which activities are most urgent and merit funding . in addition , the draft program should link all funded activities to environmental indicators . without a systematic approach , epa cannot prioritize projects within and across binational workgroups to ensure that its limited funds are used to target the highest - priority needs first . in light of the new information epa provided , we have modified our recommendations to address the u.s. / mexico border xxi program: draft framework document . to respond to this report's objectives , we met with officials from epa headquarters and regional offices as well as the departments of the state and treasury . we also interviewed a wide range of other u.s. and mexican officials from both governmental and nongovernmental organizations . in addition , we reviewed documents provided by these officials as well as pertinent laws and regulations .