oz. ) 3 / 4 cup ( 6 fl . 1.5 oz . 1.5 oz . 2 oz . 3 oz . 3 tbsp . 3 tbsp . 4 tbsp . 6 tbsp . cafeteria management . schools offering brand - name fast foods were more likely to be managed by an fsmc than schools not offering these foods — about 18 ( 13 to 23 ) percent compared with 10 ( 8 to 11 ) percent , respectively . offer versus serve . elementary and middle schools offering brand - name fast foods were more likely to use the offer versus serve option than elementary and middle schools that did not — about 95 ( 91 to 98 ) percent compared with 84 ( 82 to 86 ) percent . multiple entrees . schools using brand - name fast foods were more likely to offer multiple entrees than schools that did not use these foods — about 83 ( 78 to 88 ) percent compared with 57 ( 54 to 59 ) percent . the use of brand - name fast foods benefited schools' lunch service , according to most cafeteria managers we surveyed . they most often cited a desire to increase students' participation in the lunch program as the reason for using brand - name fast foods , and they most frequently reported increased sales as a benefit . those cafeteria managers not offering brand - name fast foods most frequently stated that the food currently being served was more nutritious as their reason for not offering those items . as figure 4.2 shows , 75 percent of the cafeteria managers at schools offering brand - name fast foods named increased student participation as the reason for turning to brand - name fast foods . fifty - five percent said the students asked for brand - name fast foods , and another 46 percent said their food authority or district decided to provide students with brand - name fast foods . as shown in figure 4.3 , in terms of benefits , cafeteria managers most often identified three changes following the introduction of brand - name fast foods: ( 1 ) 82 percent reported increased school lunch and a la carte sales , ( 2 ) 74 percent reported increased student satisfaction with the school lunch , and ( 3 ) 71 percent reported greater student participation . however , 6 percent of the managers said that they experienced no change in sales , and 1 percent reported a decrease . schools' use of brand - name fast foods appeared to have little effect on the number of schools' food service workers . sixty - four percent of the schools reported no change in the number of food service workers , another 5 percent reported a loss , and 10 percent reported a gain . according to cafeteria managers in 55 percent of the schools that did not use brand - name fast foods , their school did not use these foods because managers believed the food currently being served in their cafeteria was more nutritious .