( see app . i for a list of countries that have signed — or signed and ratified — the convention. ) as requested , this report provides information on ( 1 ) how compliance with the convention's terms and obligations will be reviewed by the ratifying countries ( hereinafter , also called parties ) and ( 2 ) the potential costs to the united states to participate in the convention . the convention on nuclear safety , which became effective for the ratifying countries on october 24 , 1996 , seeks to achieve and maintain a high level of safety for all nations that operate civil nuclear power reactors . within this group setting , all countries would critically examine and review how each country is complying with the convention . iaea officials told us that the country - review groups form the core of the peer review process . nrc officials have expressed some concern about the potential grouping of countries . in their view , this approach may not provide the most meaningful , professionally technical review . for example , the united states , which spent about $89 million through march 1996 to improve the safety of soviet - designed reactors , would not be in the same review group as russia or ukraine , countries that operate the majority of these reactors . in addition to its ongoing safety assistance program , the united states also has significant technical expertise and years of practical experience working to improve the safety of these reactors and improve these countries' civilian nuclear regulatory capabilities . the united states had earlier supported a different approach in which each country's self - assessment would be reviewed by separate subject matter committees . this review would be based on three main elements of the convention: ( 1 ) governmental organization ; ( 2 ) siting , design , and construction ; and ( 3 ) operations . the u.s. - favored approach was replaced by the country - grouping model proposed by france and the united kingdom . representatives of these countries maintained that the smaller groups of countries would allow for a more thorough and unified review of a country's report than would a functional review of part of a country's report , as initially envisioned by the united states . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the convention does not impose sanctions for noncompliance but seeks to encourage compliance through peer pressure .