under development . $325,000 ( faa ) $250,000 ( tswg ) limited penetration of target objects . ( continued ) funding ( fys 78-96 ) radio frequency pulses probe hags to elicit unique responses from explosives and drugs . commercially available . a field prototype capable of handling small size packages was tested in atlanta during the olympics by airlines to screen electronics . this is a product derived from funding the same technology listed in appendix i. nonimaging technology that provides chemically specific detection and automatically alarms on explosives or drugs . detection of certain cocaine compounds needs improvement . system uses microwave technology to penetrate bottles and will discover when bottles do not contain the liquid that is expected . it is basically a discovery rather than detection system . this is an faa in - house project working with a commercially available device . faa is currently testing field prototypes . $19,000 to $25,000 $77,000 ( faa ) system does not identify the liquid in the bottle . system throughput is expected to be 720 bottles per hour . however , system is unable to penetrate certain types of bottles . automatically alarms if explosives detected . prototypes are available . $75,000 to $125,000 $974,000 ( faa ) analysis time varies between 20 and 70 seconds per target . manufacturer is working to shorten analysis time . the funding column indicates whether a specific technology was developed or is being developed for explosives detection , narcotics detection , or both . generally , faa and tswg funding has supported explosives detection , while funding by dod , customs , and ondcp has supported narcotics detection . where a technology funding cell shows faa or tswg in combination with dod , customs , or ondcp , that technology is generally capable of detecting both narcotics and explosives . funding ( fys 78-96 ) an accelerator generates gamma rays to penetrate the object to be screened . achieved federal aviation administration ( faa ) certification in december 1994 . faa currently funding operational testing at three airports and also funding projects to improve throughput rate , reduce unit cost , and improve overall capabilities . department of defense ( dod ) recently tested technology for detecting drugs in small packages . two different x - ray energies determine the densities and average atomic numbers of the target material . commercially available . faa is developing an enhanced version that may meet certification standards . system automatically alarms based on 3 dimensional images of elemental ratios of hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , and carbon . dod completed the project , but the system was not transitioned to customs due to customs' concern with cost , size , operational , and safety issues . faa conducted limited testing for checked baggage application in 1993 and it is now considering a new project for screening air cargo . tswg is funding a counterterrorism application . $8 to $10 million $19 million ( dod ) $ 5.3 million ( faa ) $6.2 million ( tswg ) system takes 20 minutes per analysis and would typically be combined with an x - ray system to speed throughput .