this estimate includes travel expenses . nrel was able to estimate its costs for the park service's contract because several staff worked for extended periods with the park service and femp in developing the solicitation , serving on the evaluation panel for the project proposals , and providing assistance to the park service at the facility . the cost of pnnl's assistance in performing energy audits was $125,000 , according to femp staff . an lbnl official estimated administrative costs of about $2,500 , including travel costs , for the one staff person who participated on the evaluation panel for this contract . femp officials noted that femp's accounting system is not set up to track specific project support costs because many of femp's activities support a number of agencies simultaneously . femp officials , however , estimated administrative costs for the three staff persons associated with this contract at $8,900 , including travel costs . femp staff , for example , assisted the park service by providing a list of firms to which the solicitation could be mailed . according to bureau officials , the bureau's administrative costs are estimated because tracking these costs would be labor intensive . the bureau estimated that it incurred costs of $17,500 for salaries for two staff , related travel expenses during fiscal years 1993-96 , and other miscellaneous contract - related administrative expenses . nrel estimated that its administrative costs for the bureau's contract were about $53,000 , including travel expenses . these costs covered the work of three staff who visited the site and / or helped to prepare the solicitation , develop baseline data , and review the technical proposal . femp had no administrative costs directly associated with this contract . we transmitted a draft of this report to the secretary of energy for review and comment . we met with officials of the department , including the director of femp , who generally agreed with the report's findings . they provided technical and editorial revisions , which we incorporated as appropriate . we also transmitted a draft of this report to the secretary of the interior for review and comment . we met with officials of the department , including the national park service's deputy superintendent of the statue of liberty / ellis island , who agreed with the report's findings . they provided technical and editorial revisions , which we incorporated as appropriate . we transmitted pertinent sections of a draft of this report to officials with the department of justice's federal bureau of prisons for review and comment . the bureau suggested wording concerning its tracking of contract costs , which we incorporated as appropriate . we performed our work from december 1995 through august 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i provides more information on our objectives , scope , and methodology . as arranged with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 7 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , the secretary of energy , the secretary of the interior , the attorney general , and other interested parties .