ii. ) using the advanced mixed waste treatment project as a model , total private financing represents the highest financing cost — $137.9 million — for construction financing . as the amount of government involvement in financing increases , the financing costs of the options decrease . with a 100-percent government guarantee of debt , the contractor's financing costs are $104.1 million . to stay within the caps , budget authority and the resulting outlays are limited for all programs . the way transactions between em and its privatization contractors are structured affects how they are scored and , because of the budget caps , has consequences not only for em but also for all the other programs and activities funded by the committees that provide em's appropriations . there are several ways the federal government can acquire capital assets or the use of capital assets , such as an office building or waste treatment facility , that are being constructed for its use . the most direct way is to simply purchase the asset outright , taking full ownership of it . in that case , budget authority for the full cost of the purchase would be scored in the year the budget authority is first made available , and budget outlays would be scored as payments are made to the contractor during construction . alternatively , agencies may choose not to purchase the asset itself ( for example , a waste treatment plant ) but merely the services connected with the asset ( for example , waste treatment services ) . for such a service contract , the agency would need budget authority in each year equal to its legal obligations under the contract , including cancellation costs . in a case in which services will not be delivered until the construction of a facility is complete , outlays would not be scored during the construction period ; instead , they would be scored as services are delivered . in addition to outright purchase of an asset or purchase of services , the agency may choose to lease the asset from the private contractor . we received assistance in this effort from our accounting and information management division . we provided a draft of this report to doe for its review and comment . doe's comments and our response are included as appendix iii and are discussed in the chapters where appropriate . we performed our review from july 1997 through may 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . fixed - price contracts can be used for cleanup projects , including privatization projects , when certain conditions in the federal acquisition regulation are met . for example , the regulation finds that fixed - price contracts are appropriate when projects are well - defined , uncertainties can be allocated between the parties , and sufficient price information and / or multiple competing bidders are available to help determine a fair and reasonable price for the work . in addition , em's projects place special demands on both em and the contractor which must be considered when selecting the contracting strategy that will be most cost - effective . for example , contracts for em's projects must consider the need to indemnify contractors for accidents involving nuclear materials .