however , not all refiners are affected equally . officials of arco and exxon , which have subsidiaries that own and operate tankers in the alaskan north slope trade , said that because they have made few , if any , export shipments , lifting the export ban has had little or no effect on their alaskan north slope tanker fleets . these effects were the direct result of lifting the export ban . california revenue comes from a share of federal royalties , income taxes , and property taxes . california officials told us that they receive relatively little revenue from these sources . consequently , there was no significant change in revenue as a result of lifting the export ban . lifting the oil export ban has had limited effects on refiners , consumers , and the oil - shipping industry — including alaskan north slope fleet operators , shipbuilders , and tanker repair yards . in 1998 , these three products accounted for more than 80 percent of the total output of west coast refineries , as well as the bulk of consumers' expenditures on petroleum products . at issue was who would benefit and who would not benefit from lifting the ban . advocates of lifting the export ban argued that it created a surplus of alaskan north slope oil on the west coast , in turn depressing price and production and limiting state governments' revenues . for example , the department of energy concluded in 1994 that lifting the ban on exporting alaskan north slope oil would ( 1 ) increase the price of the oil by expanding its markets , ( 2 ) increase alaska and california revenues through increased royalties and taxes , and ( 3 ) generate new economic activity and employment in alaska and california . moreover , these benefits were expected to accrue without an increase in gasoline prices . opponents argued that lifting the ban would have adverse consequences . for example , in a 1995 report prepared for the coalition to keep alaska oil , consultants agreed with the department of energy's 1994 conclusions that the price and production of alaskan north slope oil would increase . however , none of the refiners shared specific cost data with us . the extent to which refiners can pass higher costs on to consumers determines how their profits are affected by increased crude oil prices . the ability of west coast refiners to pass rising crude oil costs on to consumers may be constrained by competitive oil market conditions . all refiners were not affected equally by increasing oil costs . copies will also be made available to others upon request . if you have any questions about this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . in january 1968 , oil was discovered in prudhoe bay on alaska's north slope — an 88,000 square - mile frozen landmass extending from the foothills of the brooks mountain range to the arctic ocean , as shown in figure 1.1 .