additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the results for each strategic business unit vary . the west coast and northeast corridor units both exceeded their fiscal year 1995 planned savings and are projected to meet or nearly meet their fiscal year 1996 targets . in contrast , the intercity unit did not meet its planned reduction in its fiscal year 1995 operating deficit by $41.7 million and is projected to end fiscal year 1996 $19.4 million overbudget . thus , the intercity unit — responsible for the bulk of amtrak's services and projected improvements — has been substantially overbudget in both years . table 4 shows the planned and actual revenues , expenses , and operating losses for each unit . the west coast unit , which operates commuter service along several routes as well as intercity service in and between california , oregon , and washington , had the smallest share of amtrak's services and costs and the smallest target for fiscal year 1995 savings ( $13 million ) . the west coast unit is expanding its services in fiscal year 1996 , which will increase its operating deficit slightly for fiscal year 1996 but result in future savings if the projected ridership and revenues materialize . the west coast unit is focusing on increasing the amount of commuter service it provides under contract and on aggressive marketing and pricing strategies to reduce its share of the operating loss . although ahead of the plan's projections in the first half of fiscal year 1996 , the west coast unit is now projecting a $2.9 million budget shortfall for year's end because of lost revenues and increased costs caused by the severe winter weather . in fiscal year 1995 , the northeast corridor unit , which generated more than 55 percent of amtrak's passenger revenues while incurring 45 percent of amtrak's expenses , reduced its operating loss $2.6 million more than planned . after the first two quarters of fiscal year 1996 , the northeast corridor's operating loss is higher than planned , but specific actions , such as productivity improvements in the mechanical shop , are under way to largely compensate for this by the year's end . however , the future success of the northeast corridor depends on the availability of capital to make the investments necessary to complete the electrification of the line and introduce high - speed ( maximum speed of 150 mph ) rail service between boston and new york city by fiscal year 2000 and to rebuild the southern end of the corridor between washington , d.c. , and new york , which is in a serious state of disrepair . in contrast , the intercity unit — which is the heart of the nationwide intercity network responsible for more than 80 percent of amtrak's total route miles of service — was $41.7 million overbudget in fiscal year 1995 . for fiscal year 1996 , the intercity unit is not meeting its portion of the plan's goal and after two quarters is projecting a year - end operating loss $19.4 million over its budget .