this is not the case . that is , the link between yield declines and price increases or yield increases and price declines is much stronger in some areas than others . by using the same estimate of the interrelationship for all areas , the resulting estimate of claims may be too high in some areas and too low in others . as a result , there is no assurance that the plan's premiums are appropriate for all farmers and will actually cover all claims over time . with respect to income protection , the plan's major shortcoming is that it bases its estimate of future price increases or decreases on the way that prices moved in the past . this method of developing estimates could be a problem because past price movements occurred in the context of past government programs , and in the absence of the government programs , the price movements may be considerably more pronounced , according to some analysts . instead , price volatility estimates based on commodity futures prices are more appropriate for forecasting expected claims payments because they reflect current expectations of the extent to which prices may increase or decrease between planting and harvest . the methods used in the three plans to set premium rates are described and evaluated in greater detail in appendixes iii , iv , and v . crop revenue coverage was initially approved for sale in december 1995 for two crops — corn and soybeans — in two states — iowa and nebraska . given fcic's lack of experience with revenue insurance and the uncertainty surrounding the soundness of the premiums charged , restricting the initial sales to a limited area was prudent . however , in july 1996 , 7 months after it initially approved crop revenue coverage and , before it knew the claims experience in these areas , fcic's board of directors approved the expansion of crop revenue coverage to include wheat farmers in kansas , michigan , nebraska , south dakota , texas , washington state , and 19 counties in montana . this expansion occurred under the board's authority to approve privately developed insurance products . the board required that the companies add a 10-percent surcharge , referred to as a catastrophic load factor , to the rates initially established . this surcharge was not based on the initial experiences in the original states but was a judgmental adjustment added in response to the concerns about the adequacy of premium rates expressed by usda and university economists . in january 1997 , the board , acting again within its authority , expanded crop revenue coverage to essentially cover all major crops in the major states where the crops are grown . it was clear at this time that crop revenue coverage was more popular than had been initially expected . national producer organizations expressed strong interest in expanding the program to additional geographical areas and to additional crops . the board expanded crop revenue coverage , although it was cautioned by usda officials , usda's office of general counsel , and usda's office of inspector general about problems with the continued expansion of the plan .