wildfires . is no accident . it is an outcome of our attitudes and priorities . the fire situation will become worse rather than better unless there are changes in land management priority at all levels. in the last decade , the forest service has undertaken several actions to better understand and reduce the threat of catastrophic wildfires on national forests in the interior west . however , because of concerns about the agency's accountability , we believe that the credibility of its efforts to devise such a strategy hinge upon the establishment of a clearly understood schedule for expeditiously developing and implementing this strategy . we recommend that the secretary of agriculture direct the chief of the forest service to develop , and formally communicate to the congress , a cohesive strategy for reducing and maintaining accumulated fuels on national forests of the interior west at acceptable levels . we further recommend that this strategy include ( 1 ) specific steps for ( a ) acquiring the data needed to establish meaningful performance measures and goals for reducing fuels , ( b ) identifying ways of better reconciling different fuel reduction approaches with other stewardship objectives , and ( c ) identifying changes in incentives and statutorily defined contracting procedures that would better facilitate the accomplishment of fuel reduction goals ; ( 2 ) a schedule indicating dates for completing each of these steps ; and ( 3 ) estimates of the potential and likely overall and annual costs of accomplishing this strategy based on different options identified in the strategy as being available for doing so . the following are gao's comments on the forest service's letter dated march 22 , 1999 . our report notes that there is a lack of consensus on what constitutes forest health . we have added language in our report to incorporate the agency's observation that greater community awareness and acceptance of needed actions are important elements in implementing a successful fuel reduction strategy . moreover , we believe that the agency , through improving the cohesiveness of its strategy , may provide communities and those concerned about forest health with a clearer basis for both reaching consensus on and accepting needed actions . we do not presume that there is a broad scientific consensus surrounding appropriate methods or techniques for dealing with fuel build - up or agreement on the size of the areas where , and the time frames when , such methods or techniques should be applied . our report recognizes that the agency is currently pursuing better answers to these questions through the joint fire science program and other efforts , and we have added clarifying language in our report to incorporate the agency's observation . we agree that the other forest management activities , identified by the forest service as contributing to overall forest health and as having an impact on acres at risk of wildfire , should not overlooked and can be important elements in the agency's more cohesive strategy . for instance , our report notes important interrelationships that the agency must consider when balancing fuel reduction goals with other stewardship objectives , such as preserving air and water quality .