not applicable . not applicable . ron e. wood , assistant director richard b. shargots john k. boyle jacqueline a. cook dennis p. dunphy william f. mayo carol herrnstadt shulman the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . each agency's responsibilities are summarized below . within usda , fns and the office of inspector general ( oig ) are responsible for monitoring program compliance by the approximately 185,000 stores currently authorized to redeem food stamps . while both agencies identify and investigate possible food stamp trafficking , fns has the sole authority to impose administrative sanctions on violators , and the oig concentrates on potential criminal investigations . fns and oig identify possible violators through several sources: allegations from usda's hotline and analyses of data in fns' store tracking and redemption system ( stars ) and ebt systems . of these sources , stars provides the most comprehensive information . fns and the oig use this system to monitor stores' redemptions of food stamps and to identify retailers for investigation . stars has a profile of each store , including sales volume , and tracks monthly food stamp redemptions . fns uses this system to ensure that store owners caught trafficking and disqualified from the food stamp program do not reenter the program . however , fns officials told us that they do not currently track clerks caught trafficking to keep them out of the program or to help prosecute repeat offenders . they said that fns plans to implement a system later this year to track these clerks . more recently , fns and the oig have begun using data from state ebt systems to identify possible cases of food stamp trafficking . more specifically , all states using ebt systems must provide their data on food stamp transactions to fns for analysis . these data include the date , time , and amount of the sale ; the store authorization number and cashier number ; and the recipient's identification number . both fns and oig personnel analyze the ebt data using a computer program that identifies individual transactions or transaction patterns that indicate trafficking may be occurring .