these actions are now being implemented . for example , the authority increased the number of quality assurance positions from 4.5 staff years in 1994 to 6 staff years in 1995 , and it plans further increases . also , in september 1995 fta increased the number of permanent hill international staff , from 5 to 7 ; provided 3 temporary staff , who have been extended at least through may 1996 ; and increased the frequency of interactions between hill international , fta , and the authority . with more staff , according to hill international , four rather than one staff members are present on the construction sites daily . our past work has shown that fta has rarely exercised the enforcement tool of withholding funds to compel grant recipients to fix long - standing problems . with its action on the red line project , fta has seen the success of withholding funds to compel change . given the cost and potential risks of underground tunneling and a history of resistance to certain quality control recommendations made in the past , timely enforcement actions could help to ensure that the authority addresses key recommendations in the future . we provided copies of a draft of this report to fta and los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority officials for their review and comment . we met with fta officials , including the director , office of oversight , and the program manager for the project management oversight program in headquarters and with the director of the office of program management in fta's region ix . we also met with authority officials , including the deputy executive officer for program management , director for strategic funding analysis and director for grants management . fta and the authority generally agreed with the facts as presented . however , both suggested that the report's presentation of fta's oversight of the project's quality assurance and quality control practices heavily emphasized past problems rather than focused on recent positive changes . we have revised that section of the report to clearly describe the actions fta and the authority have taken to improve construction management of the red line project . fta and the authority also commented that our discussion of the project's future growth and potential financing issues are speculative . we agree that future projections are speculative , but the report describes clear examples of potential reasons for cost increases , such as the decision to realign the mid - city extension and design delays for the east side extension , as well as the authority's potential solutions to financing these increases . the authority was also concerned that our discussion of cost growth , particularly in table 1 , could be misconstrued because the cost growth for segment three is an estimate . to address their comments , we changed the title of the table to reflect that the figures are estimates and added a footnote stating that cost mitigation measures have reduced the estimated cost growth for the east side extension from $29 million to $8 million . both fta and the authority offered technical comments to clarify information in the report , and we have incorporated these comments , as appropriate .