about 220 farmers live in the watershed . in big spring basin , groundwater aquifers ( natural underground reservoirs ) that supply drinking water are close to the land surface and are thus vulnerable to contamination from surface activities , particularly agricultural operations . the primary concern about water quality is nitrate contamination of the groundwater , which can occur through downward percolation of nitrogen from manure or chemical fertilizers applied to cropland or from surface runoff that enters the groundwater system through sinkholes or other passageways . some herbicides and insecticides also have been detected in the big spring basin's groundwater . in big spring basin , data on water quality dating back to 1961 showed strong correlations between the use of nitrogen fertilizers and the concentration of nitrates in the groundwater . during the next 2 decades , the use of nitrogen fertilizer in the watershed more than doubled , while nitrate concentrations in big spring tripled . in 1981 , the iowa geological survey began extensive , continuous water quality monitoring in big spring ; by 1983 , the survey had documented a steady decline in the quality of the groundwater in the watershed . at the same time , numerous meetings were held , educational activities conducted , and task forces convened to discuss the problem . in late 1983 , the northeast iowa conservancy district and the iowa cooperative extension service formed the ad hoc karst committee , later renamed the iowa consortium on agriculture and groundwater quality , to design a multiagency , tiered research and demonstration project for the big spring basin . the consortium , with representatives from numerous federal and state agencies , developed the big spring basin watershed proposal , which provided a broad outline for project activities . the project's day - to - day activities were managed by local project coordinators with the iowa state university extension . the watershed encompasses about 400 farms . eight creeks flow across the watershed and drain into the san joaquin river . during the arid summer months , the water in the creeks is composed entirely of agricultural runoff , primarily from furrow irrigation . this irrigation method usually results in some erosion , but the highly erodible soil in the west stanislaus watershed exacerbates the problem . the average level of sediment in the irrigation runoff is 1,500 milligrams of soil per liter , although erosion in some areas reaches as high as 9,000 milligrams of soil per liter . usda officials describe the irrigation runoff as being chocolate brown in color . such high levels of sediment have a number of impacts on the san joaquin river . farmers in that area were encouraged to participate in a voluntary program to implement various agricultural best management practices in order to reduce nutrient runoff . state officials said that demonstration projects greatly increase voluntary participation in watershed projects because farmers generally stay with practices that are “tried and true.” they tend to wait to see what experience their peers have with a new practice before they adopt it , even if the practice is said to be financially beneficial .