the proposed vessel is an icebreaker . special consideration was given to the proposed vessel's icebreaking capabilities . for example , the icebreaking requirements for the proposed vessel were increased twice between 1990 and 1994 . our report does not imply that any ship capable of breaking through ice can be considered a research vessel . however , we do state that the two existing coast guard icebreakers and the planned vessel healy , while capable of breaking ice , also have been upgraded or were specifically designed to support research . we agree that none of the three coast guard vessels represent the ideal research platform . we disagree with nsf's view that we discuss the proposed vessel and the existing coast guard icebreakers as if they were equal research platforms . on page 7 , we state that equipment and other facilities necessary to support science have been added and improved . the largely successful 1994 scientific mission to the arctic confirms that the existing coast guard vessels are capable of supporting the accomplishment of a significant body of arctic research . we disagree that we imply a reduced need for scientific research in the arctic . rather , on page 5 we state that funding constraints have contributed to underutilization of existing coast guard vessels . as we note on pages 4-5 , neither the design of the healy nor the availability of coast guard vessels are explicitly put forth , with supporting analysis , in the various studies nsf cites in this letter as supporting acquisition of the proposed vessel . the 1993 u.s. arctic research plan mentions the coast guard role of supporting arctic research and describes an arctic research vessel ( the proposed vessel ) but does not demonstrate a need for the vessel . nsf states in its comments that the planned vessel healy is not suited for year - round dedicated research . however , the coast guard has stated its intent to make the healy available for arctic research 144 days a year . nsf is the largest federal provider of funds for research in this region . the u.s. coast guard , part of the department of transportation , is charged with providing and operating icebreakers to meet u.s. military , logistic , and research needs in the arctic and antarctic regions . nsf also looked at the sensitivity of the advantage of purchase over lease by using alternative interest rates for both the government and private sector borrowing costs . throughout these analyses , government purchase was favored over leasing , but the range by which purchase was advantageous ranged from $22.9 million to $99.6 million , each in terms of present value . nsf's decision to delay choosing a method of financing the proposed vessel until after bids are solicited from shipbuilders for any of several financing options is appropriate . after bids are solicited , nsf will need to perform a financial analysis similar to the one it has performed , but it will then have the advantage of performing such an analysis on more detailed data derived from the bid solicitation .