other federal agencies conduct economic analysis . however , ers is the primary agency that analyzes agricultural activities . this mission area includes the food and nutrition service ( fns ) , which administers 15 domestic food assistance programs , and the center for nutrition policy and promotion ( cnpp ) , which coordinates nutrition policy in usda . this mission area represented 47 percent of usda's fiscal year 1997 budget . fns' mission is to provide children and needy families with access to a more healthful diet through its food assistance programs and nutrition education . to carry out this mission , fns administers 15 separate domestic food assistance programs — the largest being the food stamp program , which provides employment and training as well as nutrition assistance — in partnership with the states . hhs conducts some similar food assistance and nutrition activities . for example , hhs' maternal and child health bureau provides nutrition education activities that are similar to fns' program — the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) . both agencies provide funding to the states to meet the nutritional and developmental needs of mothers and children . in addition , both hhs and fns conduct similar activities to improve the nutrition of the elderly . fns provides subsidies — cash and / or commodity food reimbursements — to nutrition programs that provide meals to the elderly in a group setting or in their home , while hhs , for the most part , administers the program and provides most of the funding for these programs . we previously reported that one alternative to reducing costs and streamlining operations in usda would be to consolidate the meal programs for the elderly in hhs , thereby giving the funding responsibility to the agency that provides the most funding and has overall oversight responsibilities for meal programs for the elderly . furthermore , like fns' food stamp program , other federal programs provide employment and training programs . these programs include , for example , hhs' temporary assistance for needy families , the department of labor's job training partnership act program , and hud's family self - sufficiency program . we have reported that one way to reduce the cost of the food stamp program would be to eliminate its employment and training component since the services could be provided by other existing employment and training programs . for further information , see food assistance: usda's multiprogram approach ( gao / rced - 94-33 , nov. 24 , 1993 ) ; food assistance programs ( gao / rced - 95-115r , feb. 28 , 1995 ) ; multiple employment training programs: major overhaul needed to create a more efficient , customer - driven system ( gao / t - hehs - 95-70 , feb. 6 , 1995 ) . cnpp is responsible for improving the nutritional status of americans by serving as the focal point within usda for linking scientific research to the consumer .