we also found some omissions in the database . data , such as the number of units and performance designations , had not been entered for all phas . for example , we found that the database did not have size information on 18 phas from fiscal years 1992 through 1995 . we also found that no designations had been entered for 132 phas with scores less than 60 and 1,037 phas with scores 90 or higher . hud's management assessment coordinator stated that these problems with missing , inaccurate , and inconsistent data occurred because field offices either ( 1 ) did not enter the information at all or ( 2 ) entered it incorrectly . these instances of inconsistent or missing data suggest that basic system safeguards do not exist to prevent field offices from making these data entry errors or omitting essential phmap data . while hud officials who oversee phmap and the department's field offices acknowledged problems with the database , they added that the program's redesign includes changes that will address the problems with data accuracy and reliability . hud officials told us they plan to change procedures for entering information on phas into the database to allow field offices to update pha data on a real - time basis and to make immediate corrections when they find errors or omissions . these procedural changes will also enable hud headquarters staff to access field office data directly and allow ongoing reviews of the information for accuracy and completeness . hud officials also believe that the changes will increase control over the information from the field offices and help ensure that the information in the smirph database is accurate . hud expressed concern that our draft report used data from the smirph database that hud had not verified for accuracy . hud noted that it is making changes to the database that will improve headquarters' ability to find and correct data errors that have been entered by staff at its field offices . to address hud's concern that we used inaccurate , unverified data from its database to analyze phmap data on housing authorities' scores by size and region , we recalculated the number of troubled housing authorities by size category for 1995 using data hud verified with its field offices ; we also modified this report to reflect a more accurate and lower number of troubled housing authorities in 1995 . recalculating the number of troubled authorities by size did not change our conclusion that a greater proportion of the authorities that hud verified as being troubled are those with fewer than 100 units . in fact , while hud's database indicates that 44 percent of troubled authorities in 1995 were small , hud's verified list of troubled authorities indicates 49 percent were small . furthermore , although hud officials told us that a manually - verified list of troubled authorities for 1992 was not available , they agreed with our conclusion that the smallest housing authorities make up a greater proportion of troubled housing authorities in 1995 than in 1992 .