( app . i provides information on the allocation of fees and total contract amounts for the four sites included in our review. ) doe began using performance - based incentives in fiscal year 1994 in response to one of the recommendations in its february 1994 report on contract reform . in order to implement this recommendation quickly , doe directed the sites to develop performance - based incentives before it developed key policies and procedures . so that these proposed incentives would be considered in the context of each site's activities , they were reviewed and approved by doe's senior management at the sites . furthermore , any proposed changes to individual incentives must go through a formal review process and be approved by senior management at the sites . doe's october 1997 assessment of its performance - based incentives also noted that the guidance on the development and administration of these incentives was limited and generally did not address such issues as establishing baselines and allocating fee amounts to specific incentives . in response , doe has taken steps to strengthen departmentwide guidance and training for the development and administration of these incentives . in addition , the four sites we visited have issued site - specific guidance concerning the development , administration , and evaluation of performance - based incentives . although one of doe's program areas — environmental management — issued draft guidelines on performance - based incentives in may 1997 , departmentwide guidance was not issued until december 1997 . the december 1997 guidance stressed the importance of results - oriented performance expectations that can be measured by objective criteria . in addition , rocky flats , savannah river , and hanford have begun using “stretch” provisions , under which the contractor can earn more fee if it is able to accomplish additional work with the same level of funding during the year . it also recommended that each field office institute a structured process to develop performance - based incentives and to identify ways to ensure the adequate monitoring and verification of a contractor's performance in light of these incentives . furthermore , doe created an interdisciplinary training course that provides an overview on developing performance - based incentives and presented the training to headquarters and field office personnel . for example , the oig reported in march 1997 , that at hanford some performance - based incentive fees were paid for work that had been completed before the incentives had been agreed upon and that in one instance safety was compromised by the contractor in order to earn a fee . in addition , doe reported during 1997 on its assessment of the implementation of performance - based incentives . while this report identified benefits from using performance - based incentive contracts , it also raised a number of concerns . for example , the report indicated that formal guidance for developing and administering performance - based incentives was limited and did not establish criteria for measuring performance or allocating fees to incentives . recent changes to doe's performance - based contracting have generally incorporated the lessons learned from the oig's reviews and the department's own assessments of performance - based incentives .