the program is administered by states . eligibility workers in service centers work directly with clients to certify household eligibility and determine benefit amounts at the time of application and at least annually thereafter . with respect to deceased individuals , ssa's information is more comprehensive than that gathered by state agencies . ssa compiles information in its death master file from a wide variety of sources , including the department of veterans affairs , the health care finance administration , funeral directors , and its own internal claims and postentitlement processes . ssa also includes in the death master file death information that it purchases from the states through agreements negotiated with each state . about half of these agreements restrict ssa's ability to disclose this information to agencies in other states . each social security number in the death master file has been verified to ensure that it is associated with the appropriate name , date of birth , and gender for each deceased individual . ssa updates its file monthly . in contrast , state information regarding deceased individuals is initially compiled at the local level by , for example , county departments of health , which gather the information from local funeral homes and other sources , including coroners . the counties forward the information to a designated state agency , such as the state bureau of vital statistics . during calendar years 1995 and 1996 , about $8.5 million in food stamp benefits were improperly collected by households that included deceased individuals — nearly 26,000 in total — in the four states we examined . ( see table 1. ) while these individuals were counted in food stamp households for an average of 4 months , we identified 177 instances in which deceased individuals were counted as beneficiaries for the full 2 years covered by our review . we also identified 20 instances in which such individuals were counted in more than one state during the period of our review . the deceased individuals whom we identified in our match were members of households of varying sizes , some with multiple members and some with a single member — the deceased individual was the household . for households with multiple members , the household may have included a deceased individual as a member at application , or the member may have passed away while on the food stamp rolls . similarly , identifying the eligibility workers responsible for a disproportionate number of cases with deceased individuals could identify the need for additional guidance or training . the inclusion of deceased individuals in households receiving food stamp benefits compromises the integrity of the food stamp program and results in overpayments . conventional methods for detecting such individuals have not been fully effective , resulting in overpayments in the states we reviewed . a match by states using ssa's death master file information or , preferably , a modification to ssa's computerized verification system that provides ssa's deceased beneficiary information to the states could be a cost - effective method for identifying such individuals in food stamp households and reducing overpayments . to make this possible , ssa would need to be given the authority to provide this information to the states .