only the high explosives tests have been conducted on schedule . the pit is a part of the nuclear package that , until 1989 , was manufactured and tested at doe's rocky flats facility in colorado . according to doe officials , the department ideally tests one pit per year per weapon type . in december 1989 , the rocky flats facility ceased production operations . at first , doe believed that rocky flats would reopen ; however , in 1992 doe decided to move pit tests to the los alamos national laboratory . this lapse created a backlog of up to 4 to 5 years , but testing is currently nearly back on schedule . the secondary is tested at doe's y12 facility in oak ridge , tennessee . ideally , one secondary should be tested per weapon type per year . few have been tested since september 1994 , when y12 was placed in a “stand - down” mode because of problems related to safety procedures that had been noted by the defense nuclear facilities safety board . most of these problems did not involve unsafe conditions , but were related to not following approved procedures . according to doe officials , a 1-year backlog of secondaries to be tested currently exists . doe's mound facility in ohio tested detonator sets through 1994 . at that time , responsibility for testing detonator sets was moved to doe's los alamos and lawrence livermore laboratories . ideally , doe tests two to five detonator sets per year per weapon type . los alamos began testing in june 1996 , and lawrence livermore is scheduled to begin testing later this year . in the meantime , a 1-1 / 2-year backlog of detonator sets to be tested exists . doe's mound facility also tested gas transfer systems through 1994 . ideally , one or two gas transfer systems are tested per weapon type per year . responsibility for testing gas transfer systems was moved to doe's savannah river facility in south carolina . savannah river began testing some gas transfer systems earlier this year , but a 1-1 / 2-year backlog currently exists . in the meantime , a backlog of secondaries accumulated . perhaps the most drastic example occurred when operations at rocky flats ceased in 1989 . no contingency plan for testing existed , and in the time it took to make a decision on where testing should be conducted and complete the transfer arrangements , a 4- to 5-year backlog of pits waiting to be tested accumulated . doe has a draft report that discusses alternate locations for conducting weapons - related activities . for example , doe's draft stockpile management preferred alternatives report shows that for detonator - related functions , los alamos would be the alternative . doe officials indicated , however , that this does not mean that these locations have surveillance testing capability available , although the facility or operations at the facility could possibly be modified to perform the function . in the event of a disruption of operations at a facility that would preclude testing , doe officials said that they would use the stockpile management preferred alternatives report to devise a specific plan .