the technologies that can be used for upgrades are diverse . for instance , replacing existing copper telephone lines with new fiber optic lines can dramatically increase capacity , enabling the lines to carry many thousands of times more data . in addition to telephone lines , other kinds of technologies — including satellites , cellular telephones , and cable television systems — can transmit information as part of the telecommunications infrastructure . besides the infrastructure needed to move information over distances , advanced telecommunications depend on two other elements — on - site equipment and switches that have been upgraded to handle larger amounts of information . figure 1.2 illustrates these components of a network . the equipment at the originating site turns the information generated by the user , such as sounds , words , and pictures , into a form that can be transmitted . the switches route the transmission to its destination through cables or some other transmission channel . once the transmission arrives at its destination , other types of on - site equipment convert the transmission back into the same usable form of sounds , words , or pictures . the president recently signed legislation reforming federal telecommunications law . this new law envisions a telecommunications industry in which a variety of companies — local telephone , long - distance , cable television , and wireless — can offer similar services and compete with one another . for example , the new law allows competition for local telephone services . while promoting deregulation , this law seeks to preserve and advance the concept of “universal service” — affordable and widely available telephone service . universal service has been a federal goal since the enactment of the communications act of 1934 , and federal and state governments have supported this goal through a series of subsidies and other types of assistance . north carolina's state controller believes that the communities' expenses will decline as the state's network technology matures and becomes more generally available . all three states found that some local sites needed assistance in paying for on - site equipment and offered such assistance using a variety of techniques . iowa is using appropriated funds to help schools pay for local connection equipment . nebraska has funded some educational connections through several sources . for example , it has created a school technology fund from funds available from a planned program to winterize the schools and proceeds from the state lottery . grants from this fund will be used to help schools with small budgets pay to prepare rooms and connect with the frame - relay network . also , the state's public service commission allowed telephone companies to use a tax windfall to help schools connect to the internet instead of returning these funds directly to consumers . the north carolina legislature created grants that can help local sites meet the cost of preparing rooms and connecting equipment . of the first 132 sites planned to be connected in north carolina , 115 received some form of state funding . states and communities have also used funds from federal programs to pay for users' equipment and network connection equipment .