we agree . however , to be consistent with our rate analysis , we included only the counties and towns that the preference customers ( those that purchase power directly from the pmas ) report . if we had included the service territories of the utilities that purchase power from preference customers as doe suggests , our state maps would have had more shadings for counties and / or dots for towns . however , it is important to note that , in many cases , the additional counties and towns in our maps would receive relatively small portions of their power from the pma . for example , southwestern's 1995 annual report states that the pma sells power to the louisiana energy and power authority , which , in turn , serves nine municipal utilities . we estimate that louisiana electric and power , purchased 8.15 percent of its power from the pma in 1995 . this means that the nine municipal utilities received , at most , 8.15 percent of their power from southwestern . if the municipal utilities purchased portions of their power from other sources , the counties and towns they serve would consume a smaller portion of pma power . our analysis shows that many of the preference customers that sell power to other utilities purchase less than 10 percent of their power from the pma . moreover , regardless of how many utilities buy pma power indirectly through preference customers , the portion of a state's electricity consumption that comes from the pma remains the same — for example , 0.7 percent in louisiana . in its comments , doe states that our analysis shows that southwestern is serving 14 towns and one county in the state of missouri , with 93 percent of pma power going to urban areas of the state . we believe that doe misinterpreted our analysis . our analysis does not show that 93 percent of southwestern's power in missouri goes to urban areas . our analysis does show that of the 14 towns that preference customers who buy directly from the pma report serving , 13 , or 93 percent , have populations that are at least 80 percent urban , as defined by the census bureau . doe states that associated electric cooperative has a “pma power allocation serves rural areas throughout the state of missouri.” however , this power is distributed to these areas by the utilities that purchase power from associated electric , not associated electric itself . associated electric did not report serving any counties or towns to electrical world , the source of our data . moreover , southwestern , in its 1995 annual report , does not include the utilities that purchase power from the associated electric cooperative in its total count of customers . therefore , neither did we . doe states that using 1995 data compromises our rate analysis because ( 1 ) pmas' rates have recently declined and ( 2 ) prices for power purchased during periods of peak use have recently increased . these two factors would increase potential rate increases , but only if market rates remain the same .