for example , the u.s . departments of state and commerce , in a september 1995 letter to the fcc , expressed concerns about whether contractual arrangements between inmarsat and ico were conducted with sufficient independence to ensure that there was no cross - subsidization . because of inmarsat's protected status as an international treaty organization , the existence of cross - subsidies might be difficult to confirm because inmarsat has immunity from prosecution under antitrust complaints and other lawsuits . however , it is not clear whether any of the protections inmarsat enjoys would apply to its business transactions with ico . our report does point out some of the difficulties that intelsat faces that its competitors do not have . for example , our report notes that according to u.s. agency officials , some members of intelsat believe it may not be able to respond easily to changes in the market as a result of the difficult decision - making process entailed in the intergovernmental structure . while restructuring these organizations may not solve all of the problems of market access , restructuring in a way that lessens the incentives of foreign governments to favor the treaty organizations may have an impact on market access . moreover , as we note in the report , the united states is engaged in a number of activities aimed at encouraging open access . as comsat notes , separate satellite providers such as panamsat have been able to get access in many countries . however , to be a full global provider , a company may need to gain access into nearly all countries to provide many different types of services . companies told us that they want to provide global coverage , and some are closer to gaining the necessary access than others . some of the companies that comsat mentions as having gained access to many countries are not yet providing services , and it is not clear what level of access they will achieve . since some countries do limit entry , particularly regarding the provision of certain types of services ( most notably basic telephone service ) , concerns about access remain . moreover , even if a company may eventually gain significant access , a continuing concern would be the time , effort , and expense that it may take that company to do so . we acknowledge the receipt of new information on ico's recent efforts to work cooperatively with u.s. big leo ( low - earth orbiting satellite systems , which are emerging to provide mobile services ) companies on cooperation on creating a competitive regulatory environment . we believe that this recent development is ancillary to the focus of restructuring the treaty organizations and therefore have not added this information to our report . in discussing the options for restructuring , our report speaks generally about certain issues and specifically about two proposals . as agreed with our requester , we focused on the u.s. and the industry proposals and did not attempt to provide a census of the array of proposals for restructuring intelsat . our request was to examine issues related to restructuring with regard to how competition would be affected .