we agree . as pointed out in our october 1994 report on the economic net worth of the fund as of september 30 , 1993 , we estimated that if fha had not revised its premium refund schedule , the economic net worth of the fund would have been about $500 million ( 10 percent ) less than our baseline estimate . we added to our report information on additional actions taken by fha to improve the financial health of the fund . however , we continue to believe that favorable prevailing and forecasted economic conditions were primarily responsible for this improvement . as noted in our report , under our low - case economic scenario , which assumes house price appreciation rates 2 percentage points lower than our baseline , we estimated that the fund's economic net worth would be $3 billion , rather than $6.1 billion . hud's office of policy development and research official commented that the methodology we used is fundamentally sound and provides a welcome second opinion to price waterhouse's actuarial review . this official also provided technical comments on our model's specification and interpretation of statistical results . he commented that if the technical comments cannot be addressed in the report and the congress asks us to estimate the economic net worth of the fund in the future , we should consult further with the office of policy development and research on our cash flow and economic models . we have revised the report to address many of the issues concerning the model's specification and interpretation that were raised by hud's office of policy development and research . if the congress asks us to do more work in this area , we will consult further with hud on our models . we also met with a price waterhouse official , who commented that our economic model was solid . price waterhouse also provided technical comments , which we incorporated where appropriate . to estimate the economic net worth of fha's fund as of september 30 , 1994 , and its resulting capital ratios under different economic scenarios , we examined existing studies on the single - family housing programs of both hud and the department of veterans affairs ( va ) , academic literature on the modeling of mortgage foreclosures and prepayments , and previous work performed by price waterhouse , hud , va , us , and others on modeling government mortgage programs . on the basis of this examination , we developed econometric and cash flow models to prepare our estimates . for these models , we used data supplied by fha and dri / mcgraw - hill , a private economic forecasting company . our econometric analysis estimated the historical relationships between the probability of loan foreclosure and prepayment and key explanatory factors , such as the borrower's equity and the interest rate . to estimate these relationships , we used data on the performance of fha - insured home mortgage loans — such as data on foreclosure , prepayment , and loss rates — originated from fiscal year 1975 through fiscal year 1994 .