the contaminants then require further treatment . the effectiveness and cost of this technology vary and depend on site characteristics such as the moisture content of the soil and the concentration and distribution of the contaminants . in addition , thermal desorption can generate residual that should be monitored and may require further treatment . vitrification: all existing vitrification technologies use heat to melt the contaminated soil or sediment , which forms a rigid , glassy product when it cools . the volume of the end product is typically 20 to 45 percent less than the volume of the untreated soil or sediment . organic compounds , including pcbs , are destroyed by the high temperature during vitrification . vitrification may also have application to special types of dioxin contamination if current developments can be successfully tested . however , the effectiveness of vitrification for both pcbs and dioxin is difficult to assess at this point . jacqueline m. garza , staff evaluator richard p. johnson , attorney advisor gerald e. killian , assistant director pauline seretakis lichtenfeld , staff evaluator james b. musial , senior evaluator william h. roach , jr. , senior evaluator paul j. schmidt , senior evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . this flow of wastes is generally referred to as the waste feed . the wastes are then burned in the combustion chamber , which is designed to maintain and withstand extremely high temperatures . as the wastes are heated , they are converted from solids or liquids into gases . the gases are mixed with air and passed through a hot flame . as the temperature of the gases rises , the organic compounds in the gases begin to break down and recombine with oxygen from the air to form stable inorganic compounds , such as carbon dioxide and water . depending on the waste composition , other inorganic compounds , such as the acid gas hydrogen chloride , may form . this entire process is called combustion . health effects have been associated with exposure to dioxin . dioxin is considered a probable human carcinogen , according to laboratory studies on animals and observation of humans beings exposed to dioxin .