iii. ) because the forest service could not locate two files , we chose the next two cases in our random number listing and included them in our review . since we used a sample ( called a probability sample ) of forest service land purchases to develop our estimates , each estimate has a measurable precision , or a sampling error , which may be expressed as a plus or a minus figure . a sampling error indicates how closely we can reproduce from a sample the results that we would obtain if we took a complete count of the universe using the same measurement methods . information was not available . the following examples from the 135 forest service purchases listed above depict instances in which property owners received under the forest service's santini - burton act program more than , less than , or the same amount as they originally invested in the properties . a 0.25-acre parcel in washoe county , nevada , which had been purchased by its owner in october 1976 for $12,000 , was sold to the forest service in january 1988 for $57,500 , which was the parcel's fair market value , as determined by an independent appraisal . without considering other costs that might have been incurred while the owner held the parcel , this owner received $45,500 more than his original investment . however , when inflation is factored into the calculation , the price difference amounted to an increase of $32,540 . a 0.72-acre parcel in washoe county , nevada , for which a limited partnership paid $70,000 in march 1980 , was sold to the forest service in july 1984 for $35,000 . this was the parcel's fair market value at that time , according to an independent appraisal — a $35,000 decrease if other costs the partnership may have incurred are ignored . when inflation is factored into the calculation , the price difference amounted to a decrease of $53,200 . a representative of the partnership was advised by trpa that because the parcel was located in a very fragile stream environment zone , there was virtually no chance that the partnership would be allowed to build any kind of structure on the property . the partnership had invested in the property in the hope that it would eventually be able to build a single - family residence for resale . this score can range in value from 0 to 1,140 . originally , it was established that a parcel with an ipes score of 726 or higher would immediately be eligible for development , while a parcel with a low ipes score would not immediately be eligible . whereas the market value of a property with a high ipes score would likely be increased , the market value of a property with a low ipes score would likely be diminished . however , some environmentally sensitive parcels were allowed to be built on if the property owners paid mitigation fees . and , as previously mentioned , upon finding that washoe and douglas counties in nevada had met trpa's criteria for lowering the ipes threshold scores , trpa lowered the threshold scores in the two counties to 695 and 709 , respectively .