( app . i discusses the status of iaea's efforts to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the technical cooperation program and the u.s. position on these actions. ) according to a state department cable describing the results of meetings held in september 1996 , the major donors in attendance were highly supportive of iaea's initiatives to improve the program . the donors concluded that they were under increasing pressure at home to demonstrate that their countries' contributions to iaea were being well spent ; supportive of the deputy director general for technical cooperation's efforts to make the entire technical cooperation program more efficient and effective ; concerned because the technical cooperation program had not set priorities or established a schedule for accomplishing improvements to the program ; and concerned that iaea's department of technical cooperation may not have the management skills required to accomplish these improvements . an argonne official informed us that he reviews the list of “footnote a” projects to determine whether they have technical merit and should be funded by the united states ; however , he is not responsible for assessing whether these or other projects funded through the technical cooperation fund are in keeping with u.s. nuclear nonproliferation and safety goals . state department officials in the bureau of international organization affairs told us that the department did not have the resources to review all of the ongoing technical assistance projects and that u.s. oversight of these projects could be improved . acda , doe , and u.s. mission officials told us that the vast majority of iaea's technical assistance projects do not pose any concerns about nuclear proliferation because the assistance is provided in benign areas , such as medicine and agriculture , that do not involve transferring sensitive nuclear materials and technologies . iaea's director general also told us that iaea will not provide technical assistance in sensitive areas , such as the reprocessing and enrichment of nuclear material . state department and u.s. mission officials told us that if the united states does have concerns about specific technical assistance projects , it can informally raise its objections to iaea's secretariat . however , u.s. officials we spoke with generally could not recall whether the united states had raised objections or had attempted to cancel any projects in the past several years . these u.s. officials also said that the united states does not have absolute control over the approval of specific technical assistance projects because decisions about approving and funding the projects are made collectively every 2 years at the december meeting of iaea's board of governors . a former u.s. mission official told us that u.s. mission representatives can meet informally with iaea staff to discuss a preliminary list of technical assistance projects months before the board of governors' meeting . the united states and other iaea member states also have an opportunity to formally review the proposed list of technical assistance projects at iaea's general conference in september and at the november meeting of the technical assistance and cooperation committee , the final meeting where member states can provide recommendations for the december board of governors' meeting .