the bureau was to increase funding for the appraisal program . funding is being requested under the office of the special trustee's budget to implement improvements in the appraisal program and to eliminate appraisal backlogs . the improvement plan was updated in the fall of 1998 to include two additional initiatives . the first directed the bureau's office of trust responsibilities , with assistance from interior's office of the solicitor , to determine whether and to what extent existing laws , regulations , and court rulings require appraisals of trust land . the second directed bureau offices to develop and maintain a database for tracking appraisals . in november 1998 , the bureau convened a workgroup to consider and recommend ways to reduce the backlog of appraisal requests , which are made for many types of land transactions , including sales , exchanges , rights - of - way , and leases of property . in december 1998 , the workgroup made its recommendations to the deputy commissioner for indian affairs . the field solicitor in the minneapolis area field office reviewed the legal requirements for appraisals . he concluded that no laws specifically require the bureau to conduct appraisals of property or interests in that property and that the statutes give the secretary of the interior discretion in determining the fair value of property . however , bureau officials stated that the review was preliminary and that a comprehensive legal review by interior's office of the solicitor would be required before the bureau would consider making changes to the program on that basis . the appraisal workgroup also reported that each area or agency office maintains its own tracking system and that all systems are adequate to monitor , or track , appraisal requests . the bureau was to identify the extent of the appraisal backlog . the backlog was identified as of june 1 , 1998 . according to the improvement plan , these tracking systems are designed to provide the bureau with information on when most of the appraisals are needed and to enable bureau management to use appraisal resources ( funding and staff ) more effectively . however , we obtained appraisal tracking data from four offices and found wide variability in the usability of the data ; in some cases , data on an individual appraisal were virtually unusable for analyzing the status of the appraisal . table iii.1 provides additional information on the status of trust and nontrust land within the indian irrigation projects . while roughly three - quarters of the total acreage within the irrigation projects was considered to be assessable , there are striking differences in the percentages of trust and nontrust assessable acres that were reported as leased: 61 percent of the assessable trust land was leased , whereas only 1 percent of the assessable nontrust land was leased . bureau officials told us that most of the non - indian landowners farm their land rather than renting it out and that the trust land is generally not being farmed unless the acres are leased . however , the bureau does not have data on unleased trust acreage that is or is not in agricultural production .