apr . doe's office of oversight completes study of lab , concluding that since its february review , doe and aui actions to remediate tritium contamination were "aggressive and appropriate," but both parties share responsibility . apr . aui president is told that contract would be terminated . may the secretary announces termination of contract with aui , effective nov. 1997 , or when a new contractor assumes responsibilities . apr . options paper on aui contract termination circulates at doe . apr . the secretary meets with senior staff to consider terminating aui contract . no decision is made . a day or so later , the secretary decides to terminate contract for "convenience" of the government . may doe rates aui's operations as "marginal," citing delays in installing monitoring wells and other problems . the secretary became involved in discussions of aui with his senior staff as soon as he assumed office in mid - march of 1997 . by this time , doe had already shifted responsibility for remediating the tritium leak from the chicago operations office and its brookhaven group to doe's assistant secretary for environment , safety and health , and officials were discussing the future of aui . the secretary told us that widely publicized criticism of aui and doe by elected officials did not influence his decision to terminate aui's contract . rather , he said he was moved by a growing frustration with aui's technical competence when dealing with the tritium incident and with its public - relations consequences . all of the senior doe participants we interviewed said that while the tritium leak itself posed no serious health hazard , the public's perception of the way aui managed the problem undermined the community's confidence in the laboratory . the assistant secretary for es&h dispatched her office of oversight to examine the tritium situation in late january 1997 . the results of this examination were a major influence on the secretary's decision to terminate aui's contract . the office's interim report released on february 14 , 1997 , concluded that bnl “did not rigorously analyze the potential for releases from the and was somewhat overconfident in the control of effluent from .” many decisions were made “within lower levels of the bnl organization,” and “senior managers were not sufficiently involved in the decision processes and may not have had all the information necessary to make good decisions about the priority of . monitoring [the reactor's spent - fuel pool].” the interim report noted that both bnl's internal communications and communications among bnl , the chicago operations office , and the brookhaven group “were not as effective as they should have been.” senior managers were not sufficiently involved in decisions and lacked necessary information , while both bnl and doe showed “weaknesses” in their approach to such issues as management , planning , and priority setting . the office of oversight issued its second report on bnl in april 1997 . this report discussed the underlying causes of the tritium contamination . a major influence on the firing decision was the loss of the long island community's trust in bnl .