additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . hud's letter appears in appendix i . to determine how hud estimated the excess budget authority in its section 8 mod rehab program and the accuracy of this estimate , we discussed with department officials their general approach for calculating excess budget authority and reviewed preliminary documentation supporting their approach . specifically , we discussed hud's approach with officials in the offices of public and indian housing and the chief financial officer and analyzed reports from hud's accounting system that showed the amount of excess budget authority available for recapture from the housing agencies that administer the program . however , at the time we completed our review , hud had not finalized its recapture plan and the assumptions that will determine the specific amounts to be recaptured from each housing agency . to determine what hud plans to do with the excess budget authority in the section 8 mod rehab program , we interviewed program and budget officials and officials in hud's office of the general counsel about the department's plans and legal authority to recapture the program's excess budget authority and reuse it to meet ongoing needs for housing assistance . we performed our work from february 1998 to july 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we are sending copies of this report to the appropriate house and senate committees ; the secretary of housing and urban development ; and to the director , office of management and budget . we also will provide copies to others on request . if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report , please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7631 . major contributors to this report were eric marts , assistant director , and paige smith , senior evaluator , of our resources , community , and economic development division . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . it was created to upgrade substandard privately owned rental housing requiring a moderate level of rehabilitation . as the chairman of the subcommittee on va , hud , and independent agencies , house committee on appropriations , you asked us to review hud's financial management of the section 8 program . in response to that request and to a mandate in the 1997 emergency supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .