as a result , some producers suffered hardships . once epa confirmed that the dioxin levels in the poultry samples were higher than naturally occurring background levels , officials from fsis and fda were included in the investigation into the source of the dioxin . the agencies coordinated their efforts through daily conference calls involving numerous officials from the three agencies participating in the investigation . these delays increased producers' costs . furthermore , we were informed that the cost of testing for some companies totaled more than $100,000 . fda and fsis requested the producers and processors to halt the distribution of the affected food products with dioxin levels above one part per trillion because of their concern about the potential risk to human health . although scientists have not yet determined the level at which dioxin may pose a risk to human health , the agencies chose a level of dioxin that is somewhat higher than the background level in food products to distinguish the food products affected by the use of adulterated feed from other food products . the one - part - per - trillion level set by fda , in consultation with epa and fsis , was a lower concentration level than fda had used before . in an august 1981 letter to the governor of michigan , fda provided advice about the dangers of consuming fish from the great lakes tainted with dioxin . in this letter , fda stated that if the dioxin levels in fish average less than 25 parts per trillion , “there is little cause for concern.” similarly , fda's health advisory for fish stated that dioxin in concentration levels up to 25 parts per trillion posed “no serious health concerns.” this advisory was included in a 1992 epa study describing the physical and chemical properties of dioxin and the potential health effects associated with exposure to it . fda officials said the 1981 guidance was written to apply to sports fish . they pointed out that the two situations differ because the recent dioxin incident involved multiple sources of food , and consumers might ingest more dioxin through these sources than they would from sport fish , which are consumed less frequently . when fda and fsis notified producers and processors that their products could not be sold for human consumption unless the products had a dioxin concentration level below one part per trillion , industry representatives and the arkansas department of health requested scientific evidence to support the need to restrict food products with these low dioxin levels because of the risk posed to consumers . according to these officials , fda did not provide any evidence to support the decision to request that products with a dioxin level of one part per trillion be halted . this discovery triggered a joint investigation to determine the source of the contamination . this investigation was undertaken by epa , the u.s. department of agriculture's food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) , and the department of health and human services' food and drug administration ( fda ) — each of which has jurisdiction over some aspect of the food safety system .