iv. ) the corps did not have any comments on the draft report . we conducted our review from january through june 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . see appendix iii for the details of our scope and methodology . other prime contractor costs: other costs incurred by the prime contractor in performing the remedial action for such items as computers , messenger service , postage , film , etc . team subcontractors: costs that the prime contractor has paid to subcontractors for additional technical expertise . pool subcontractors: costs that the prime contractor has paid to a subcontractor for the physical implementation of the remedial action . as shown in table i.1 , the epa contractor charges that we analyzed totaled about $62 million for fiscal years 1996-97 . epa's financial management system reported disbursements totaling about $97 million for the same period . part of the difference may be attributable to the lag time between the submission and payment of billings . another reason for the difference is that about $26 million was charged to the remedial action account for other related activities at superfund sites , such as removal actions , contractor oversight of private - party cleanups , and adjustments to previous expenditures . amount charged as a percentage of cumulative project costs ( 75,749 ) ( continued ) amount charged as a percentage of cumulative project costs ( continued ) amount charged as a percentage of cumulative project costs ( 7,943 ) ( continued ) . this appendix provides detailed information on superfund contractor spending managed by the corps at two large projects . these are the only projects that were billed on a cost - reimbursement basis during the period of our review and thus the only projects for which detailed billing information is available . columns 2 and 3 in table ii.1 show charges at these projects during fiscal years 1996-97 . columns 4 and 5 show cumulative costs over the life of these same projects . the cost categories shown below were derived from corps contractors' billings and are defined as follows: professional labor: the prime contractor's expenses for the professional labor used to manage and oversee a remedial action . should you need further information , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-6111 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . this appendix provides detailed information on superfund contractor charges for remedial actions , by environmental protection agency ( epa ) region . the information provided is for all remedial action projects that had spending of $10,000 or more in either fiscal year 1996 or fiscal 1997 , as reported by epa's integrated financial management system . columns 2 and 3 in table i.1 show charges for these projects during fiscal years 1996-97 . columns 4 and 5 show cumulative charges over the life of these same projects . the cost categories shown below were derived from epa contractor billings and are defined as follows: prime contractor direct labor: professional and technical labor that the prime contractor uses in the management and oversight of remedial actions . travel: expenses that prime contractor staff incur in traveling to manage and oversee superfund remedial actions .