app . ix describes the objectives , scope , and methodology . we performed our work from july 1995 through april 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 14 days from the date of this report . at that time , we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretary of energy , the secretary of agriculture , and the administrator of epa . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 if you have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix x . this appendix summarizes the results of a 1995 study performed by the department of energy's ( doe ) argonne national laboratory , which evaluated , among other things , the greenhouse gas emission characteristics of reformulated gasoline ( rfg ) . this is the most current and comprehensive study that we could find on this issue . the study indicates that rfg's potential to reduce greenhouse gases is small . according to the study , the effects of using rfg on greenhouse gas emissions varies according to ( 1 ) the specific oxygenate that is added to conventional gasoline and ( 2 ) the time of year that rfg is used . according to one of the study's authors , the time of year is a factor because of the volatile organic compound ( voc ) reduction requirements for high ozone season ( summer ) rfg . table i.1 shows the comparative carbon dioxide equivalent emissions , a common measure of greenhouse gases , of rfg made with ethyl tertiary butyl ether ( etbe ) , an ether made from ethanol ; methyl tertiary butyl ether ( mtbe ) , an ether made from methanol ; conventional gasoline ; and rfg made with etbe , derived from ethanol produced with new or additional rather than existing agricultural sources . carbon dioxide equivalent emissions ( grams ) reformulated gasoline ( existing ) reformulated gasoline ( new ) the table shows that in the summer when ozone problems are most severe , etbe made with existing sources of ethanol produces the least amount of greenhouse gases ; while etbe from new sources of ethanol emits the highest amount of greenhouse gases . emissions of greenhouse gases from conventional gasoline are the second lowest , followed by emissions from rfg made with mtbe . in all cases , however , as discussed above , the difference in greenhouse gas emissions between rfg and conventional gasoline is small . nearly all ethanol is currently made with corn . according to the department of agriculture , current research on using biomass feedstocks to produce ethanol , combined with improved production processes , may lead to greater reductions of greenhouse gases for rfg made with ethanol . however , a doe official noted that while ethanol made with biomass can significantly reduce the amount of greenhouse gas emissions compared with corn - based ethanol , all oxygenates comprise only a small part of the rfg mixture .