( app . ii describes the importance of seasonality , storage , and transport in anhydrous ammonia markets in more detail , as well as the difficulty in defining these markets. ) as shown in figure 2 , anhydrous ammonia is delivered from the tanks at the storage terminals to farms in three steps . first , specialized tank trucks deliver the anhydrous ammonia from the terminal to local retail fertilizer dealers , where it is stored temporarily in “bullet” tanks . stb officials typically devote relatively few staff - years' effort to pipeline cases . if a rate case is brought before stb , the cost to the pipeline carrier of defending the case could be substantial . the limited number of pipeline rate cases in stb's history provides little basis for estimating the cost of these cases . however , stb officials told us that the cost of rail rate cases ranges from less than $50,000 to about $1 million . stb's regulatory presence would be reduced even more if stb were to grant an exemption from regulation to a pipeline or group of pipelines carrying the same commodity . an exemption could be structured narrowly or broadly and potentially could eliminate all regulatory requirements imposed on the pipelines . before stb granted an exemption , it would have to determine whether such an exemption was warranted . this determination would require stb to devote more staff to pipeline issues . if an exemption were granted for a pipeline , shippers would still have the right to contest rates charged by the pipeline . given that stb does not currently impose many requirements on pipelines , it appears that an exemption would not significantly affect a pipeline . does the limited number of pipeline cases under icc and stb indicate there is no need for continued regulation ? it is possible that the limited number of rate cases brought before stb and its predecessor in the last 10 years is evidence of effective competition , and therefore there is no need to continue pipeline regulation . alternatively , the shippers we spoke with state that the five cases — including one in which icc required a pipeline to establish common carrier rates and one in which stb found that the same pipeline was charging unreasonably high rates at certain volume levels — indicate a need for continued regulation . in addition , they point out that the mere existence of a federal regulatory agency with the authority to roll back rate increases and levy civil penalties acts as a deterrent to unfair rate increases . finally , 12 of the 21 pipelines we identified under stb's jurisdiction were operated under contracts with shippers . the contracts we reviewed guarantee prices for a given level of product over a certain time period . shippers that enter into such contracts may be much less likely to complain to stb . would shippers have recourse if stb's economic regulation of pipelines were eliminated ? absent stb or any other regulatory body , shippers that believe they are being charged unfair rates would presumably complain to the department of justice or the federal trade commission .