the ec has 16 benchmarks . specific projects include the following: developing parks , recommending state legislation for a tax - incentive program , providing small business training , and increasing the availability of safe and affordable housing . the city council of watsonville is the lead entity for the ec ; the deputy city manager has the day - to - day responsibilities for the ec . an advisory steering committee represents the residents of the ec ; however , the city council has decision - making responsibility . the ez / ec ssbg funds pass through the california department of social services to the city of watsonville enterprise community for its use . as of december 31 , 1996 , the ec had obtained about $250,000 of the ez / ec ssbg funds for use in its projects . the main emphasis of the ec's strategic plan is youth development . the ec has 15 benchmarks . specific projects include the following: establishing youth job training , including teaching basic job - seeking expanding and renovating recreation facilities for at - risk youth in several impoverished parts of the city ; building and operating a small business retail incubator in conjunction with the new transit center ; and improving the downtown area by refurbishing retail businesses' facades . to estimate the cost of the rural ez / ec program , we reviewed information on the resources available to the ez / ec program from the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and 13 other federal agencies . we also obtained tax - incentive information from the internal revenue service and spoke with officials in the office of tax assessment . to review the status of the ez / ec program's implementation and identify the difficulties that communities have encountered , we talked with officials and obtained information at all 3 rural ezs , 5 of the 30 rural ecs , six states , and the two principal agencies , usda and hhs . we selected ecs that are located in the same state as the ezs and added ecs from three other states to provide geographic distribution . during our visits to these communities , we visited selected projects to discuss the ez / ec program with the individuals most directly involved at the local level . we incorporated these comments where appropriate . we also sent the detailed information on each ez and ec we visited ( as presented in app . i ) to the cognizant local officials for their review and comment . we made several technical changes in response to the comments we received . in addition , we sent the sections of the report describing the problems resulting from the conflict between hhs' written and verbal guidance on financial standards to the cognizant state government officials for review and comment ; these officials concurred in our presentation of the issues discussed in the report . we conducted our review from june 1996 through february 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . our scope and methodology are discussed in more detail in appendix ii .