the mortgage on this property has not been subordinated . however , the note does not mature for over 970 years , and no payments are due until then . furthermore , the note could only be accelerated upon the enactment of a statute requiring immediate payment . according to fra , the present value of the mortgage — that is , the government's interest in the property — is nominal . in a liquidation , the trustee could pay off the mortgage and sell the property or sell the property to a purchaser who would assume the mortgage . in either case , proceeds from the sale would be available to satisfy creditors' claims . it is not likely the federal government would sustain a financial loss on such transactions because it has no expectation of payment for over 970 years . while the federal government's financial interest might not be affected , any interest the federal government might have in continuing intercity passenger rail service could be jeopardized if a purchaser did not use amtrak's property for this purpose . the u.s. government also holds all of amtrak's preferred stock , about $10.6 billion as of september 30 , 1997 . while the amtrak reform and accountability act of 1997 eliminated the liquidation preference attached to such stock as well as the requirement to issue such stock , this stock ownership nonetheless represents a substantial interest in amtrak.however , the federal government's claim associated with this stock would be secondary to the payment of the claims of secured and unsecured creditors . in contrast to the losses that creditors might suffer , participants in the railroad retirement and unemployment systems would have increased financial obligations in the event of amtrak's liquidation . the financial health of some of these participants — especially small freight railroads and commuter passenger railroads — might be adversely affected to the degree that they cannot increase revenues or cut costs to offset increased payroll taxes . the primary source of income for the railroad retirement system is payroll taxes levied on employers and employees . because the retirement system is on a modified pay - as - you go basis , the financial health of this system is closely related to the size of the railroad workforce and the income to the railroad retirement account derived from this workforce . in 1996 , amtrak paid about $335 million in payroll taxes into the railroad retirement account ( about 8 percent of the total receipts for the railroad retirement account in calendar year 1996 ) . a loss of this contribution could have a significant impact . these obligations can vary over time . for example , amtrak's debt levels and capital lease obligations have increased significantly in recent years — from $492 million in fiscal year 1993 to about $1.3 billion in fiscal year 1997 . this total does not include about $820 million that is expected to be incurred in fiscal year 1998 and beyond to finance high - speed trainsets and locomotives and related maintenance facilities for the northeast corridor . future obligations to creditors may be affected by a variety of factors , such as the taxpayer relief act of 1997 .