only competition will do that . doe believes that our draft report did not adequately acknowledge the impact of the department's new competition policy . specifically , doe believes that real changes have occurred in its contract competition culture and practices and that the proposed extension of the three laboratory contracts conforms to its policy . first , doe states that in all cases where noncompetitive extensions have been sought , the department subjected each decision to a rigorous examination of the facts and circumstances . also , doe states that rather than using the existing contract as a basis for negotiation , the department developed administrative mechanisms to ensure that contract reform terms and conditions were the basis for negotiation . while we agree that doe has changed its competition policy , the department decided in two - thirds of its decisions to noncompetitively extend m&o contracts . furthermore , the contract reform team's report concluded that contracts should be competitively awarded except for unusual circumstances . we believe that such a large proportion of noncompetitively extended contracts suggests that doe still has a long way to go before realizing the benefits of competitive contracting . although doe believes that it is improving its existing contracts by negotiating in a noncompetitive environment , it is not obtaining the benefits of competition . second , doe states that extending the three laboratory contracts was contingent on incorporating contract reform provisions and achieving other negotiation objectives . as noted in our draft report , the secretary's decision to extend these contracts stated that considering other contractors was unrealistic and incompatible with program requirements . once doe stated that only one contractor could do this work , doe effectively weakened its negotiation position . even though the secretary also noted that any resulting contract was contingent on the incorporation of reform measures , we believe that doe's actions to date , give the appearance that the decision to extend these contracts was made prior to the completion of successful negotiations and therefore is inconsistent with the intent of contract reform . one of the key elements of doe's new performance - based management contracts is their inclusion of clearly stated , results - oriented performance goals and indicators to determine if the performance was achieved.however , as doe seeks to implement its new contracting approach together with its strategic planning initiative , contract weaknesses are becoming apparent . doe's new contracts do not always contain a clear linkage between the contract goals and those of the department . in addition , some contract provisions allow contractors to dispute either the total amount of the contract incentive or the amount of the incentive provided for a specific goal . because doe relies heavily on its contractors to carry out its missions , it is essential that the goals in doe's contracts be aligned with doe's strategic goals . additionally , doe's contracts should not harm the department's authority to allocate incentives to the performance of contract goals . doe officials agree that their efforts to put reforms and initiatives in place quickly resulted in inconsistencies . they see these early stages of implementing contract reform and strategic planning as a learning process .