we have incorporated these revisions . while these officials agreed with our conclusion that the fund needs to encourage awardees to increase their reporting of accomplishments , they disagreed with our draft report's proposed recommendation to ( 1 ) include accomplishment measures in the performance schedule of the assistance agreement and ( 2 ) waive the use of sanctions for measures outside the awardee's control . is an evaluation date ( target date ) given ? is an evaluation value ( target value ) given ? is a baseline date given ? is a baseline value given ? is a target population or geographic area given ? each question could be answered with a yes or a no . for nine questions , the unit of analysis was an individual goal and its associated measure ( s ) , referred to as a “goal statement.” for the two remaining questions , the unit of analysis was an individual measure . two teams of two gao evaluators performed the assessments ; each team assessed approximately half of the goal statements . the two members of each team independently assessed each goal statement and then compared their answers . disagreements were discussed and resolved . after the members of each team reached agreement , we compared the assessments performed by the two teams , reviewing the ratings each had given to a subset of 8 goal units ( 11 measures ) that both teams had assessed . we also reviewed quarterly progress reports submitted by 19 of the 1996 awardees and held discussions with case studies officials to assess the awardees' progress . for the bea program and its awardees , we performed work at fund headquarters similar to that we performed for the cdfi program , reviewing the fund's guidance , policies , procedures , and other materials on the awards process and discussing these issues and others related to the program with the fund officials administering the program . for data on the banks' performance under the program , we relied on the fund's status report on the activities completed by awardees as of january 1998 . this report includes the status of disbursements made by the fund for specific activities completed in accordance with the awardees' agreements with the fund . we conducted case studies of selected bea awardees to explore our objectives in more depth , obtaining awardees' perspectives on the process of applying for an award and gathering information from awardees that the fund does not collect systematically , such as information on the incentives banks identify for participating in the program and the ways they monitor and measure the progress of their investments . we also verified with these awardees ( 1 ) the information we obtained from the fund's january 1998 status report and ( 2 ) the information the banks voluntarily reported to the fund on their uses of award funds . we judgmentally selected a sample of five awardees for our case studies , ensuring that collectively they represented the full range of activities for which banks can receive awards .