the study is appended to the report . faa also reviewed other reports , including reports from the president's commission on aviation security and terrorism , the white house commission on aviation safety and security , the national civil aviation review commission , and coopers & lybrand . in addition , faa conducted a literature search and reviewed testimony provided for the white house commission on aviation safety and security and various congressional hearings on aviation security . faa's report considered the views of the various commissions and other parties that studied or commented on transferring air carriers' security responsibilities to the airport operators or to the federal government , or for sharing responsibilities among the air carriers , the airport operators , and the federal government . the report also considered the commissions' and other parties' views on potential sources of funding for aviation security , such as the airport improvement program , passenger facility charges , and user fees . the report points out that the source of security funding has been a matter of continuing controversy over the last 30 years . faa concluded that there appears to be a consensus in the civil aviation community to retain the current system of shared responsibilities for aviation security . therefore , faa would continue to be responsible for establishing and enforcing regulations , policies , and procedures and for identifying potential threats and appropriate countermeasures . air carriers would bear the primary responsibility for applying screening and other security measures to passengers , baggage , and cargo . airport operators would be responsible for maintaining a secure airport environment and for providing local law enforcement support . faa also concluded that there is no apparent consensus for changing the overall system of funding for aviation security and that there is no definitive answer to the long - standing question of who should pay for aviation security . faa plans to expedite the process by publishing the final rule within 1 year of the closing of the comment period , which would be at the end of 2000 . faa believes that it is important to implement the final regulation at the earliest date possible to realize the performance improvements expected to be brought about by the proposed certification requirements , training requirements , and performance measurements and standards . however , several issues could impede faa's efforts to complete this undertaking . in addition to the tip validation and data - gathering efforts previously discussed , the human factors staff in faa's office of aviation research is conducting a sophisticated and long - term evaluation using tip to assess how such variables as screeners' experience , method of training , checkpoint operating environment , and shift lengths affect screeners' performance . tip is still in the research and development stage ; therefore , the office of aviation research developed a test and evaluation plan for tip . the effort is expected to be completed by mid - 1999 . this assessment could identify issues regarding screeners' performance that would have to be addressed and could potentially delay the issuance of the regulation . faa therefore did not make any legislative proposals for transferring security responsibilities from air carriers or any recommendations for changing funding sources .