most of the material is located in russia . los alamos national laboratory has identified five sectors in the russian nuclear complex that handle direct - use material . • nuclear materials in weapons . ( this material is largely in the custody of the ministry of defense. ) • the minatom defense complex , which contains large amounts of nuclear material removed from dismantled nuclear weapons and stockpiles of heu and plutonium produced for the nuclear weapons program . • the minatom civilian sector , which includes a number of reactor development institutes such as the institute of physics and power engineering at obninsk , as well as organizations , such as the elektrostal machine building factory , that produce nuclear fuels and materials for civilian applications . ( some of these institutes and enterprises do both civilian and defense work. ) doe plans to work at up to 15 facilities per year . doe and national laboratory officials estimate that the cost per facility will range from $5 million to $10 million , on the basis of dod's and doe's experiences to date working at a limited number of sites at several facilities in the nis . as doe prepares to undertake the much larger task of managing the expanded program , it will face several uncertainties that can affect program implementation . • as previously stated , doe does not know how many facilities may ultimately require assistance . currently , u.s. officials do not know where all the direct - use material is located . according to a doe official , the united states may need to include as many as 35 additional facilities beyond the 80 to 100 facilities currently envisioned to achieve its goal of enhancing controls over all direct - use material . • doe is uncertain about the total costs of the program . the cost of the entire program could range from $400 million to over $1 billion based on the estimate that the number of facilities that may require assistance could range from 80 facilities to as many as 135 facilities , and that per project costs could range from $5 million to $10 million . project estimates could vary as the program expands to different types of facilities , or if the nis consolidate their stockpiles of direct - use material . the arrangements include formal audit and evaluation rights negotiated as part of government - to - government agreements and flexible arrangements developed by the national laboratories to be applied to the lab - to - lab program . under government - to - government agreements , which provide basic rights and responsibilities for the government - to - government program , the united states is allowed to conduct audits and examinations during the period of the agreements upon 30 days advanced notice . these agreements give u.s. personnel the right to visit sites receiving u.s. assistance . dod and minatom signed an additional agreement on administrative arrangements for the conduct of audits and examinations of assistance . using these arrangements , dod conducts audits and examinations of all ctr - funded assistance and will include mpc&a assistance .