nevertheless , restrictions persist . as a remedy , most u.s. all - cargo airlines advocate separating negotiations of cargo rights from broader negotiations that include passenger services . other attempts to resolve problems have been unsuccessful . one airline reported that after trying unsuccessfully to resolve its problems in obtaining flight permits , clearing cargo through customs , and complying with burdensome legal requirements at a latin american airport , it decided to stop operating at that airport . another airline , which was unable to resolve significant operating and marketing problems at two airports in an asian country , sold its rights to fly to those airports . some u.s. all - cargo airlines have not requested dot's or the state department's intervention because ( 1 ) they view the u.s. government's role as limited to intervening in matters involving violations of bilateral agreements only ; ( 2 ) they believe requesting the u.s. government's intervention would be too costly or time - consuming ; or ( 3 ) they have been unaware that the assistance is available . like several u.s. passenger / cargo airlines , many u.s. all - cargo airlines do not believe it is practical for airlines to rely on the u.s. government to resolve the daily difficulties of operating in foreign countries . in addition , according to dot and state department officials , many u.s. airlines do not seek the u.s. government's assistance because they believe such government involvement might harm relations with the host country . some airlines do not request the u.s. government's assistance to resolve problems because they usually view the problems as local or unique to the airports in question . these airlines prefer not to involve dot or the state department in problems they view as not involving a breach of obligations under a bilateral agreement . one airline explained that it generally attempts to work with local airport officials , the international air transport association ( iata ) , the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) , and other carriers to remove many of these impediments to doing business . this carrier believes that the bilateral process is not an appropriate forum for resolving many of the problems that are specific to all - cargo airlines' operations because the process is structured to address the needs of passenger services . like u.s. passenger / cargo airlines , many all - cargo airlines do not view the formal process for filing complaints about operating problems as a cost - effective way to resolve them . they consider the formal process of requesting the u.s. government's intervention to be too costly or time - consuming . this view is especially common among the small and mid - size airlines that have limited resources to devote to filing complaints under 49 u.s.c. , section 41310 , the statute under which airlines file formal complaints with dot about their problems in doing business abroad . of the 28 complaints filed under the statute since 1989 , only 6 were filed by all - cargo carriers .