( see app . iii for the list of stakeholders that we contacted. ) remedies had been constructed at 526 sites . since the superfund program began , 175 sites have been deleted from the npl . in addition , the program has conducted about 5,000 removal actions — short - term response actions to address emergency and other situations — at npl and other sites . our reviews have shown that the superfund cleanup process can be long and expensive . in march 1997 , we reported that the cleanup of nonfederal sites completing the cleanup process in 1996 had taken an average of 10.6 years after placement on the npl and that remedy selection at sites completing that phase of the cleanup process in 1996 had taken an average of 8.1 years after a site's listing . in september 1997 , we reported on a growing number of expensive superfund cleanups . we said that in 1996 epa had spent $10 million or more in that year alone on nine sites , up from two sites with the same level of annual spending in 1989 . spending on the nine sites , which represented less than 3 percent of the sites where epa spent money for remedial actions , totaled about $238 million , almost 57 percent of remedial action spending at all sites . beginning in 1993 , epa launched a series of administrative reforms to address a wide range of superfund concerns . these reforms have attempted to speed up site investigations , choose more cost - effective remedies , reduce litigation , and make other improvements . according to epa officials , the reforms have begun to work . epa officials believe that cleanup durations have recently been reduced to an average of 8 years . in addition , the national remedy review board epa created to review proposed site cleanup remedies , had saved $37 million as of november 1997 through its examination of 20 remedies . epa has also encouraged its regions to revisit remedy decisions when new information or technical advances indicate that the intended level of health or environmental protectiveness might be achieved at less cost . according to epa , these remedy updates had saved at least $725 million at over 120 sites as of november 1997 . epa also made it easier for parties with only minimal responsibility for site contamination to settle their liability with lower legal expenses . all 50 states have established their own clean up programs for hazardous waste sites , according to a 1998 survey by the environmental law institute . some of these state programs can handle highly contaminated sites , whose risks could qualify them for the superfund program , as well as less dangerous sites . some states initially patterned their cleanup programs after the superfund program , but over the years , in an effort to clean up more sites faster and less expensively , have developed their own approaches to cleaning up sites .