utilities . parks , recreational , and other facilities , including playground equipment , swimming pools , boat docks and piers , bath houses , tennis courts , picnic tables , golf courses , and some trees and landscape features . in addition , fema makes public assistance grants to cover a portion of the cost of administering grants for the above purposes . the amounts of grants for administrative expenses are determined by a formula that takes into account the total amount of public assistance grants provided to grantees following the disaster . as shown in table 1.1 , the amounts that fema has obligated for public assistance have increased substantially for the disasters and emergencies declared in recent years , exceeding $2 billion for fiscal year 1994 alone . in constant 1995 dollars , fema obligated over $6.5 billion in public assistance for 246 disasters and emergencies declared during fiscal years 1989 through 1994 , as compared with about $1 billion for 151 disasters and emergencies declared during the preceding 6 fiscal years . fema could not readily provide data showing the amounts obligated for the permanent restoration of each category of facilities ; however , fema provided data showing the projected cost for each category . the projected costs are fema's best estimates of what the total obligations will be when all activities associated with the disaster are completed . as shown in table 1.2 , for disasters that occurred during fiscal years 1989 through 1994 , the public assistance category with the highest projected cost was the permanent restoration of public buildings and equipment — over $2.6 billion , or about one - third of the total projected public assistance costs for these disasters . to help verify the scope of work needed for individual public assistance projects and the estimated costs , fema contracts with technical specialists such as architect / engineering firms . for disasters declared during fiscal years 1989 through 1994 , fema has obligated about $71.4 million for this purpose . under section 404 of the stafford act , fema may provide additional grants to mitigate the damage from future disasters , for example , to strengthen or retrofit undamaged public facilities in the disaster area . these grants can cover up to 75 percent of the cost of the mitigation effort . for the disasters declared during fiscal years 1989 through 1994 , fema has obligated about $275.3 million for this purpose . also , when a disaster is declared , fema may make “mission assignments” directing other federal agencies to perform work . mission assignments may be made for a number of purposes , including those related to restoring public services or facilities ; for example , fema may assign the u.s. army corps of engineers the mission of debris removal in a disaster area . according to fema , mission assignments are primarily for public assistance work . for disasters declared in fiscal years 1989 through 1994 , fema obligated about $1.07 billion for mission assignments . according to a 1995 senate report , for fiscal years 1990 through 1993 fema obligated nearly two - thirds of all mission assignment dollars to the corps of engineers .