iii. ) a rigorous maintenance program is in place . according to the coast guard aircraft repair and supply center ( arsc ) official responsible for maintaining the agency's aircraft , a rigorous maintenance program for aircraft , as well as periodic assessments of the condition of each aircraft , allow the aircraft to operate beyond original service life estimates . the coast guard uses a two - level maintenance system that includes maintenance performed at the air stations ( servicing , component replacement , and inspection for corrosion and fatigue cracks ) and more extensive maintenance performed periodically at the arsc , which can take several months to be completed . at the four air stations we visited , we asked 37 coast guard flight crew members what they thought about the condition and capability of their aircraft and their ability to carry out their missions . ( these flight crews also conduct maintenance on their own aircraft. ) overall , most crew members said that they were satisfied with the condition and performance of their aircraft but noted shortcomings in sensors and communication equipment that hampered their ability to fully carry out their missions . for example , coast guard crew members stated either that existing night vision capabilities are totally absent or that they are making due with equipment designed for other purposes . we focused our review on the following questions: to what extent does the current justification for the deepwater project accurately depict the coast guard's need to modernize or replace its ships and aircraft ? to what extent are projected costs for the deepwater project consistent with the coast guard's overall budget for its capital projects ? to answer the first question , we examined three main areas covered in the deepwater project's justification: the condition of current assets , projected capability needs , and projected demand for services . we analyzed the coast guard's documents depicting this need , such as the deepwater mission analysis report and the mission needs statement , and compared the information that these documents presented with other coast guard data , such as engineering studies on the condition of coast guard ships and aircraft , planned upgrades for extending the service life of ships and aircraft , and records of actual usage . in those instances where the coast guard had relied on contractors to develop data for the project's justification , we interviewed contractor officials and obtained information on the procedures and methodology they used . we interviewed coast guard and dot acquisition and planning officials in headquarters to understand the process used by the coast guard to justify the deepwater project .