iii. ) the majority of the inmate participants we identified in our match occurred as a result of the verification process . ( see table 2. ) by selecting only prisoners ( 1 ) whose dates of incarceration matched the dates that food stamp benefits were issued to their household and ( 2 ) who had been incarcerated at least a full month , we avoided some of the pitfalls that have been or could be encountered by states implementing matching programs . the state agency supervises operations in both states . in florida and texas , state agencies operate the program through district and regional offices , respectively . whatever the administering authority , local service centers work directly with clients to certify household eligibility and determine benefit amounts at the time of application and at least annually thereafter . to identify prisoner participation , we performed a computer match comparing 1995 food stamp rolls with inmate rolls . to ensure that our analyses resulted in valid matches , we ( 1 ) verified the prisoners' social security numbers through the social security administration's verification system , ( 2 ) used only those matches showing dates of incarceration that coincided with the dates that food stamp benefits were issued to the household , and ( 3 ) used only those matches showing that the prisoner had been incarcerated for at least a full month and that sufficient time had elapsed for the household to notify the state of the change and for the state to take action . the food stamp rolls covered three large states ( florida , new york , and texas ) and one large county ( los angeles , california ) . ( see app . the inmate rolls covered the state prison population in the four states and the jail population in large metropolitan areas of each state , that is , los angeles county , california ; dade county , florida ; new york city , new york ; and harris county , texas . our detailed methodology is discussed in appendix ii . during calendar year 1995 , about $3.5 million in food stamp benefits were issued on behalf of state prison and county jail inmates claimed as household members in the locations we examined . ( see table 1. ) of this total , nearly 9,500 state prison inmates included as household members accounted for an estimated $2.6 million in benefits . about 2,700 county jail inmates accounted for over $900,000 in benefits . the inmate participants that we identified in our match were members of households of varying sizes , some with multiple members and some with a single member — the prisoner was the household . prisoners are able to participate in the food stamp program because local welfare agencies seldom verify the composition of a household . instead , most agencies rely on food stamp applicants to provide accurate household information and to report subsequent changes , such as the incarceration of a household member . most agencies do not , for example , routinely compare lists of prison or jail inmates with lists of household members .