closed . doe completed an assessment of its readiness to proceed to the preliminary design . the team agreed with doe's decision to proceed . it is not evident that doe has reviewed the lessons learned from other projects and applied them to the tritium extraction facility project's conceptual design and plan . partially closed . the lessons learned from other projects have been identified and evaluated and are being incorporated into the project design and project implementation processes . closed . additional information has been added to the conceptual design report . the remote handling process is overly complex . closed . improvements have been made to the design for the remote handling process . a section devoted to the project's schedule should be added to the conceptual design report . open . the team's chairman no longer considers this a major comment . the process development program ( a program to develop facility processes by using prototypes and mock - ups ) should be accelerated . closed . while the program has not been accelerated , doe has recognized the risk to the project's cost and schedule and will attempt to mitigate the risk . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional information on the schedule was added to the conceptual design report ; however , the schedule does not include contingencies , which represents a high risk . there should be a section in the conceptual design report that discusses applicable design and construction codes and standards . references to applicable design and construction codes and standards have been added to the conceptual design report . any segment of the facility should be designed totally in - house or totally subcontracted . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we obtained the results of that review . at the time of our review , the project office had not formally responded to the formal design review team's comments . to obtain information on the process doe used to respond to the comments raised by the review teams , we reviewed the review teams' charters ; correspondence between the review teams , the project office , and doe ; and the teams' reports and related documents . we also discussed the processes with doe and project office officials and representatives from the review teams . we conducted our review from october 1997 through february 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards .