we disagree . crop losses for buyup coverage in 1995 were equal to or higher than crop loss experiences throughout the 1990s , except for 1993 . furthermore , we found that high crop losses did not significantly increase companies' loss - adjusting expenses — the delivery cost factor most likely to be affected by high crop losses . for example , for buyup insurance , while companies paid out $1.28 in loss claims for every dollar of premium received in 1995 and $0.58 in loss claims for every dollar of premium received in 1994 , their related loss adjusting expenses as a percent of premium for these 2 years were not substantially different . therefore , although losses were higher in 1995 than in 1994 , the companies' loss adjusting expenses for processing these claims did not increase commensurately . in addition , loss adjusting expenses are not a significant portion of total administrative expenses ( about 3.5 percent of premiums on average for the nine companies we reviewed ) . furthermore , since the 1980s , the crop insurance companies have received additional reimbursements in years of high crop losses . second , the standards we used to identify reasonable costs for delivering crop insurance were developed on the basis of a number of different widely recognized accounting , insurance , and acquisition standards . fcic agreed that the standards used were appropriate . we recognized all expenses reasonably associated with selling and servicing crop insurance . however , we continue to believe that the government should not be expected to reimburse companies for such expenses as those related to maximizing underwriting gains , acquiring other companies' business , payments to executives to refrain from joining or starting other companies , payments to parent companies with no measurable benefits to the program , profit - sharing bonuses , and payments to lobbyists . we believe that these expenses should not be included in determining an appropriate future reimbursement rate for administrative expenses . third , two factors that have emerged since the 1994-95 time period that we reviewed — higher premium rates and higher crop prices in 1996 and 1997 — should be considered in evaluating the appropriate , future reasonable reimbursement rate because these factors did increase companies' revenues without increasing expenses . furthermore , usda projects that crop prices will generally increase through 2005 . if crop prices decline , fcic could reevaluate the reimbursement rate . finally , we disagree that a lower reimbursement rate — in the range of 24 percent — would destabilize the industry . such a rate represents the companies' current expenses that are reasonably associated with the sale and service of crop insurance and as a result should not diminish service to the farmer nor destabilize the program . companies will still have the opportunity to realize underwriting profits . in 1994 and 1995 , for example , the companies realized underwriting profits of $103 million and $133 million , respectively . ( see apps . viii and ix for the industry's comments and our detailed response. ) in 1995 , farmers without crop insurance were required to purchase catastrophic risk protection insurance to participate in federal farm programs — a requirement that was rescinded in 1996 .