( see app . i for additional information on ams' inspection services and costs. ) most inspections do not include tests for adulteration . moreover , the tests for adulteration performed by these agencies and by private laboratories have limitations , and most are expensive . ams' inspections are not designed to detect adulteration , but rather to grade products in accordance with ams' standards . lot inspections , which look only at juice and not at a plant's operations , can allow illegal activities , such as adulteration , to occur in the plant without being observed by the inspector . what recent federal enforcement actions have been taken against juice adulterators , and what was the magnitude of the fraud ? what are the options for enhancing the detection of juice adulteration , including inspections for juice plants that sell their products to the federal school meal programs ? over the years , several methods for adulterating juice have been used . adulteration ranges in sophistication from simply diluting juice with water to adding beet sugar , the adulterant that is most difficult to detect . ams officials told us that the routine tests done to grade juice products , such as determinations of acid levels and solid contents , might identify some potential adulteration . however , these officials emphasized that such tests are not designed to identify potential adulteration . in a special agreement with the state of florida , ams also tests frozen concentrated juice coming into the state for economic adulteration , among other things . however , this juice accounts for only 15 percent of the juice processed in florida . fda's inspections of juice plants are likewise not specifically designed to detect the economic adulteration of juice . these inspections are instead done primarily to determine if a juice plant engages in good manufacturing practices . as a result , such inspections focus on sanitary conditions at the plant , as determined primarily by the inspector's visual observations.furthermore , fda does not inspect all juice plants each year . from 1992 to 1994 , fda inspected no more than 20 percent of the nation's over 500 juice plants in any one year . in fiscal year 1992 , fda ( and its contractors ) inspected 77 juice plants ; in fiscal year 1993 , 70 plants ; and in fiscal year 1994 , 102 plants . keith oleson , assistant director david moreno , project leader wayne marsh , staff member jon silverman , staff member kathy stone , staff member the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .