, a joint venture . over 1,700 acres of this property , which adjoins the north side of the headwaters property , will be retained by the government to act as a buffer for the old - growth forest . the remaining acreage will be part of the exchange with pacific lumber for its headwaters properties . he then reconciled the two sets of values . in the discounted cash flow method , the appraiser estimated the net annual income under each harvest premise — for example , 25 percent over 5 years — and calculated the present value of the total net income stream . to this , he added the present value of the remaining land and trees as if they were sold at the end of the harvest period . for each premise , the appraiser used a discount rate of 9 percent and used appreciation rates for timber values of 1 to 4 percent , depending on the type of tree . in the cost approach , the appraiser estimated that the immediate harvest value of the land and timber would be $590 million ; he then multiplied the four premise percentages — for example , 25 percent — to get the value of the timber harvested under each premise . because the timber on the property could not be harvested in 1 year , the appraiser discounted the values using a rate of 8 percent . for the cost approach , the appraiser used a 3.5-percent appreciation rate . the headwaters property appraisal established four values based on four separate harvest premises . these four values are displayed in table 1 . the elk river property appraisal covers the 9,468 acres of second - growth timber commonly referred to as the elk river timber company property , even though the owner of record is l.e.t. the appraiser responsible for the elk river property appraisal relied on a sales comparison approach and verified the value using a discounted cash flow approach . for both approaches , the appraiser estimated the total amount of timber available for harvest and the costs of logging the timber , which include the costs for transportation . using timber inventory data provided by an outside consultant , the appraiser estimated that the property contains about 207 mmbf of timber . the appraiser estimated that logging costs would be the same under each approach , about $132 per mbf . using the sales comparison approach , the appraiser gathered data on the price of logs delivered to mills and the sale price of standing timber . he calculated a price per thousand board feet for each type of timber — for example , redwood — and multiplied these prices by the amount of timber , according to type , that could immediately be logged . the appraiser estimated that about 109 mmbf of the timber on the property could be logged immediately . to this value , the appraiser added the present value for the remaining land and trees . the appraiser used a discounted cash flow analysis to verify the value established by the sales comparison approach .