this was done in march 1997 . the newly consolidated office of civil rights ( ocr ) made one of its top priorities the resolution of the department's large backlog of program and employment complaints . ocr defines backlog complaints as complaints that were active before november 1 , 1997 ; complaints filed with ocr on or after november 1 , 1997 , are considered “new” complaints . new program complaints are processed under procedures and time frames that were developed in conjunction with a recommendation in the civil rights action team's report . employment complaints — both new and backlog cases — are to be processed under the governmentwide regulations that govern equal employment opportunity complaints . these regulations require , among other things , that a federal agency complete an investigation of a complaint and issue an investigation report within 180 days from the date the complaint was formally filed . concerned about allegations of management weaknesses and of discrimination in the department , you asked us to ( 1 ) examine the timeliness of ocr's processing and closing of program and employment discrimination complaints and ( 2 ) identify the reasons for delays in the processes . the past few years have been a period of upheaval for civil rights at usda . during this period , an increasing number of usda employees have filed discrimination complaints . also , in december 1996 , a group of minority farmers demonstrated in front of the white house to protest what they viewed as systemic , long - standing discrimination in the department's agricultural lending programs . in october 1997 , minority farmers filed a class action lawsuit that charged usda with discrimination in lending and other departmental farm programs between 1983 and 1997 and failure to investigate discrimination complaints . in addition , recent legislation would enable past complainants either to bring suit or to obtain a departmental hearing on the record . this legislation waives the statute of limitations for suits alleging discrimination between 1981 and 1996 that were filed with the department before july 1 , 1997 . concerned about allegations of discrimination , the secretary of agriculture , in december 1996 , appointed the civil rights action team to review civil rights issues and develop recommendations to address institutional problems . the team held a dozen “listening sessions” with usda customers and employees throughout the country before issuing its report in february 1997 . the report made 92 recommendations to address four major problem areas: ( 1 ) the organizational structure of civil rights , ( 2 ) the lack of management commitment to civil rights , ( 3 ) program delivery and outreach , and ( 4 ) workforce diversity and employment practices . shortly after the report was issued , the secretary established a civil rights implementation team to implement the report's recommendations . several months later , in testimony before the house committee on agriculture , the secretary stated that his goal was to get usda out from under the past and have it emerge as the federal civil rights leader . regarding organizational issues , the action team's report noted that usda's civil rights program had been in a persistent state of chaos because of numerous changes since the 1980s .