( app . i lists these counties. ) appendix i provides details on our objectives , scope , and methodology . as arranged with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 15 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will make copies available to appropriate congressional committees ; the commissioner , ins ; meatpacking companies ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-5138 if you or your staff have any questions . ( 3 ) what are the housing conditions of plant workers and their families ? ( 4 ) is there evidence that meatpacking companies have hired illegal aliens ? to answer these questions , we analyzed information on nebraska's and iowa's counties that had at least 250 or more workers employed in meatpacking plants . for each question , the amount of reliable county - level data varied . also , the number of counties with large meatpacking workforces has increased since the 1980s . specifically , for population changes , we examined data from the 1980 and 1990 censuses for 16 counties . for changes in school enrollments , health care costs , and economic conditions , we analyzed data for 23 counties . for crime , sufficient data were available for reporting on 19 counties . we also interviewed and obtained information from various federal , state , county , and city officials as well as meatpacking company officials . it should be recognized that while large meatpacking plants are major employers in the counties for which we present data , many factors besides the activities associated with these plants may have affected changes in these counties , such as the opening and closing of other businesses and changes in the economy in general . the meatpacking industry employed about 123,000 production workers and had sales of about $51 billion nationwide in 1995 , according to data reported by the american meat institute . in 1996 , meatpacking plants in nebraska and iowa slaughtered about 23 percent of the cattle and 35 percent of the hogs slaughtered nationwide . about 36,000 workers were employed in meatpacking plants in nebraska and iowa in 1996 , according to data from the bureau of labor statistics . large meatpacking plants contribute significantly to the economies of the communities where they are located through , among other things , their large payrolls . these plants are large employers , employing 250 to 2,500 or more production workers . production workers in meatpacking plants earned an average of about $415 per week in 1996 , or about $9.82 per hour , according to the bureau of labor statistics . entry - level workers have been paid about $6.15 to $8.20 per hour in recent years , depending upon the company and the plant's location . the work in meatpacking plants is often hard and can be hazardous . the use of knives , hooks , and saws in hot and cold areas on wet floors presents the risk of cuts , lacerations , and slips ; and the work presents the risk of repetitive stress injuries .