( app . i describes each of these risk management tools in more detail. ) concerned about the level of knowledge farmers have about available federal and private - sector tools for managing risk and the adequacy of usda's initiatives to prepare farmers to use these tools , you requested that we examine usda's efforts to educate farmers about risk management . specifically , you asked us to ( 1 ) provide information on the extent of farmers' use of risk management tools and ( 2 ) identify educational programs and projects usda has directed or initiated to prepare farmers for managing risks and to determine the groups or individuals who have participated in or been served by these programs . includes arizona , colorado , idaho , montana , nevada , new mexico , utah , and wyoming . includes california , oregon , and washington . includes kentucky , north carolina , tennessee , virginia , and west virginia . includes alabama , florida , georgia , and south carolina . includes arkansas , louisiana , and mississippi . includes connecticut , delaware , maine , maryland , massachusetts , new hampshire , new jersey , new york , pennsylvania , rhode island , and vermont . includes oklahoma and texas . confidence interval ( dollars in millions ) agricultural sales ( dollars in millions ) 9,632 ( 2,845 ) $2,962.3 ( $1,145.3 ) includes kansas , nebraska , north dakota , and south dakota . includes illinois , indiana , iowa , missouri , and ohio . includes michigan , minnesota , and wisconsin . includes arizona , colorado , idaho , montana , nevada , new mexico , utah , and wyoming . includes california , oregon , and washington . includes kentucky , north carolina , tennessee , virginia , and west virginia . includes alabama , florida , georgia , and south carolina . includes arkansas , louisiana , and mississippi . includes connecticut , delaware , maine , maryland , massachusetts , new hampshire , new jersey , new york , pennsylvania , rhode island , and vermont . confidence interval calculations are not exact because of the small sample size or other characteristics of the sample results . includes oklahoma and texas . confidence interval ( range ) confidence interval ( range ) confidence interval ( range ) 42-84 ( 7 ) - 7141-73 ( 32 ) - 9067-87 ( 32 ) - 82includes kansas , nebraska , north dakota , and south dakota . includes illinois , indiana , iowa , missouri , and ohio . includes michigan , minnesota , and wisconsin . includes arizona , colorado , idaho , montana , nevada , new mexico , utah , and wyoming . includes california , oregon , and washington . includes kentucky , north carolina , tennessee , virginia , and west virginia . includes alabama , florida , georgia , and south carolina . includes arkansas , louisiana , and mississippi . includes connecticut , delaware , maine , maryland , massachusetts , new hampshire , new jersey , new york , pennsylvania , rhode island , and vermont . includes oklahoma and texas . cognizant rma regional service office ( s ) .