usgs has not estimated reclamation costs . in a september 1991 report , the department of the interior's office of inspector general estimated that it would cost about $11 billion to reclaim the “known universe” of all abandoned noncoal mine sites ( not just those on federally managed lands ) . this estimate was based upon the bureau of mines' estimate of the extent of damage rather than on the number and type of abandoned hard rock mine sites . the report did not include an estimate of the number of sites , nor did it classify the sites by the type of hazard they present . in most cases , the states reporting to the western governors' association estimated the cost of reclaiming sites . however , not all the states reported such estimates , and those that did so reported statewide estimates without regard to whether the lands were publicly or privately owned . the mineral policy center has projected the total cost of cleaning up all abandoned hard rock mines ( not just those on federal lands ) to be from $33 billion to $72 billion . this estimate was based on data contained in the western governors' association's report and on follow - up discussions with the participating states and with the environmental protection agency . we requested comments on a draft of this report from the secretary of the interior and the chief of the forest service or their designees . we met with and obtained comments from officials from the department of the interior's office of the solicitor , blm , national park service , fws , usgs , and office of policy analysis and with officials from the u.s. department of agriculture's forest service and office of general counsel . these officials generally agreed with the factual information presented in this report . officials from several of the agencies provided technical clarifications , which we have incorporated as appropriate . officials from the department of the interior asked that we recognize their concern that a comprehensive inventory could be mandated . according to these officials , such an inventory would be costly and take efforts away from remediation . in this regard , officials from interior's agencies noted that the interagency approach of targeting remediation throughout a watershed towards those water bodies impaired by drainage from the abandoned mines would be more cost - effective and worthwhile than a comprehensive inventory of individual mine sites on federal lands . fws has not categorized its sites any further . the forest service is classifying its sites according to the existing and potential environmental degradation , identifying sites according to whether they may degrade water quality or other natural resources or contain hazardous materials . according to a march 1993 report by the forest service , over 1,500 western mining sites with significant problems of acid drainage have been identified on the lands in the national forest system . a hazardous material specialist with the forest service said that approximately 10 percent of the abandoned mine sites on the lands managed by that agency have a high potential to be hazardous waste sites . the bureau of mines and usgs have both focused on environmental effects in classifying the sites .