( app . iv contains a more detailed discussion of our calculations and methodology. ) additional savings may not be significant after the first year that farmers are included in the high - risk program . most of the savings are realized in the first year , when many high - risk farmers choose to stop purchasing crop insurance rather than pay the higher rates . for those who remain , most of the rate increases occur in the first year ; the rate increases in succeeding years are similar to those for other farmers . for example , for farmers who remained in the program after being targeted in 1992 , the premiums paid averaged 67 percent more in 1992 than in 1991 and 7 percent more in 1993 than in 1992 . to ensure that the crop insurance program realizes the congressional requirement of receiving a projected $1 in premiums for each $1.10 in claims paid , usda needs reasonable estimates of farmers' normal production . this information will help ensure that farmers do not purchase insurance for production levels higher than they are likely to produce and , as a result , make claims for production losses that are not real . to achieve this objective , usda has recently changed the way it establishes farmers' production levels to more closely align them with actual production history . usda's action should reduce the government's outlays , although not as much as usda had anticipated . however , this change has a critical weakness . usda does not require that loss adjusters verify the accuracy of the production history supplied by the farmers and therefore lacks assurance that it is insuring production at the appropriate level . according to usda's blueprint , the level of production insured may be the single most important factor in determining the success or failure of the crop insurance program . the insured production level is key because it forms the basis for calculating insurance premiums and payments on claims . consequently , a production level that is too high compared with the productive potential of the farmer and the land will increase the frequency and amount of a farmer's claim . conversely , a production level that is too low will not effectively protect farmers from loss and , because the production level is regarded as insufficient , will discourage farmers from buying insurance . before crop year 1994 , farmers could base the level of production for which they purchased crop insurance on 10 years' actual production , or , for those years for which farmers did not report actual production , on a modified average production level for the county . usda concluded that the option of basing a production level on a modified county average was adversely affecting the crop insurance program's financial condition . this option benefited farmers whose production was below the modified county average . it enabled them to get a higher level of production coverage than their historic production levels would have warranted . therefore , some farmers may have paid lower premiums than they should have and received claims that exceeded what would have been warranted by their historic production levels .