i would be pleased to answer any questions . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . my statement discusses our findings in these areas . s. 981 represents a continuation of efforts that have been made by both the legislative and executive branches to improve the rulemaking process and , as a result , produce better regulations . during the past 20 years , congress has enacted a series of statutory requirements intended to , among other things , reduce paperwork , lessen regulatory burden on small entities , and curb mandates imposed on state , local , and tribal governments and the private sector . in the same vein , each of the last six presidents has issued executive orders or taken other actions intended to improve the regulatory process . executive order 12866 , issued in september 1993 , is the clinton administration's statement of policy on regulatory planning and review . the executive order makes the office of management and budget ( omb ) responsible for carrying out regulatory reviews and , to the extent permitted by law , for providing guidance to agencies . s. 981 addresses many of the same issues as executive order 12866 , including cost - benefit analysis , agency reviews of existing regulations , interagency coordination , and transparency in the regulatory review process . the bill goes beyond the order's requirements on these issues and adds some new elements to the rulemaking process . as i will discuss in more detail , our work indicates that some of the executive order's requirements have not always been met . enactment of s. 981 would help ensure that the underlying purposes of the order's requirements are more consistently achieved by omb and regulatory agencies and provide a sound basis for congressional oversight of regulatory management issues . the rulemaking record before publication of any proposed or final rule a document clearly identifying the changes made to the draft submitted to omb's office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) , including and separately identifying the changes made at the suggestion or recommendation of oira . s. 981 also requires agencies to provide for peer review of all required cost - benefit analyses and risk assessments . peer review is the critical evaluation of scientific technical work products by independent experts . the bill states that the peer review panels should be “broadly representative and balanced,” and that the results of the reviews should be made available to the public . we believe that important economic analyses should be peer reviewed . in response to questions raised at a march 1997 hearing on peer review at epa , we said that , given the uncertainties associated with predicting the future economic impacts of various regulatory alternatives , the rigorous , independent review of economic analyses should help enhance the products' — and the associated agency decisions' — quality , credibility , and acceptability . however , in our 1996 review of peer review at epa , whose own policies and procedures call for such reviews , we concluded that implementation of these policies and procedures had been uneven .