part 600 . doe has no formal definition of peer review , but practices peer review as merit review with peer evaluation — a formal , competent , and objective evaluation process using specified criteria and the review and advice of qualified peers . peers must be technically competent in the scientific or technical field under review and must be free from conflict of interest . peers may come from any source , including industry , academia , private and nongovernmental institutions , government agencies , and their associated laboratories . doe uses merit review with peer evaluation to guide research direction and to assess research progress . external research is peer - reviewed in conjunction with the preaward competitive selection process . this research is also reviewed as part of the award renewal process . reviews of laboratory research occur at both the laboratory and departmental oversight levels . in addition , laboratories , user facilities , and major research divisions have committees of outside experts that provide periodic peer reviews of research relevance and quality . research results are also extensively published in peer - reviewed journals . the methods for conducting reviews are tailored to each situation . the following provides examples of the different peer review practices among doe's programs . with few exceptions , merit review with peer evaluation guides doe research , including that by its research laboratories . for example , regulations governing the financial assistance program require peer review and competitive selection . the regulations specify that each grant proposal normally receive a minimum of three reviews per proposal by technically qualified experts in the proposed field , followed by a peer review panel . proposals are peer - reviewed for scientific excellence . the office of science & technology , in the environmental management program , project selection reviews , for new research and development activities , combine the judgments of technical peers and potential users of the results . in addition , research subcontracted by doe's national laboratories to outside researchers is governed by contract provisions , unless otherwise justified through formal documentation . these provisions require competitive selection processes , including merit review with peer evaluation . peer review is applied to the selection and approval of most laboratory field work proposals . field work proposals are the means by which the laboratories formally propose future work and seek authorization for expending research and development funds . in the office of science , all field work proposals are required to be peer - reviewed for quality by external , independent experts . each laboratory research program is reviewed annually . for example , the technology development program of the office of environmental management uses teams of subject matter specialists from technical , regulatory , business , and stakeholder perspectives . in addition , peer review is used to allocate available time and to select the experiments conducted at specialized research facilities located at doe's laboratories . such facilities include accelerators for the study of high - energy physics and the world's most powerful computers and lasers . at the laboratories , each director's discretionary research and development program and the laboratory field work proposals are reviewed .