compromise . the debt is satisfied when a borrower makes an immediate single lump - sum payment that is less than the amount owed . cancellation . the debt is written off without any payment made , and the borrower is released from further liability because fsa believes that the borrower has insufficient potential to make additional payments . charge - off . the debt is written off without any payment made , and fsa ends collection activity , but the borrower is not released from liability for the amount owed . table 2 summarizes the amount of debt written off during the fiscal year 1995-97 period through each of the four debt settlement options . as the table shows , a comparatively small number of borrowers who had a large amount of debt written off accounted for a substantial portion of the write - offs . in 1997 , for example , 182 borrowers , or about 9 percent of those whose debts were written off , had $500,000 or more forgiven ; these borrowers received about 48 percent of the total debt forgiveness . borrowers in a small number of states accounted for a disproportionate share of the write - offs . specifically , borrowers in the five states with the most write - offs each year received about 48 percent of the total write - offs during this 3-year period . appendix ii provides information on the five states with the most write - offs during each of these 3 fiscal years . three statutory provisions were enacted in the mid - 1990s that provide fsa with discretionary authority to contract for loan - servicing assistance . these provisions authorize , but do not require , contracting with ( 1 ) private attorneys to obtain legal assistance in resolving delinquent farm loan accounts , ( 2 ) private lenders to obtain assistance in servicing farm loan borrowers' accounts , and ( 3 ) private collection agencies to obtain assistance in collecting delinquent farm loans . fsa has made little use of these authorities: it has contracted with private attorneys in only two states ; it has not contracted with private lenders or with private collection agencies and is not actively considering doing so . the farmers home administration improvement act of 1994 ( p.l . 103-248 , may 11 , 1994 ) gave fsa discretionary authority to contract with private attorneys to assist in resolving delinquent farm loan accounts . the process for using the new contracting authority generally starts with a request for legal assistance from an fsa state office to fsa's farm credit programs at headquarters . farm credit programs then refers the request to usda's office of general counsel ( ogc ) , which after its review may refer the matter to the department of justice . justice , in consultation with fsa and usda's ogc , reviews the situation to see if ( 1 ) the farm loan cases can be handled by the u.s. attorney's office that has jurisdiction for the area , ( 2 ) the cases can be referred to a private attorney under contract with justice , or ( 3 ) fsa should use its authority to contract with a private attorney .