these concerns are not new . in the past , many advisory groups emphasized the need to clarify and redefine the laboratories' missions . although doe recently developed a strategic plan and processes intended to integrate the department's missions and programs in five major areas , questions remain about doe's overall capacity to lead the national laboratories into new mission areas . each national laboratory must have clearly defined , specific missions which support the over - arching missions of doe to ensure the best technical and management performance and the greatest value to the nation . ( app . ii contains the list of programs the laboratories identified. ) from these programs , we selected three for assessment . this approach allowed us to examine both the strengths as well as the weaknesses of the laboratories . when collecting information , we strove to identify and assess mission and management issues from the experience of the laboratory managers responsible for directing the programs we had selected . our work also focused on each laboratory's technology transfer activities because of the increased national emphasis on using the laboratories to enhance u.s. technological competitiveness . we collected information about the laboratories' missions and management from multiple sources with direct knowledge of these issues . at the laboratories , we interviewed managers who were responsible for the research programs we had chosen . we also held discussions with laboratory directors , senior officials responsible for technology transfer activities , and contractor representatives . at doe , we interviewed program managers — washington - based executives responsible for the research programs we had selected at the laboratories — and doe field office managers , who oversee the department's contractors at the laboratories . to validate and refine our findings , we conducted two focus groups . the first group , which met with our staff in chicago , consisted of one program manager from each of the nine laboratories . a second group , comprising program managers from doe headquarters , met with our staff in washington , d.c. to obtain independent views about the laboratories' missions and management , we interviewed experts and industry representatives who were not associated with the laboratories . in addition , the national academy of public administration assisted us in convening a panel of experts with backgrounds in ( 1 ) managing research in government and industry and ( 2 ) science and technology policy . table 1 lists the panelists and their relevant professional experience . we also reviewed information and analyses from the laboratories , doe , the congress , industry , and independent experts , as well as legislative proposals and testimony , doe documents , budget materials , and previous studies conducted by government and private organizations . in analyzing information , we compared and contrasted views about laboratory mission and management issues . we found considerable agreement among all types of respondents on both topics . to give the reader concrete illustrations of how mission and management issues were viewed , we have used quotations from sources we interviewed throughout this report . we obtained written comments on a draft of this report from doe . the agency's comments and our evaluation are presented in appendix iii and at the end of chapter 5 .