doe has done little to pursue this goal . it has performed only a preliminary evaluation of possible sites . doe has not developed a detailed contingency plan , selected a site , or established a time frame by which a plan should be completed . according to doe officials , they will not pursue contingency planning for large - scale manufacturing until fiscal year 2000 or later . the purpose for the contingency plan was to lay out a framework by which doe could establish a production capacity of 150 to 500 pits per year within a 5-year time frame . such a capacity would be necessary if a systemwide problem were identified with pits in the stockpile . this issue may become more important in the future , as existing nuclear weapons and their pits are retained in the stockpile beyond their originally planned lifetime . research is being conducted on the specific effects of aging on plutonium in pits . a doe study found that los alamos is not an option for large - scale pit manufacturing because of space limitations that exist at pf - 4 . as a result , large - scale operations would most likely be established at some other doe nuclear site ( s ) where space is adequate and where some of the necessary nuclear infrastructure exists . doe has not specified a date by which the plan will be completed , and , according to doe officials , the contingency plan has not been a high priority within doe for fiscal years 1998-99 . according to doe officials , they may fund approximately $100,000 for a study of manufacturing and assembly processes for large - scale manufacturing in fiscal year 1999 . in addition , according to doe officials , doe has not pursued contingency planning for large - scale manufacturing more aggressively because the department would like more work to be done at pf - 4 prior to initiating this effort . in this regard , the officials stated that the development of a contingency plan requires more complete knowledge of the processes , tooling , and technical skills still being put in place at los alamos . this knowledge will serve as a template for large - scale manufacturing . doe believes that this knowledge should be well defined by fiscal year 2000 . this estimate includes funds for numerous mission elements needed to achieve doe's goals . this estimate does not include over $490 million in costs for other activities that are not directly attributable to pit production but are needed to support a wide variety of activities , including the pit - manufacturing mission . some key controls related to the mission are either in the formative stages of development or do not cover the mission in its entirety . doe provided us with data reflecting the total estimated costs of its new plans and schedules . these data were developed for the first time during our audit . doe emphasized that these costs should be treated as draft estimates instead of approved numbers . on the basis of this information , the costs for establishing and operating the pit - manufacturing mission were estimated to total over $1.1 billion from fiscal year 1996 through fiscal 2007 .