( app . ii provides detailed information on loans approved in fiscal years 1990 through 1996 that had funding advances , and app . the state is repaying the loan state is foreclosing on for - profit business . as requested , we reviewed ( 1 ) the extent to which communities and states are using the loan fund ; ( 2 ) factors affecting communities' and states' willingness to use the program ; ( 3 ) the types of projects being financed with loan proceeds ; and ( 4 ) the department of housing and urban development 's ( hud ) procedures for overseeing the program . to obtain information on the loan fund , we reviewed the program's history , regulations , policies , and procedures . we also reviewed hud's annual reports to the congress for community development programs for 1994 and 1996 . we interviewed the director , office of block grant assistance ; the director , financial management division ( fmd ) ( the loan fund program office ) ; fmd representatives ; hud community planning and development officials in hud field offices in atlanta , georgia ; columbia , south carolina ; and portland , oregon . we also interviewed community development officials for the states of georgia and south carolina , and the cities of atlanta , georgia , and columbia , south carolina . we reviewed inspector general reports issued as of january 7 , 1997 . to determine the extent to which communities and states use the program , we obtained and analyzed fmd's database of hud's loan fund . we identified the manner in which the data were collected and summarized . we reviewed annual reports to the congress for community development programs for 1994 and 1996 . we interviewed the director , financial management division , and community planning and development officials at hud's field offices in atlanta , georgia , and columbia , south carolina . to identify the factors affecting communities' willingness to use the program , we interviewed officials of associations that represent communities eligible for the program , including the council of state community development agencies , the national congress for community economic development , the national council for urban economic development , the u.s. conference of mayors , the national community development association , and the national association of state development agencies . we discussed this issue with the director of hud's financial management division ; and hud community planning and development officials at two hud field offices . in addition , we interviewed state community development officials in georgia and south carolina , and city development officials in atlanta and columbia . we also reviewed documentation obtained during these interviews . to identify the types of projects financed with loan proceeds , we obtained and analyzed fmd's database of hud's loan fund . we developed two data collection instruments to obtain additional information about loan commitments . with the first , we recorded data from loan files on the activities communities and states financed with loan proceeds . with the second , we conducted a telephone survey with hud community planning and development officials at hud field offices responsible for monitoring loan commitments in our sample .