none . the plan , however , acknowledges that air traffic control modernization is a management issue that needs to be addressed . furthermore , the plan states that dot has formulated activities to address this issue . the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) $41 billion air traffic control modernization program has experienced cost overruns , delays , and performance shortfalls . the plan also identifies the coast guard's acquisition project as a management issue and describes activities to address it . the coast guard needs to more thoroughly address the justification and affordability of its $9.8 billion project to replace / modernize its ships and aircraft . ( dot's oig also identified air traffic control modernization as a top priority management issue. ) important challenges remain in resolving faa's year 2000 risks . ( the oig also identified this area as a management issue. ) none . however , the plan's corporate management strategies include an objective to complete all year 2000 remediation or contingency plans so that there are no critical system disruptions . in addition , the plan states that the year 2000 issue is a management challenge that needs to be addressed and identifies activities and milestones for addressing it . faa and the nation's airports face funding uncertainties . dot and the congress face a challenge in reaching agreement on the amount and source of long - term financing for faa and airports . ( the oig also identified this area as a management issue. ) none . however , the plan identifies financing for faa's activities as a major issue that the department , the congress , and the aviation community need to address . the plan also lists activities that faa is undertaking to develop the information needed to make financing decisions . ( continued ) aviation safety and security programs need strengthening . the plan includes performance goals to shortcomings in aviation safety programs include the need for faa to improve its oversight of the aviation industry , record complete information on inspections and enforcement actions , provide consistent information and adequate training for users of weather information , and resolve data protection issues to enhance the proactive use of recorded flight data to prevent accidents . reduce the fatal aviation accident rate for commercial air carriers and general aviation , reduce the number of runway incursions , reduce the rate of operational errors and deviations , faa has encountered delays in implementing security initiatives at airports . completing the initiatives will require additional funding and sustained commitment from faa and the aviation industry . increase the detection rate for explosive devices and weapons that may be brought aboard aircraft , and faa's computer security of its air traffic control systems is weak . get threat information to those who need to act within 24 hours . ( the oig also identified aviation safety and transportation security as management issues. )