issue permits to municipal and industrial dischargers . epa issues guidance on water quality criteria for specific pollutants that the states may use in developing numeric criteria for their water quality standards . states may also use other data to develop their numeric criteria as long as these criteria are scientifically defensible . approve states' water quality standards . oversee states' npdes programs , including reviewing state - issued npdes permits for compliance with the appropriate standards . issue permits for states that do not have authorized npdes programs . adopt water quality standards , including designated uses and numeric criteria for specific pollutants . the states' water quality standards — and any policies that affect the implementation of these standards — are subject to epa's approval . in determining whether water - quality - based controls are warranted , the states' and epa's permitting authorities ( 1 ) analyze a facility's wastewater to identify the type and amount of pollutants being discharged and ( 2 ) determine whether these levels of pollutants will cause , have a “reasonable potential” to cause , or will contribute to causing the facility's discharge to exceed the state's water quality criteria . this assessment has one of three possible effects on a facility's permit: it may result in ( 1 ) a discharge limit , if the amount of pollutants being discharged violates , is likely to violate , or will contribute to violating the criteria that protect the receiving waters ; ( 2 ) a requirement for monitoring to gather additional data in order to determine whether a limit is warranted ; or ( 3 ) neither a limit nor a monitoring requirement , if the amount of pollutants being discharged will not violate , is unlikely to violate , or will not contribute to violating the criteria that protect the receiving waters . for each of the five toxic metal pollutants included in our analysis , figure ii.1 shows the number of permits that contained discharge limits , the number that contained monitoring requirements , and the number that contained neither type of control . municipal wastewater treatment facilities receive wastewater from several sources , including industry , commercial businesses , and households . figure 1 shows the results of our analysis . as figure 1 indicates , differences in the numeric limits for the same pollutant can be significant — in the case of mercury , about 775 times greater at one facility than at another facility of similar capacity . we discuss the causes of the differences in discharge limits later in this report . variations in the discharge limits , or in the standards and procedures used to derive these limits , have been a source of concern , particularly when neighboring jurisdictions share water bodies and the differences are readily apparent to the permitting authorities and discharging facilities , as the following examples illustrate: in 1995 , an industrial facility in pennsylvania challenged a discharge limit for arsenic because pennsylvania's numeric criterion was 2,500 times more stringent than that used by the neighboring state of new york , into which the discharge flowed . among other things , the discharger argued that having to comply with the more stringent criterion created an economic disadvantage for the company .