faa agreed with the recommendations . ( see fig . how could faa offices , already facing a diverse and extensive mix of responsibilities , do a better job of inspecting repair stations without adversely affecting other operations ? to determine if there were workable answers to that question , we turned to the field offices themselves . faa field offices are given some flexibility by faa headquarters in deciding how to accomplish their surveillance programs . we looked to see if some of these offices had developed alternative approaches that might hold promise for other locations . we identified several offices that had adopted approaches that might prove useful on a broader scale . what steps has faa taken to improve the oversight of repair stations ? faa headquarters is also examining a revised approach to surveillance that could help improve the inspection process . some of the faa field offices we reviewed , departing from the standard approach to assigning inspectors' responsibilities , have developed new approaches on their own to place greater emphasis on repair stations . typically , inspectors working in a field office are separated into two disciplines: general aviation and air carrier . general aviation inspectors are assigned to specific repair stations and also inspect operators covered by part 135 of the federal aviation regulations — that is , air taxi operators . in addition , they inspect other aspects of the industry such as agricultural aircraft operators , technical schools for pilots and mechanics , and helicopter operators . air carrier inspectors are responsible for operations covered by part 121 of the federal aviation regulations — that is , for domestic air carriers . they are assigned specific carriers to inspect , and may , in that context , inspect the carriers' in - house repair stations or those the carriers use , assessing whether repairs being made conform with the carriers' faa - approved maintenance manuals . two faa offices we visited have found this structure does not recognize the importance of overseeing repair stations and are pursuing other approaches that place a higher priority on it . our analysis was based in part on agencywide data faa provided and in part on a detailed review of a cross - section of airlines , repair stations , faa offices , and faa inspectors . in general , we did the following: we reviewed the use of repair stations by eight air carriers , chosen because , like the industry as a whole , they varied greatly in the extent to which they used repair stations . the number of aircraft operated by these carriers ranged from 3 to 659 . we reviewed operations at 10 repair stations , chosen because they represented a wide variety of locations ( both domestic and foreign ) , types of repair activities , and size of operations . the repair stations ranged from a wheel and brake specialist with about 20 employees to facilities conducting many types of maintenance and employing more than 3,000 workers . we examined oversight activities and discussed the oversight of repair stations at faa headquarters , 4 of faa's 9 regional offices , 8 of faa's 86 flight standards district offices , and 6 of faa's 7 offices with international responsibilities .