ii . to gain perspectives on whether , legally , american international cargo ( aic ) can continue to provide turnaround service , we obtained detailed legal positions from aic , aloha airlines , and hawaiian airlines . in washington , d.c. , we conducted personal and / or telephone interviews with attorneys for aic , aloha , and the state of hawaii . also in washington , we met with the federal aviation administration ( faa ) attorney responsible for drafting the agency's initial and revised interpretations of turnaround service . the attorney provided us with the agency's current position on whether aic has the legal right to operate interisland service after september 30 , 1998 , and submitted documentation indicating how faa's interpretation has evolved over time . to gain a full understanding of the key factors affecting the transport of air cargo throughout hawaii , we solicited information pertaining both to the rates charged and the services provided . we attempted to obtain data on rates charged for interisland service during calendar years 1994 , 1995 , 1996 , and 1997 ( through october ) . obtaining a substantial amount of empirical data from this 4-year period would have permitted us to conduct a complete economic analysis and to draw meaningful conclusions regarding the effect that aic's november 1995 entry may have had on the rates charged by all airlines operating in the interisland markets . however , we were unable to obtain sufficient rate data to conduct such an analysis and to draw such conclusions . we used two methods to gather information regarding the potential effect of aic's entry on interisland rates . first , we sought data from aic , aloha , and hawaiian , which are the three airlines carrying significant amounts of cargo throughout the state of hawaii . although aic provided us with the basic rates that it charged its 20 largest customers during 1996 , these data alone could not provide us with the historical perspective necessary to draw meaningful conclusions . for a proper historical analysis of the rates charged prior to aic's entry as well as since its entry , we would have needed to obtain similar data from other airlines and from these airlines' customers . although aloha provided us with cargo yields per pound since 1993 and with a list of its key customers , neither aloha nor hawaiian was able to share historical , customer - specific rate information . second , in a mailed survey , we solicited information from 37 of aic's , aloha's , and hawaiian's interisland customers . these customers included small - package delivery firms , freight forwarders , and agricultural producers . thirty customers declined to provide us with the level of detail that we needed , despite our pledge of confidentiality . customers cited concerns ranging from confidentiality clauses with airlines and the time - consuming nature of data searches to the absence of historical records as reasons for failing to provide the information . taken together , the level of detail that we obtained was not sufficient to allow for meaningful analysis of interisland air cargo rates .