vi ) . while agreeing that differences in the estimates are due , in part , to differences in the methodologies , we continue to question certain aspects of ernst & young's approach , including ( 1 ) the assumption that working systems and components will be replaced if their estimated useful lives have expired and ( 2 ) the inclusion in the capital needs estimates of the cost of work that is under way but not yet completed . the fact that ernst & young's estimates for 7 of the 10 case study properties that gao reviewed were based on inspections of fewer than 10 percent of each property's units also adds to the uncertainty of the estimates . will the recently enacted portfolio reengineering demonstration program cover the full range of options and outcomes ? an issue with short - and long - term cost implications is whether hud should continue to provide fha insurance for the restructured loans and , if so , under what terms and conditions . if hud were to discontinue the insurance when restructuring the loans , as it originally planned , it would likely incur higher debt restructuring costs because lenders would set the terms of the new loans ( eg , interest rates ) to reflect the risk of default that they would now assume . the primary benefits of discontinuing fha insurance are that ( 1 ) the government's dual role as mortgage insurer and rental subsidy provider would end , eliminating the management conflicts associated with this dual role , and ( 2 ) the risk of default borne by the government would end as the loans were restructured . if fha insurance were continued , another issue is whether it would need to be provided for the whole portfolio or could be used selectively . the government could , for example , insure loans only when owners could not obtain reasonable financing without insurance . also , if fha insurance were continued , the terms and conditions under which it is provided would affect the government's future costs . some lenders have indicated that short - term ( or “bridge” ) financing insured by fha might be needed while the properties make the transition to market conditions , after which time conventional financing at reasonable terms would be available . under such an arrangement , the government could insure loans for 3 to 5 years , instead of bearing the risk of default , as it now does , for the life of the loans — generally 40 years . finally , legislation could require a portion of the risk of default , now borne entirely by the government , to be assumed by state housing finance agencies or private - sector parties . one of the key issues to be decided in addressing the problems of the insured section 8 portfolio is whether to continue project - based subsidies , convert the portfolio to tenant - based assistance , or combine the two types of assistance . on the one hand , using tenant - based assistance can make projects more subject to the forces of the real estate market , potentially helping to control housing costs , foster housing quality , and promote residents' choice .