( app . i provides information on all nuclear technical assistance projects that iaea provided for cuba , by program area , from 1980 through 1996 . most of this assistance was provided in the areas of general atomic energy development and in the application of isotopes and radiation in agriculture ) . while the costs of administration and related support for iaea's technical cooperation program are funded through iaea's regular budget , most of the funding for iaea's nuclear technical assistance projects comes from voluntary contributions made by the member states to iaea's technical cooperation fund . the agency had spent almost three - fourths of the approximately $396,000 approved for the project , as of january 1997 . of this amount , spain has agreed to provide about $159,000 in extrabudgetary funds . according to iaea's information on the technical cooperation program for 1995 to 1996 , this project is designed to develop proper safety and emergency systems and to preserve the plant's emergency work and infrastructure in order to facilitate the resumption of the nuclear power plant's activities . seven reports were prepared by iaea experts under this project that discuss the power plant's ability to cope with a nuclear accident . our requests to review or to be provided with copies of these reports were denied by iaea because information obtained by the agency under a technical cooperation project is regarded as belonging to the country receiving the project and cannot be divulged by iaea without the formal consent of the country's government . at the time of our review , the government of cuba had not given iaea permission to release these reports . since 1995 , iaea has assisted cuba in designing and implementing a training program for personnel involved in the operational safety and maintenance of all nuclear installations , including the reactors , in cuba . iaea has spent about $31,000 of the about $74,000 approved for the project . furthermore , according to iaea's information on the technical cooperation program for 1995 to 1996 , this project will develop and implement an adequate training program that will improve operational safety at all nuclear installations in cuba and will promote a safety culture . for the 1997 to 1998 technical cooperation program , iaea has approved two new projects to assist in licensing the reactors and establishing a quality assurance program for them . funding of about $210,000 has been approved for these two projects . according to iaea's information on the technical cooperation program for 1997 to 1998 , the objective of the licensing project is to strengthen the ability of cuba's nuclear regulatory body to carry out the process of licensing the reactors . according to iaea's information , the quality assurance project will assist the nuclear power plant in developing an effective program that will improve safety and lower construction costs . in our september 1992 report and in our august 1995 testimony on the nuclear power reactors in cuba , we reported that the united states preferred that the reactors not be completed and discouraged other countries from providing assistance , except for safety purposes , to cuba's nuclear power program .