additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we incorporated their suggested changes as appropriate . overall , these officials agreed with the information presented and indicated that the material was an accurate presentation of the issues discussed . to ensure the accuracy of the information about the states' programs , we provided the relevant portions of a draft of this report to forest management staff in oregon and washington . we met with these officials , including oregon's principal forester and the natural resource program specialist in washington's department of natural resources , to discuss their comments . overall , these officials agreed with the information presented and indicated that the material was an accurate presentation of the issues discussed . to determine the differences among the federal and state timber programs as well as to determine the effects of these differences on the agencies' processes , we interviewed officials of the timber management staff at the forest service's pacific northwest region and washington , d.c. , offices ; timber management staff at the bureau of land management's oregon state office ; and forest management staff at the oregon department of forestry and the washington department of natural resources . we also reviewed documentation provided by them , including the appropriate legislation and regulations , written procedures , and standard timber sale contracts . although you were primarily interested in the state of washington's timber sale program , as later agreed with your office , we expanded the scope to include the state of oregon . this addition enabled us to review two states' timber sale programs yet keep within one forest service region . in addition , by expanding the scope to include oregon , we included blm's timber sale program in western oregon , which accounts for almost all of blm's timber sales . because we reviewed timber programs in only two states and one forest service region , the results of this work cannot be projected to the forest service or blm as a whole . our review was performed from june 1995 through april 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the secretaries of agriculture and the interior and to officials at the washington department of natural resources and the oregon department of forestry . we will make copies available to other interested parties on request . this work was performed under the direction of james k. meissner , associate director for timber , who may be reached on ( 206 ) 287-4810 if you or your staff have any questions about this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix i . carole j. blackwell araceli c. contreras linda l. harmon john p. murphy , jr . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .