we disagree . we believe our report characterizes the situation as it currently exists , that is , the disagreement remains open because the postal service opposes the recommendation . in its comments on a draft of this report ( see app . vi ) , the postal service expressed its continued opposition to recommendation 3.4 , which would grant customs the authority to search outbound international mail , and presented a number of concerns it has about the implementation of this recommendation . we recognize that the department of the treasury and the postal service have opposing views on the recommendation . our report does not take a position on these views but acknowledges that disagreement continues to exist . regardless of the positions taken by either agency , it is our obligation to inform the congress on issues that could affect its deliberations involving legislative matters that come before it . where appropriate , we have clarified our report on the basis of the department of the treasury's and the postal service's comments . ( 2 ) what progress has faa made in implementing three of the commission's aviation security recommendations that were scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 1997 and have all implementation issues been resolved ? ( 3 ) what progress has faa made in implementing five recommendations that were both recommended by the commission and mandated by the congress in 1996 , and what major issues need to be addressed before they can be fully implemented ? in response to concerns about the crash of twa flight 800 , the white house commission on aviation safety and security was established in july 1996 to look , first , at the changing security threat and how the united states can address it and then to examine safety and air traffic control issues in the aviation industry and how the government should address them . in september 1996 , the commission issued its initial report , which contained 20 recommendations to enhance the security of air travel . the federal aviation reauthorization act of 1996 , enacted in october 1996 , mandated some actions similar to the commission's recommendations . in february 1997 , the commission issued its final report , which contained a total of 57 recommendations that focused on improving aviation safety , making air traffic control safer and more efficient , improving security for travelers , and responding to aviation disasters . because our report deals exclusively with aviation security , it discusses only the 31 recommendations for improving aviation security contained in the commission's report and related legislative mandates authorized under the reauthorization act . ( see app . i for lists of the aviation security recommendations in the commission's final report and the aviation security mandates in the 1996 reauthorization act. ) as agreed with your office , we selected 8 of the 31 aviation security recommendations for detailed review — 3 of which were scheduled for completion in fiscal year 1997 and 5 of which are similar to mandates in the reauthorization act . faa is responsible for implementing 21 of the 31 aviation security recommendations in the commission's report . eight other federal agencies have the lead role for 1 or more of the remaining 10 recommendations .