( app . i provides descriptive information on these county offices. ) the 16 county executive directors told us that while some aspects of their offices' work have decreased since the passage of the 1996 act , their offices have also taken on new responsibilities . these additions , coupled with reductions in the staff formerly dedicated to administering commodity - related programs , have resulted in increasing the per person volume of work for the remaining staff . the 1994 act was the latest such effort . under the 1994 act , fsa was created by merging the staffs of the former ascs and part of the former farmers home administration . many of the newly formed fsa offices continue to be managed by a county executive director hired by a committee of locally elected farmers . the former ascs' staff was reduced from 13,432 in 1995 to 11,729 in 1997 , while about 2,200 former farmers home administration employees were assigned to fsa's county offices to help administer agricultural credit programs . the 1996 act significantly changed usda's administrative requirements for the commodity programs . from the 1930s through 1996 , usda provided annual payments — more recently called deficiency payments — to participating farmers under federal commodity programs . these payments were based on annual calculations involving historical acreage devoted to agricultural production , market prices for crops , and support prices set by the congress and the secretary of agriculture . participation in the commodity programs was limited to farmers who agreed annually to limit production in order to receive deficiency payments . this annual requirement no longer exists . under the new program , any one whose farm had a recorded planting history for wheat , feed grains , cotton , and rice in any single year from 1991 to 1995 could sign a production flexibility contract . those who signed these contracts in 1996 are generally eligible to receive annual payments through 2002 , regardless of the crop planted . although signing up for the program was to be a one - time event , changes in farming operations may require participants to modify their contracts . for example , usda's annual payments to farms that are leased are normally shared between the farmer and the landowner . because many leases are for only 1 year , these contracts will need to be revised annually to reflect current lease agreements . in addition , land comes out of the conservation reserve program annually , and this land can be signed up in the new program . in carrying out their program management responsibilities , county office staff perform a variety of tasks , including informing farmers of available programs and their requirements ; signing up producers to participate in the programs ; and maintaining basic information on program participants in their county , including the names and addresses of producers , the tracts they farm , the programs they participate in , and the payments they receive . while the 1996 act has reduced the need for some basic crop information , other information is still needed to ensure compliance with the requirements of related farm programs and to make certain that annual payment limitations to any single individual are not exceeded .