a catalyst to spark action . what are the costs and consequences of not doing the research ? the boeing company defense & space group's rdt&e facility capacity ( and any consolidation or streamlining ) had to conform to the boeing company's strategic business plan . the defence research agency began operating on a “trading fund” basis and aligned its missions along functional lines that were linked directly to the needs of its customer , the ministry of defence . in both organizations , when the plans required a particular capability , the executive responsible for the laboratories had to choose either to maintain the applicable research and development or to contract for it ( if the capability was reasonably available by outside contract ) . the boeing company defense & space group and the defence research agency documented their decisions to ensure that laboratory missions and functions were linked directly to the missions and functions of the greater organization . before determining whether their capabilities and functions supported their parent organizations' missions , the boeing company defense & space group and the defence research agency had to complete an inventory of all their rdt&e facilities , without exception , to determine what to cut . for example , although its high technology center was only 3 years old and cost $40 million to build , it was included in the inventory and dismantled because it failed to support the company's strategic business plan . can someone else do the research ? according to a boeing company defense & space group official , if the company had exempted certain facilities from its inventory , new ones like the center would likely not have been cut . because of political sensitivities , the defence research agency restructured its rdt&e infrastructure in two phases . the r&d laboratories were restructured first , then the t&e centers . the r&d laboratories were easier to restructure because they were all in england , and so only one constituent country was involved . the t&e centers , on the other hand , were located in england , scotland , and wales . the agency thus had to face three separate legislative bodies in two constituent countries ( england and scotland ) and one principality ( wales ) with its politically sensitive restructuring decisions . however , the successful restructuring of the laboratories eased the way for the restructuring of the t&e centers . the boeing company defense & space group and the defence research agency discovered that their financial management systems could not capture or evaluate either the total costs of operating their laboratories or the facility utilization rates . because accurate , reliable , and comparable data were critical to success in restructuring their rdt&e facilities , both organizations developed standardized data collection instruments to capture necessary details about their infrastructure . these details included each laboratory's geographic location , original and current purpose , present and future projects , unique capabilities , product areas , equipment values , utilization rates , maintenance costs , personnel costs and capabilities , anticipated capability requirements , and potential consolidation / closing requirements .