most controllers hired during that period have remained with faa . according to faa officials , most of the decrease in the size of the controller workforce was due to the congressionally directed initiative to contract out the functions of lower - level control towers to private companies , instead of staffing them with faa employees . as part of a larger presidential effort to reduce the number of federal employees , in 1994 faa also offered a retirement incentive , called a buyout , to staff , including those controllers who worked at the towers whose functions were contracted out . in fiscal year 1995 , faa's end - of - year controller workforce dropped below the level specified by the staffing standards . although the actual controller workforce differed from the staffing standards by as much as 400 in some years , nationwide staffing levels were well within the standards' 10-percent tolerance level . this report does not evaluate faa's staffing standards . we have previously reported on faa's staffing standards , and faa has taken action to address our prior recommendations . in addition , the standards process is currently undergoing a congressionally requested review by an expert panel convened by the national academy of sciences . the study was requested to determine if a comprehensive methodology could be developed to provide more accurate estimates of the required number of controllers at each atc facility , and its findings are expected to be published in the spring of 1997 . after the controller workforce dropped below the levels specified by the standards in 1995 , faa initiated plans to increase hiring . faa currently plans to increase both hiring and the overall size of the controller workforce over the next 4 years . in fiscal year 1997 , faa requested and received funds to hire 500 new controllers — 250 to replace controllers expected to leave the workforce that year and 250 to meet projected future needs . faa's fiscal year 1998 request includes funds for 800 new controllers — 300 replacements and 500 new positions . table 2.2 provides faa's estimates of controller hiring , attrition , and the total workforce through fiscal year 2002 . as the table shows , estimated attrition is expected to increase from 280 controllers in fiscal year 1997 to 550 controllers in fiscal year 2002 . in march 1996 , the chairman and ranking member of the subcommittee on transportation , house committee on appropriations , and ranking member of the house committee on transportation and infrastructure , asked us to examine faa's efforts for addressing future and existing controller staffing needs . specifically , we were asked to ( 1 ) identify the key variables faa uses to project future controller staffing needs and evaluate their reasonableness , ( 2 ) determine whether faa has identified a sufficient number of controller candidates to satisfy its short - and long - term controller staffing needs and evaluate faa's plans to train new controllers , and ( 3 ) identify impediments that hinder faa from staffing atc facilities at specified levels .