iv. ) after 36 years of using chemical and mechanical processes to produce slightly enriched uranium from ore , doe's fernald site is faced with a variety of environmental problems . as with other sites in doe's nuclear weapons complex , an emphasis on production versus safety has produced a legacy of contaminated radioactive and hazardous wastes at storage sites , in buildings that are deteriorating , or in seepage to underground water supplies . also , as with other doe sites , contract management has been an ongoing problem . we found that the fernald area office did not require the contractor to prepare a formal corrective action plan and has not performed a follow - up review to ensure that the recommendations from the 1994 assessment were acted upon . contractor officials stated that most of the recommendations have been addressed through their continuous improvement program . however , because there was no formal corrective action plan , it is difficult to assess directly exactly what was done or how effective the actions were in resolving the problems cited . for example , the office of field management recommended that the fernald area office conduct comprehensive assessments of the contractor's accounting system and compliance with applicable procedures . while the fernald area office has ascertained that the contractor has written procedures governing key components of the project control system , such as opening and closing control accounts and charge numbers , it has not assessed the logic or implementation of those procedures . the chief financial officer's review reiterated this recommendation in march 1996 . however , the fernald area office has not performed the assessments and does not plan to do so until fiscal year 1998 at the earliest . thus , the review will occur considerably after the date on which doe will have to decide whether to offer fluor daniel fernald's contract for competition or renew it . furthermore , one recommendation was to follow the baseline change control procedure that calls for the prompt updating of the baseline when fixed - price subcontracts are negotiated . the ohio field office's office of the chief financial officer has been conducting an audit of how well the contractor has followed that written procedure in general and has issued a report on one instance in which it was not followed . in that case , the contractor entered into a subcontract to dismantle plant 7 at a cost of about $5 million less than the estimated amount included in the baseline . subsequently , the contractor did not process a proposal to change the baseline . as a result , the contractor's award fee for the period was based on the higher amount . the contractor later agreed to pay back $135,000 of the fee received in that period . doe prepared a plan in early 1996 , on the basis of future budget projections , for cleaning up the fernald site in 10 years ( ending in fiscal year 2005 ) and at a cost of about $2.387 billion . subsequently , because of reduced budget projections , doe prepared and approved a replan that concluded that the fernald cleanup will take 13 years and cost about $2.374 billion ( or about $13 million less ) .