nonetheless , drawbacks exist . for example , performing integrated inspections and promoting pollution prevention requires inspectors to have additional expertise . each of the three states has found it difficult to fund its multimedia activities through epa's grants for medium - specific programs . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . initial testing has begun at one facility . according to new york officials , the state's facility - management approach has improved the efficiency of its regulatory activities while simplifying the facilities' compliance activities . new york's approach operates more efficiently because each facility manager coordinates all of the state's regulatory activities and the various inspectors approach each facility as a team . one facility manager said new york's approach has been effective in bringing problem facilities into compliance more rapidly because the facility manager is able to focus on problems in all media at one time . state officials report that industry has benefited from having a single point of contact with the state to coordinate the state's inspection visits . although the facility - management approach is labor - intensive and challenging for the facility managers — who must develop expertise in a wide range of federal and state laws , industry processes , and techniques to prevent pollution — the difficulty in obtaining detailed knowledge about each environmental program is mitigated by the presence of single - medium inspectors on each facility's inspection team . as part of a departmentwide review , new york plans to develop performance measures to evaluate its program . these measures will assess the amount of pollution prevented and the impact of environmental programs on the state's natural resources . new york officials have not yet established milestones for performing this evaluation . new jersey is testing the use of a single , integrated permit for industrial facilities , an approach that departs from the existing practice of issuing permits to industrial facilities on a medium - specific basis . under the existing practice , a facility may have dozens of medium - specific permits that regulate environmental releases through “end - of - the - pipe” treatment . depending on the medium - specific program , permits may state what pollutants may be discharged , prescribe technology - based discharge limits , or contain other requirements . in 1991 , the new jersey legislature passed a pollution prevention act that directed the state's department of environmental protection to test the use of facilitywide permits at industrial facilities . the test is intended to identify ways to streamline and integrate medium - specific requirements , incorporate pollution prevention into the permitting process , and improve the overall administrative efficiency of permitting by consolidating all of a facility's environmental permits for air , water , and solid and hazardous waste into a single , facilitywide permit .