streamlining the number of closeout procedures . to expedite the closeout process and prevent another backlog , the grants administration division streamlined two procedures involving the property and invention reports . requiring grants management offices to develop a closeout strategy . grants management offices were to develop a closeout strategy and certify to the grants administration division by april 1 , 1998 , that a plan had been implemented to prevent another backlog . our review of 15 files for grants that had recently been awarded showed that none of the files included or identified the data needed before an award is made . in addition , the files showed no evidence that the grants management offices are identifying and documenting the closeout reports that recipients need to expeditiously close out inactive grants . moreover , as previously noted , some of the grants management offices' strategic plans to avert a future backlog did not identify a specific strategy or methodology that would meet the goals identified in the plan . on the basis of the conditions we observed , we concluded that the grants management offices' strategies do not ensure that a future backlog will be averted . total amount includes $14.4 million for completed nonconstruction grants that were within the 180-day closeout period and were not classified as inactive as of june 30 , 1998 . to review epa's efforts to reduce the number of completed grants and contracts that should be closed out , we interviewed epa officials at selected locations to discuss the initiatives taken and planned to reduce the number of completed contracts and grants . we reviewed documents related to epa's efforts , including regulations , policies , and closeout strategy plans . we also reviewed 15 closed out grant files and 5 closed out contract files that were randomly selected to assess epa's compliance with established closeout requirements . the grant files were reviewed at epa headquarters and at the agency's regional offices in atlanta , georgia , and chicago , illinois . the contract files were selected and reviewed at the contracts management division in research triangle park , north carolina . for wastewater treatment construction grants , we interviewed officials and reviewed documents from epa's regional offices in new york , new york ; boston , massachusetts ; philadelphia , pennsylvania ; and epa headquarters . to assess the implementation of epa's strategy to prevent a future backlog of grants , we reviewed the national strategy plan and regional implementation plans . we also randomly selected 15 files of recently awarded grants to determine if the strategy's measures had been implemented . these files were located at the same offices as those for the grant selections previously mentioned . to identify the number of completed grants and contracts that should be closed , we obtained data from epa headquarters and analyzed the data to determine the status of grants and contracts closed and remaining to be closed as of june 30 , 1998 . for wastewater treatment construction grants , we requested that epa obtain information on the number of inactive grants as of march 1998 .