case 2 . because of what fmha state and county officials in texas described as an oversight , a deceased borrower's $131,000 debt was canceled without the county office's filing a claim with a local probate court . our review of this case — which included reviewing the probate court's records , comparing the amount of outstanding debt with the value of real and personal property owned by the borrower's estate , and consulting with usda's office of general counsel — disclosed that about $47,000 was available for payment on the debt if the claim had been filed . case 3 . fmha officials in mississippi canceled a $202,000 debt without a payment offer from a partnership consisting of two brothers who reported a total annual income of $123,000 ( about $64,500 and $58,500 , respectively ) . both borrowers submitted documentation claiming that they were unable to repay any part of their fmha debt because their expenses exceeded their income . their expense statements included the following information: both brothers claimed over $15,000 in annual payments to other creditors and expensive gifts to charities ; one brother claimed the cost of operating three automobiles , while the other claimed the cost of operating two ; and one brother claimed college education costs for his son and daughter - in - law as well as living expenses for that son and his family . fmha state officials told us that they did not consider these expenses to be excessive , and the supervisor of fmha's county office questioned whether the agency should require borrowers to lower their standard of living in order to repay their debt . case 4 . fmha state and county officials told us that they had chosen not to use the payments from the agricultural stabilization and conservation service to offset the loan losses because they did not want to create undue hardship for the borrower . fmha has placed little emphasis on minimizing losses during debt settlements . fmha's approach is illustrated in part by internal performance goals that create work priorities and incentives that are counter to aggressive protection of the government's interests . specifically , fmha's field office staff have annual performance goals for resolving delinquent loan accounts , but they do not have balancing goals that would encourage recoveries through the debt settlement process . as a result , several officials at fmha's state and county offices noted that protecting the government's interests is not a high priority among staff . we updated the report to recognize the secretary's reorganization plan . fmha expressed its concern that prohibiting loans to borrowers whose accounts are resolved through debt settlement could eliminate the use of its leaseback / buyback and homestead protection programs . in these programs , borrowers who default on fmha loans are given preference in reacquiring the farms that they had pledged as security for those loans . fmha may finance these transactions . implementing our recommendation would not eliminate these loan - servicing programs — former owners would still retain preference for reacquiring their farms . however , we recognize that it would be difficult for some former owners to take advantage of this preference without fmha financing .