paul airport . the airline requested ins' assistance , and between january and february 1998 , ins responded to five flights involving passengers who the airline suspected were illegal aliens . twelve passengers were detained , all of whom were using tickets created from stolen stock . ins found that 11 of the 12 passengers were illegal aliens . none of the passengers had a criminal history , so local law enforcement officials declined to prosecute them . instead , the illegal aliens were turned over to ins for deportation . while ins and the airline industry have not routinely worked together to identify illegal aliens using stolen ticket stock , cooperation in this area is increasing . ( 2 ) what financial implications are associated with the use of stolen ticket stock ? ( 3 ) what other issues are potentially associated with the use of stolen ticket stock ? and ( 4 ) what technological interventions and other initiatives are available to detect the use of stolen ticket stock ? to determine the overall number and value of airline ticket stock reported stolen , we obtained information from the industrywide database on stolen and other fraudulent ticket stock maintained by aeronautical radio , inc. ( arinc ) . this database cannot be broken out by year and does not contain information about the value of reported stolen stock . accordingly , we used arc's status reports to determine the amount of arc ticket stock that is stolen annually . we also used information provided by arc to estimate the value of its stolen ticket stock for 1997 and 1998 — the years for which the most complete information is available . a detailed description of our scope and methodology appears in appendix i . instead , such matters are left to the airline industry . there are a variety of sources and types of airline ticket stock . for example , when airlines issue tickets directly to passengers , they use individualized ticket stock bearing their corporate name . however , the vast majority of u.s. travel agencies obtain their ticket stock from arc — an airline - owned corporation created , among other things , to accredit u.s. agencies and to facilitate the distribution of airline ticket stock to the agencies . in 1998 , there were 32,694 arc - accredited retail travel agencies . in 1998 , arc issued 1.1 billion pieces of ticket stock to u.s. travel agencies . the ticket stock is blank except for the inscription of a unique identifying number and has no value until it is made into a ticket . over 90 percent of the ticket stock arc issued in 1998 was in automated form . travel agents imprint this stock by computer with data — such as flight dates , flight numbers , and fares — generated from the airlines' computer reservation systems . according to arc , a typical ticket is composed of six to seven pieces of ticket stock — the airline auditor's record , an agent's record , several flight coupons ( one for each segment of a traveler's journey ) , a charge form , and the passenger's receipt . when combined together , these pieces of stock form an airline ticket .