appendix i lists the groups we consulted . in addition , we reviewed documents on research , including a survey of state transportation research staff published in 1995 by the american association of state highway and transportation officials' ( aashto ) research advisory committee . table 1.1 represents this progression . this traditional linear view of research has been changing . increasingly , research is seen as a process of continuous feedback involving interactions between activities on the continuum . in addition , opportunities for using new technologies and emerging transportation needs influence research . dot's surface transportation research concentrates primarily on applied research , development , demonstration , and technology transfer . according to public and private officials we consulted , investments in research have provided benefits to surface transportation users and the economy . one expert pointed out that these benefits continue for a long time . dot officials said that although research produces important results , its benefits may not be recognized because they are taken for granted . these benefits include crash protection devices , such as seat belts , motorcycle helmets , and car seats for infants and children ; programs to reduce alcohol - related deaths ; longer - lasting highway surfaces that reduce maintenance costs ; and improved roadside safety hardware , such as guardrails and road signs that yield to the force of a collision . states have realized benefits from their surface transportation research programs . through a study of drivers' behavior , for example , university researchers for the ohio department of transportation found little to no benefit from using steady - burn lights on barrels in construction zones . ( steady - burn lights are low - wattage yellow electric lamps , which may be used to mark obstructions or hazards. ) when the study showed that the lights did not influence drivers' speed or other behavior in construction zones , the state stopped requiring the lights . the department estimated that this change would save more than $4 million annually without affecting safety . the indiana department of transportation also benefited from its research programs . its maintenance engineers , in cooperation with university researchers , developed a computer - aided system for planning efficient routes to remove snow and ice . the department , which is responsible for more than 30,000 lane - miles of roadway , expected that this system would enable it to eliminate about 120 snow removal routes and save between $86,000 and $120,000 per year for each eliminated route . the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ) expressed the need for a new direction in surface transportation research , finding that despite an annual federal expenditure of more than $10 billion on surface transportation and its infrastructure , the federal government lacked two key components for an effective surface transportation research program: ( 1 ) a clear vision of the role of federally funded surface transportation research and ( 2 ) an integrated framework for the fragmented surface transportation research programs dispersed throughout the government . in response to these concerns , istea established a framework for changing surface transportation research .