( continued ) . total monthly increase if no cap ( continued ) total monthly increase if no cap ( continued ) gross income as percentage of poverty ( continued ) gross income as percentage of poverty ( continued ) average monthly food stamp benefit if no cap ( continued ) average monthly food stamp benefit if no cap ( continued ) . see figure 1 . 6.7% households without children in total , affected households contained about 2.3 million children under the age of 18 . these children represented about 17 percent of all children receiving food stamp benefits in fiscal year 1995 . moreover , slightly more than half of the affected households , 51.4 percent , contained preschool children , while about one - third , 32.2 percent , of households not affected by the cap on the excess shelter expense deduction contained preschool children . single females headed almost two - thirds of the food stamp households affected by the excess shelter cap in fiscal year 1995 . in contrast , slightly more than one - third of the households not affected by the cap were headed by single females . ( see fig . the average size of affected households was larger than not affected households , 3.4 and 2.4 members , respectively ( see fig . the difference was primarily due to the fact that a greater percentage of affected households had children . a higher percent of affected households , 18.2 percent , contained a noncitizen compared with 9.8 percent of not affected households ( see fig . under the 1996 welfare reform act , many noncitizens will no longer receive food stamp benefits . households affected by the cap tended to have more income than households not affected by the cap . however , both affected and not affected households , 88.8 and 76.4 percent , respectively , tended to be located in urban areas . this deduction is known as the excess shelter expense deduction . included among deductible shelter expenses are rent , mortgage payments , utility bills , property taxes , and insurance . in comparison 26 percent of households not affected by the cap were located in these four states . affected households had larger monthly food stamp benefits than not affected households . the average monthly food stamp benefit for affected households was $261 compared with an average monthly food stamp benefit for not affected households of $162 . this was also true for affected households with children compared with not affected households with children ; $271 and $225 per month in food stamp benefits , respectively . figure 8 shows the average monthly food stamp benefit for affected and not affected households with and without children . in fiscal year 1995 , almost 70 percent of affected households were receiving more than 75 percent but less than 100 percent of the allowable maximum food stamp benefit . food stamp benefits for the 1.1 million households affected by the cap would have increased by about 12 percent , on average , or about $31 per month , in absence of the cap in fiscal year 1995 .