those doing so participate voluntarily . fannie mae and freddie mac , both government - sponsored enterprises , are parts of the secondary mortgage market , through which many single - family home mortgages are ultimately sold . federal law requires that fannie mae and freddie mac use information from the finance board's survey on the year - to - year change in house prices to annually adjust the conforming loan limit ( currently $240,000 ) , which is a legislative restriction on the size of any individual loan that either may buy . fha also uses information from the finance board to set limits on the dollar value of loans it will insure , which are based on the conforming loan limit and median home prices . that is , fha sets an area's loan limit at the greater of 48 percent of the conforming loan limit or 95 percent of the median home sales price for the area , but no greater than 87 percent of the conforming loan limit . consequently , fha loan limits vary depending on the location of the home and the median home sales price there but are no lower than $115,200 and no higher than $208,800 — 48 percent and 87 percent , respectively , of the conforming loan limit . fha is not required by statute to use a particular source of information on home prices to determine the median price of homes in an area and , consequently , the loan limit for the area . however , fha has chosen to use the finance board survey for this purpose . fha relies heavily on the survey to measure median home sales prices because it is the most comprehensive source of published house price data readily available to the agency . the office of federal housing enterprise oversight ( ofheo ) also collects information on home sales . specifically , both fannie mae and freddie mac provide data to ofheo on all of the mortgages they purchase in order for ofheo to construct a house price index . ofheo uses the house price index to account for changes in the values of the homes securing the mortgages that the enterprises have purchased and their potential impact on credit risk . by definition , the index includes only conforming loans — those with values less than the conforming loan limit — because neither enterprise may purchase loans that exceed the conforming loan limit . in addition , the index excludes all government - insured loans . in 1997 , fannie mae and freddie mac purchased 37 percent of all conventional loans originated that year for single - family homes . in about two - thirds of the 42 metropolitan areas we reviewed , no substantive difference existed in the 1997 median house prices calculated with finance board and ofheo data . as figure 1 shows , in 27 of these areas , the difference between the higher and lower estimates of median prices according to the two sets of data was 5 percent or less . in an additional 10 areas , the two agencies' estimates were within 10 percent of each other .