( app . iii describes in more detail how the adoption of a simplified program helps the states to comply with the requirement to provide the minimum wage. ) the welfare reform act requires the states to retain several features of the regular food stamp program , such as issuance procedures and the use of the thrifty food plan as the basis of benefits in their simplified program . the states must also obtain fns' approval to implement a simplified program . unlike the seven states that had implemented a mini simplified program , arkansas adopted a more extensive simplified program , using a number of tanf requirements to determine eligibility and benefits . for example , under the regular food stamp rules , the portion of the fair market value of a household vehicle that exceeds $4,650 is counted toward the household's resource limit . however , arkansas' simplified program uses a state - defined tanf rule that exempts the total value of the vehicle from the resource limit . arkansas' primary goal in adopting the simplified program is to create a “one - stop” process for approving tanf and food stamp benefits , thereby eliminating separate participant interviews , forms , and reporting requirements for each program . the state expects that caseworkers will then be able to spend more time helping program participants find employment . ( app . v describes the arkansas program in more detail. ) according to the survey responses , of the five remaining states ( excluding arkansas ) planning to implement a simplified program , all but florida plan to adopt it within the next year . florida was uncertain about when it would adopt a simplified program . figure 1 identifies the eight states ( including arkansas ) that have implemented a simplified program and the five states that are planning to implement a program . exclusions to the work requirement vary by program . to encourage their responses to our survey , we used follow - up mailings and telephone calls . appendix i contains a more detailed description of our methodology . appendix ii provides summary information on our survey responses . the welfare reform act gives the states the opportunity and authority to streamline their operations by allowing them to experiment with ways to standardize their eligibility and benefit requirements for households participating in both tanf and the food stamp program . specifically , the act provided the states with the option of operating the simplified food stamp program . this program allows them to establish eligibility and benefit levels on the basis of household size and income , work requirements , and other criteria established under tanf , food stamps , or a combination of both programs — as long as federal costs are not increased in doing so . the tanf block grant , administered by the u.s. department of health and human services , helped the states provide assistance to about 3.9 million needy families with children in fiscal year 1997 . among other things , the grant is intended to allow children to be cared for in their own homes and to reduce welfare dependency by promoting job preparation and work .