appropriate situations . similarly , we believe that using the issuance of nprms as the trigger for analytical requirements may be entirely appropriate . however , as a result , some major rules will probably not be subject to these requirements . s. 746 also requires agencies to provide for an independent peer review of any required risk assessments and cost - benefit analyses of major rules that the agencies or the omb director reasonably anticipate are likely to have a $500 million effect on the economy . peer review is the critical evaluation of scientific and technical work products by independent experts . the bill states that the peer reviews should be conducted through panels that are “broadly representative” and involve participants with relevant expertise who are “independent of the agency.” we believe that important economic analyses should be peer reviewed . given the uncertainties associated with predicting the future economic impacts of various regulatory alternatives , the rigorous , independent review of economic analyses should help enhance the quality , credibility , and acceptability of agencies' decisionmaking . in our 1998 study of agencies' cost - benefit analysis methods that i mentioned previously , only 1 of the 20 analyses that we examined received an independent peer review . of the five agencies whose analyses we examined , only epa had a formal peer review policy in place . although omb does not require peer reviews , the administrator of omb's office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) testified in september 1997 that the administration supports peer review . however , she also said that the administration realizes that peer review is not cost - free in terms of agencies' resources or time . the peer review requirements in s. 746 provide agencies with substantial flexibility . if an agency head certifies that adequate peer review has already been conducted , and the omb director concurs , the bill requires no further peer review . however , agencies will need to carefully plan for such reviews given the bill's requirement that they be done for all risk assessments and each cost - benefit analysis for which the associated rule is expected to have a $500 million effect on the economy . agencies will also need to ensure that a broad range of affected parties are represented on the panels and ( as s. 746 requires ) that panel reports reflect the diversity of opinions that exist . mr. chairman , last year we issued a report which you and senator glenn requested , assessing the implementation of the regulatory review transparency requirements in executive order 12866 . those requirements are similar to the public disclosure requirements in s. 746 in that they require agencies to identify for the public the substantive changes made during the period that the rules are being reviewed by oira , as well as changes made at the suggestion or recommendation of oira . we reviewed four major rulemaking agencies' public dockets and concluded that it was usually very difficult to locate the documentation that the executive order required . in many cases , the dockets contained some evidence of changes made during or because of oira's review , but we could not be sure that all such changes had been documented .