million . revenue from a mix of project and systemwide toll receipts and state transportation funds . final engineering is nearly complete . $210.0 million plus . not determined . not determined . not determined . not determined . not determined . to public agency ; loan to private sector partner not determined . most likely source of revenue: local tax revenues and parking fees . preliminary design and feasibility analysis completed . not determined . airport parking fees , concession fees , and public - private joint development projects . feasibility study is under way ; state plans to solicit proposals in 1996 for private equity partners . not determined . not determined . enhancement to support bonds issued by the city or county . final environmental impact statement completed in 1996 . not determined . million . local transportation sales tax revenues . purchase commitment to follow financial plan . ( continued ) not determined . enhancement to support bonds issued by bi - state development authority . sales taxes and parking fees would support the bond issue . first $1 million phase of project is under way ; second $8 million phase is awaiting sib funding . $23.3 million support for pooled bond issuance for all five projects . most likely revenue source: local tax revenues . progress depends on identifying funding source . not determined . $38.6 million plus not determined . most likely revenue source: taxes from a new transportation development district . project is in preliminary stages . not determined . not determined . not determined . taxes paid to the tax increment financing district . $19.5 million loan: $7.5 million . and not all sibs will leverage funds . only 18 states have leveraged funds under epa's state revolving fund program . in the state revolving fund context , leveraging means that states have the discretion to use the federal capital grants , as well as their matching shares , as collateral to borrow in the public bond market to increase the pool of available loan funds for projects . according to the council of infrastructure financing authorities , leveraging the state revolving fund has substantially increased the funds available for lending . the council reported in august 1994 that close to $4 billion has been added to the loan pool by the 18 states that have leveraged their funds — half as much as the nearly $8 billion provided in federal capital grants thus far . furthermore , when assessing the future growth for those funds that are leveraged , the council assumes conservatively that $1 for the state revolving fund program will generate an additional $2 in investments . arizona's plans are an example of how a sib could grow . the state plans to capitalize an initial sib at $71.5 million , representing $64 million in federal funds and $7.5 million in state and / or local funds . the state plans to use that investment as a base for issuing bonds and make $20 million in initial loans to transportation projects with the bond proceeds . in approximately 20 years ( by 2017 ) , the state anticipates that loan repayments plus interest on the loans will increase its initial $71.5 million investment to $260 million in sib loans .