these programs are described below . new construction / substantial rehabilitation program . the purpose of this program was to encourage developers to build or rehabilitate projects for lower - income families by providing rental assistance contracts for a negotiated number of units in a project for periods ranging from 15 to 40 years . the program was established in 1974 and repealed by the congress in 1983 because of its high cost . thus , funding for new project - based rental assistance contracts associated with newly constructed or rehabilitated properties was discontinued in 1983 , except for new contracts associated with housing for the elderly and disabled . elderly / disabled program . since fiscal year 1992 , hud's programs for the elderly and disabled have provided property development funding to sponsors of low - income housing through capital advances and project - based rental assistance contracts . these weaknesses stem from a number of factors , including limited oversight of the process by hud's office of the chief financial officer . each year , the status of hud's unexpended balances are to be examined under a review process the department refers to as the annual review of unliquidated obligations . according to hud's handbook on incurring , recording , and adjusting obligations , the purpose of the review is to determine whether the recorded obligations should be continued , reduced , or canceled . according to hud's acting assistant chief financial officer for accounting , the annual review covering section 8 project - based balances focuses on identifying those balances associated with contracts that are no longer active , such as balances remaining on expired or terminated contracts . the review process is based on balances as of june 30 and is to be completed by august 31 . for decentralized programs such as the section 8 project - based rental assistance program , the reviews are conducted by hud's program offices . the program office for the section 8 project - based program is the office of housing . the reviews are coordinated by hud's field accounting divisions and conducted by office of housing staff at the various field office locations . the annual review process is to occur in four major steps . first , hud's field accounting divisions provide a listing of all section 8 project - based contracts with unexpended balances that have had no financial activity for 6 or more months to the responsible office of housing directors at the various field office locations . second , office of housing officials are to have the balances examined and report the results of their reviews to the field accounting division . these reports should specify whether each contract is ( 1 ) active , ( 2 ) completed and cancellation action has been initiated , or ( 3 ) completed and cancellation action will be initiated . for contracts for which funds are to be canceled , the office of housing is to provide the appropriate documentation to the field accounting division so that the remaining balances may be deobligated . third , the field accounting divisions are to compile the results of all of the reviews and send a certification statement to hud's office of the chief financial officer ( cfo ) .