research assoc. , inc. westinghouse electric corp. kapl , inc. ( lockheed martin ) westinghouse savannah river co . doe did not strengthen this office . doe's primary response to our recommendations and those made by the galvin task force was creating the laboratory operations board . “doe's organization is a mess . you cannot tell who is the boss . there is no doe leadership to implement changes.” we believe these organizational weaknesses are a major reason why doe has been unable to develop long - term solutions to the recurring problems reported by advisory groups . the absence of a senior official in the department with program and administrative authority over the operations of all the laboratories prevents effective management of the laboratories on an ongoing basis . as far back as 1982 , an advisory group recognized the need for a strong central focus to manage the laboratories' activities . in its 1982 report , doe's energy research advisory board noted “layering and fractionation of managerial and research and development responsibilities in doe on an excessive number of horizontal and vertical levels . .” the board recommended that doe designate a high level official , such as a deputy under secretary , whose sole function would be to act as doe's chief laboratory executive . although doe did not make this change , the under secretary has assumed responsibility for ensuring that laboratory reforms are accomplished . despite many studies identifying similar deficiencies in the management of doe's national laboratories , fundamental change remains an elusive goal . while the department has many steps in process to improve its management of the laboratories — such as new strategic planning tools and the laboratory operations board — the results of these efforts may be long in coming and may fall short of expectations . other actions doe is taking are focused more on process than on results , and most are still incomplete , making it difficult to show how doe intends to direct the laboratories' missions and manage them more effectively as an integrated system — a major recommendation of past advisory groups . the department has not developed a way to show how its actions will result in practical and permanent laboratory reform . we believe that without a strategy for ensuring that reforms actually take place , doe will make only limited progress in achieving meaningful reforms . establishing accountability for ensuring that its actions will take place in a timely manner is a challenge for doe . the department's complex organizational structure creates unclear lines of authority that dilute accountability and make reforms difficult to achieve . in our 1995 management review of doe's laboratories , we reported that if doe is unable to refocus the laboratories' missions and develop a management approach consistent with these new missions , the congress may wish to consider alternatives to the present relationships between doe and the laboratories . such alternatives might include placing the laboratories under the control of different agencies or creating a separate structure for the sole purpose of developing a consensus on the laboratories' missions . because of doe's uncertain progress in reforming the laboratories' management , we continue to believe that the congress may wish to consider such alternatives .