additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . toxic pollutants have frequently been involved . included among the significant violations were discharges of ammonia , chlorine , and oxygen - demanding pollutants , which are leading causes of fish kills , according to epa . about 70 percent of the violations that the criterion did not identify as cases of significant noncompliance were violations of water - quality - based discharge limits that are based on analyses of risks to affected organisms posed by exposure to pollutants . table 1 lists the 20 toxic and conventional pollutants that epa found were being most frequently discharged in excess of daily maximum limits that epa identified in its 1994 study as significant violations . epa assigns priorities for enforcement action to facilities whose violations have met its criterion for significant noncompliance , and it bases its penalties , in part , on the types of limits that the facilities have violated . consequently , epa and the states have taken limited formal enforcement action against facilities that have violated daily maximum and other limits that do not meet the criterion for significant noncompliance . also , permittees whose continuous discharges are subject to daily maximum limits only are subject to much smaller penalties for significant violations than permittees whose discharges are subject to both daily maximum and monthly average limits . epa's regions and the states concentrate their enforcement resources on facilities that the permit compliance system has identified as being in significant noncompliance . consequently , according to epa officials , epa and the states have given much less attention to violations of daily maximum limits , which do not meet the system's criterion for significant noncompliance , than to violations of monthly average limits , which do meet the criterion . not surprisingly , epa's 1992 and 1994 studies determined that few formal enforcement actions had been taken by epa or the states for violations of effluent limits that were not expressed as monthly average limits . epa also found that when significant violations of limits other than monthly average limits were identified , they were not resolved quickly . for example , an epa analysis of data from december 1993 through october 1994 identified 276 facilities with significant violations of effluent limits expressed as daily maximum limits . the analysis showed that the violations had occurred at 192 of these facilities for over 6 months and at 116 facilities for 9 months . in may 1993 , after identifying these disparities in enforcement , epa notified its regions that violations of daily maximum limits and limits other than monthly average limits might be occurring without a prompt enforcement response , and it indicated that additional cases should be considered for action . the data for 1993 exhibit a similar pattern . epa's permit compliance system does not identify many cases of significant noncompliance , even though the system contains the information needed to do so .