( see fig . when epa awarded its superfund contracts , beginning in 1995 , it created a contract management information system . in the past , we have expressed concern that contractors' program support costs , as a percentage of total contract costs , have been too high . since the mid - 1990s , epa has used 11 percent as its target for program support costs . in our 1997 report , we determined that the panel used the ranking process to allocate fiscal year 1996 funds . however , because the panel process was new and the congress did not pass epa's appropriations act until april of that year , we decided to continue monitoring the agency's use of the panel process . we found that , in fiscal year 1998 , epa ranked 50 sites and funded 38 according to the panel's ranking , at a value of more than $200 million . epa does not know the universe of high - risk sites remaining to be addressed . epa has never had its own site identification program and relies primarily on other entities , such as states and private citizens , to report sites for possible inclusion in the superfund program . early in the program , these entities referred tens of thousands of sites to epa . over time , however , according to site assessment managers in all four regions in our review , the states became reluctant to report sites because they wanted to avoid what they saw as the long and costly superfund cleanup process . as a result , they currently do not necessarily report all high - risk sites to epa . for those sites that are reported to epa , the agency assesses the level of potential risk posed to human health and the environment by applying the hazard ranking system . for nonfederal sites , epa or the state in which the potentially contaminated site is located conducts the assessment . the responsible federal agencies assess their own sites that are on the federal facility docket . epa then uses the data from these assessments to calculate a site's potential risks by using its hazard ranking system . also , cost estimators still do not have access to historical site - specific cost data , and until they do , they cannot generate the most accurate estimates possible . because epa's contract management information system most likely will not provide the detailed historical site - specific cost data estimators say they need and will not be available in the near future , the agency will have to consider other cost - effective alternatives for providing these data . this system assesses potential risks to humans and sensitive environments , such as wetlands , from exposure to contamination at the site through four “pathways” — soil , groundwater , surface water , and air . each site receives a score ranging from 0 to 100 , and sites that score above 28.5 in this system are eligible to be considered for placement on epa's national priorities list . only sites on this list may receive long - term cleanups financed by the superfund trust fund .