25 percent . however , epa's efforts have been largely offset by increases in what some of its officials describe as statutorily required information collections . mr. chairman and members of the committee: we are pleased to be here today to discuss the implementation of the paperwork reduction act of 1995 . as you requested , we have reviewed selected aspects of the act's implementation by the office of management and budget ( omb ) and three agencies — the internal revenue service ( irs ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) . in your request letter , you noted that participants at last year's white house conference on small business believed these three agencies impose the most significant paperwork burdens on small businesses . we will focus on three main issues today: ( 1 ) changes in paperwork burden governmentwide and in the three selected agencies , ( 2 ) omb's responsibility to set goals for reducing such burden and whether agencies will achieve the burden reductions envisioned in the act , and ( 3 ) actions each of the three agencies have taken since the passage of the act . we will also discuss some measurement issues congress needs to consider as it assesses agencies' progress in reducing paperwork burden . first , however , a little background information is needed . the paperwork reduction act of 1995 amended and recodified the paperwork reduction act of 1980 , as amended . the 1995 act reaffirmed the principles of the original act and gave new responsibilities to omb and executive branch agencies . like the original statute , the 1995 act requires agencies to justify any collection of information from the public by establishing the need and intended use of the information , estimating the burden that the collection will impose on the respondents , and showing that the collection is the least burdensome way to gather the information . at the end of the fiscal year , and agency estimates of the burden for the coming fiscal year . the 1995 act also makes several changes in federal paperwork reduction requirements . for example , it requires oira to set goals of at least a 10-percent burden reduction governmentwide for each of fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , a 5-percent governmentwide burden reduction in each of the next 4 fiscal years , and annual agency goals that reduce burden to “the maximum practicable” extent . the act also redefines a “collection of information” to include required disclosures of information to third parties and the public , effectively overturning the supreme court's 1990 dole v. united steelworkers of america decision . finally , the 1995 act details new agency responsibilities for the review and control of paperwork . for example , it requires agencies to establish a 60-day public notice and comment period for each proposed collection of information before submitting the proposal to omb for approval . oira uses the icb information to assess whether agencies' burden reduction goals are being met .