special use permits are revocable . in other words , during the term of a permit , if the agency decides that a right - of - way is no longer consistent with management's goals for an area of a forest , the agency can revoke the permit and require the operator to remove his investment in the land and leave . they also noted that while they currently pay nonfederal landowners higher fees for rights - of - way , it is their view that they get more from these landowners than they do from the forest service because nonfederal landowners ( 1 ) generally use easements , instead of permits , to authorize rights - of - way and ( 2 ) are more timely than the forest service in responding to requests for rights - of - way . these costs could be mitigated , and in some cases negated , with some administrative improvements to the program . the forest service has the authority to make most of these changes . however , mla requires annual payments for rights - of - way for oil and gas pipelines . thus , changing fee collection from an annual payment to a one - time payment would require legislative action from the congress . instead of employing special use permits to grant right - of - way authorizations , one improvement the forest service could make is to grant authorizations using an instrument , such as an easement , that is more commonly found in the market . special use permits convey rights that are similar to those of easements but not equal to them . we will also make copies available to others on request . should you have questions about this report or need more information , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . because of this situation , banks do not recognize a permit as granting a value in the land equivalent to that granted by an easement , which is not revocable but can be terminated if the operator breaches the terms and conditions of the easement . the constraint on special use permits affects the users of rights - of - way when they are trying to obtain financing for a project . we provided a draft of this report to the forest service and the western utility group — an industry group representing a large number of users of rights - of - way — for their review and comment . we met with officials from the forest service — including the acting director of the division of lands — and with officials from the western utility group , including its chairman . both the agency and the western utility group agreed with the factual content , conclusions , and recommendations in the report . while the forest service officials agreed with the report's recommendations , they noted that the recommendations should also include having the forest service ( 1 ) look for ways to operate more efficiently and ( 2 ) manage the rights - of - way program in a more business - like manner . we are not including these points because we believe they are already inherent in our recommendations .