( app . i provides additional information about the sites , including the location and a description of the contamination present at each of the sites. ) according to nrc officials , delays in cleaning up sdmp sites increase the likelihood , over the long term , for human exposure to radiation through the further release and spread of contamination into the environment . however , nrc officials and representatives of the contaminated sdmp sites told us that the sites do not pose any imminent health or safety risk because controls exist to limit the public's access to contaminated areas . because of the nature and large quantities of thorium at the 14 sites , radiation doses at the sites would exceed nrc's guidelines for unrestricted use if the waste were buried . according to nrc , it is too early to tell whether the other 16 sites with large volumes of radioactive waste can meet nrc's guidelines for on - site disposal because efforts to characterize the sites are still under way . off - site disposal of large amounts of radioactive waste also may not be feasible . specifically , only one facility in utah is currently available to accept large volumes of waste from existing sdmp sites ; however , it cannot accept materials that exceed the specified concentration levels established for various radioactive materials . according to nrc , access to waste disposal facilities will continue to be a problem and could even get worse over the next 5 to 10 years until state - sponsored facilities are available to accept the waste . and even when these facilities are available , the manager of the sdmp program acknowledged that it is uncertain whether the facilities will accept the quantities of contaminated materials present at some sdmp sites . off - site disposal also may not be practical because of the costs involved . finally , negotiations between current and previous site owners about who is responsible for cleaning up sdmp sites have resulted in delays . for example , at one sdmp site negotiations between the former licensee and the current site owner to determine which one is the responsible party delayed cleanup by at least 2 years ; negotiations between parties at another site delayed cleanup by about 6 months . according to the manager of the sdmp program , nrc expects that most future sdmp sites will be identified from nrc's ongoing review of past cleanups at sites with terminated materials licenses . consequently , negotiations about who is responsible for site cleanups will likely become a larger issue in the future . nrc's lengthy time frames for reviewing and approving key decommissioning documents , such as site decommissioning plans , also have contributed to cleanup delays at many sdmp sites . for example , according to nrc documentation , excessive time frames for reviewing and approving documents submitted by sdmp site owners contributed to delays of between 6 months and 22 months at nine sites during 1993 . representatives of owners at 10 of the 14 sdmp sites we contacted also identified concerns about the timeliness of nrc's reviews . specifically , they said that nrc's reviews were “rarely” or “not usually” timely .