the congress has not implemented these recommendations . in recent years , fmha's field offices have improved their compliance with the agency's standards for making guaranteed loans but , through fiscal year 1993 , had not improved in complying with the standards for servicing such loans . fmha requires its field offices to follow specific credit standards in approving guaranteed loans . these standards include determining an applicant's eligibility and repayment ability and the adequacy of collateral . fmha also requires its field offices to follow specific loan - servicing standards in overseeing the lender's servicing of loans . this servicing includes ( 1 ) inspecting collateral to ensure that the borrower possesses and is maintaining security property , ( 2 ) providing the same servicing for fmha guaranteed loans as for other loans , and ( 3 ) ensuring that loan funds are used properly . to evaluate the extent that fmha's field offices comply with the agency's policies , procedures , and standards , fmha established the coordinated assessment review ( car ) as a part of its internal control review . the car consists of examining a random sample of direct and guaranteed loans each year in selected states . generally , loans made in about 15 states are sampled and reviewed each year so that each state is reviewed every 3 years . fmha's target for an acceptable compliance rate is 85 percent — or no more than a 15-percent noncompliance rate . according to the cars , fmha's field offices improved their oversight of lenders' guaranteed loan - making process . since our april 1992 report , recent cars have shown that the field offices had less than a 15-percent noncompliance rate for all standards that put the government at risk . conversely , through fiscal year 1993 , the cars showed that fmha's field offices had not improved their oversight of lenders' servicing . in our april 1992 report , for example , we reported that in 25 percent of the cases reviewed , field office officials had not , as required , effectively monitored lenders' compliance with standards for inspecting collateral and for ensuring the proper use of loan funds . the cars for fiscal year 1993 showed that the field offices continue to have a high rate of noncompliance in several areas . of the 15 loan - servicing standards , the field offices exceeded a noncompliance rate of 15 percent for 12 of the standards . for example , the following three cases relate to potential loss claims and demonstrate the noncompliance areas found: there was a 36.8-percent noncompliance rate for the standard that fmha officials concur with the lender that a delinquency was beyond a borrower's control before allowing the lender to reschedule or reamortize a loan . the failure to follow this standard can lead to the increased risk of paying higher loss claims because of accrued interest and deteriorated collateral . ( see fig . however , the agricultural credit improvement act of 1992 ( p.l . 102-554 , oct. 28 , 1992 ) could change some of this emphasis back to direct loans .