( app . i lists ongoing class action suits against doe contractors during fiscal years 1991-93. ) doe has the option of undertaking the defense against such class action litigation on its own ; however , it has generally opted to have the contractors defend the case in good faith . as standard practice , doe has authorized contractors to proceed with their defense and has limited its own involvement to approving the hiring of outside counsel , reviewing billings , and agreeing upon any settlement amounts . gibson , dunn , and crutcher charged almost $170,000 for duplicating documents over a 3-year period . for 13 months , the firm charged 25 cents per page , and for 23 months , it lowered the rate to 20 cents per page . had the firm been allowed to charge only 8 cents per page , the total cost reimbursed by doe would have been $58,750 , a savings of nearly $109,000 . limiting all firms to this rate would have saved almost $425,000 . the costs for these data bases increase doe's total outside litigation costs substantially . data obtained from the cognizant chief counsels' offices show that from fiscal year 1991 through fiscal year 1993 , over $25 million was spent for developing litigation data bases for these four cases . the data base for the fernald litigation was the most costly — exceeding $14 million — but the other data bases cost over $2 million each . ( app . iii contains information on the costs of data bases. ) when the fiscal year 1992 costs for data bases are added to the expenses paid to outside law firms during the same fiscal year , the total costs incurred by doe for its contractors' legal defense during that fiscal year exceed $40 million . to respond to this request , we met with staff in doe's office of general counsel in washington , d.c. , to obtain an overall perspective on the litigation activities of the department's various contractors , the underlying issues associated with such litigation , and the rationale for doe's paying the costs of the contractors' litigation . additionally , we selected and visited three of doe's operations offices — albuquerque , oak ridge , and richland — and examined records of the litigation activities and costs incurred in each office . we selected these offices because doe data indicated that these offices had incurred about 75 percent of the department's expenses for contractors' litigation . travel costs incurred by law firms representing doe contractors exceeded guidelines set forth by rtc and fdic . the corporations' criteria limit travel costs to coach airfare , moderate hotel prices , and federal per diem rates for meals . travel costs reimbursed by doe were significantly higher . for example , two firms — hunton and williams and perkins coie — billed first - class airfare for their senior partners . additionally , attorneys often were reimbursed for the costs of high - priced hotel rooms . lawyers from kirkland and ellis billed for hotel rooms in washington , d.c. , that cost from $215 to as much as $250 per night .