( see fig . 1 for a map identifying sinpo and other relevant north korean sites. ) iaea's board of governors approved the request . shortly thereafter , iaea and north korea began negotiating arrangements for iaea's monitoring of the freeze , which among other things , resulted in the identification of critical buildings at each facility site that would be subject to iaea's monitoring measures . according to officials from the state department and the arms control and disarmament agency ( acda ) , iaea and north korea also reached an understanding on the definition of the freeze that , according to iaea's documentation , provides that any movements of nuclear material or equipment within the facilities under the freeze , any maintenance work by the operator , and any transfers of nuclear materials out of the facilities must be carried out under iaea's observation or under other iaea arrangements . finally , any nuclear equipment and components related to the freeze , including items manufactured for the two reactors under construction , must be monitored by iaea . iaea inspectors visited the north korean facilities subject to the freeze from november 23 to november 28 , 1994 , and confirmed that the three operating facilities had been shut down and that construction on the two incomplete reactors had stopped . iaea maintains a continuous presence in north korea to monitor the facilities and to ensure that they remain under the freeze . according to iaea , its monitoring activities provide assurance that operations and construction at the five facilities are frozen . iaea inspectors regularly monitor the 5-mw ( e ) reactor , the fuel fabrication plant , and the reprocessing plant . iaea uses all technical means available to monitor the freeze at these facilities , such as using seals that can indicate instances of tampering , using video cameras , and making short - notice inspections . the particular method ( s ) used depends on the circumstances at each of the three facilities . the primary monitoring method is the use and frequent verification of tamper - indicating seals on equipment and installations throughout the “frozen” nuclear facilities . video cameras are also used for surveillance . finally , short - notice inspections are used to monitor certain equipment and areas in the frozen facilities that have not been allowed to be sealed . iaea inspectors also monitor activities related to the canning and storage of spent fuel from the 5-mw ( e ) reactor and have , through qualitative measurements of the fuel rods ( spent fuel ) , verified whether the rods are , in fact , irradiated ( spent ) fuel rods . iaea also monitors activities at the two unfinished reactors . as with the three other nuclear facilities under the freeze , iaea established an initial photographic baseline to document the status of each facility's construction . the purpose of these measures is to ensure that nuclear material is not diverted to nuclear weapons . iaea uses several measures to ensure compliance with its safeguards agreements . material - accounting measures verify the quantity of nuclear material declared to iaea and any changes in the quantity over time .