( see app . ii for more detail on funding and staffing for fiscal years 1990-96. ) since 1990 , aphis has raised aqi staffing levels about 44 percent — from 1,785 to 2,570 positions . the agency shifted positions from other programs to meet the increased workload . aphis' results monitoring program will provide important information on risk . however , aphis officials have not yet determined how this information will be integrated into their staffing models or staffing decisions . finally , aphis has not made a commitment to using its staffing models to allocate inspection resources from a national perspective . rather , it plans to examine resource allocations only within regions . as a result , aphis may lack the flexibility for effectively shifting its resources to target them to the highest risks . to better ensure that aphis identifies harmful pests and diseases through the inspections that it conducts , the secretary of agriculture should direct the administrator of aphis to issue guidance that emphasizes the need for aphis inspectors to adhere to minimum inspection standards in terms of the methods used to select samples from shipments chosen for inspection . we recognize that meeting these minimum standards may result in fewer inspections , but we believe that a smaller number of reliable inspections is preferable to a larger number of inspections that do not comply with inspection guidelines . to strengthen aphis' ability to allocate its inspection resources more effectively and efficiently , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture direct the administrator of aphis to develop and implement plans that will improve the reliability of data in the wads ; integrate a risk assessment factor , developed on the basis of the results monitoring program , into its staffing allocation process ; and position aphis to evaluate inspection resources in terms of national rather than regional needs . we provided a draft of this report to aphis for its review and comment . appendix iv contains aphis' written response to our draft report . aphis agreed that the issues identified in each of our four recommendations needed to be addressed and indicated actions under way to address them . finally , the models are not used to allocate inspection resources on a national basis . rather , they are used only to allocate resources within aphis regions . aphis' staffing models are intended to help determine the number of inspectors that should be stationed at various locations across the country . there are four separate models for calculating staffing needs at airports , land border crossings , maritime ports , and plant inspection stations . each of the models calculates staffing needs by , in essence , multiplying various measures of workload activity ( such as number of inspections , number of vehicle arrivals , and number of pest interceptions ) by the time it takes to complete these activities and converting that product into an estimate of the number of inspectors needed . the accuracy of the workload data used in the models is key to ensuring that projected staffing needs are also accurate . however , aphis has little assurance that the data are accurate .