ii for details ) . the reductions in doe's funding are delaying the development of several technologies , according to doe officials . appendix i describes the objectives , scope , and methodology of our review in detail . appendix iii lists the major contributors to this report . as arranged with your office , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees , federal agencies , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . if you have any questions about this report , call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 . our objectives were to determine ( 1 ) what changes have occurred in the amount of electricity - related research and development ( r&d ) funding and the primary reasons for these changes and ( 2 ) what has been the impact of these changes on the types of r&d being funded . for the impact of changes to the department of energy's ( doe ) r&d , we agreed to provide information on six technologies . you also wanted to know , given these changes , what alternate funding approaches r&d managers and others have proposed . to obtain information on the federal electricity - related r&d programs , we contacted doe officials and program managers and extracted electricity - related r&d data from doe's budget documents . because doe does not separately identify electricity - related r&d , we relied heavily on an analysis of utility - related activities for fiscal year 1993 performed by doe's office of energy efficiency and renewable energy . we used this analysis together with other budget data to estimate doe's budget for electricity - related r&d activities for fiscal years 1993 through 1997 . we did not gather data on possible electricity - related r&d funding by other federal agencies , such as the department of defense , national aeronautics and space administration , and department of commerce . to determine changes in electric utilities' r&d spending , we analyzed data on r&d expenditures collected by the federal energy regulatory commission from investor - owned utilities through 1994 . these utilities accounted for about 93 percent of nonfederal utilities' r&d spending . for information for 1994 through 1996 , future trends , and other responses , we interviewed and obtained data from utility r&d managers or other corporate officials at 80 companies representing 112 investor - owned electric utilities , which accounted for over 99 percent of investor - owned utilities' r&d . we also interviewed and collected information from corporate officials , program managers , and officials of the electric power research institute ( epri ) , and officials of trade associations representing municipal utilities and rural electric cooperatives . to gather information on state - sponsored electricity - related r&d programs , we interviewed and obtained data from officials involved with 11 state programs of significant size from 9 states — california , florida , illinois , iowa , new york , north carolina , north dakota , ohio , and wisconsin .