iii. ) antibacterial resistance describes a feature of some bacteria that enables them to avoid the effects of antibacterial agents . bacteria can be traced by their dna patterns . evidence that the dna patterns of resistant bacteria from geographically diverse places are the same or very similar combined with evidence that resistance in these bacteria have been prevalent in one place and not in the other allows researchers to conclude that a bacterial clone has spread . with international travel and trade and the continuous exchange of bacteria among people , animals , and agricultural hosts and environments , resistant bacteria can spread from one country to another . for example , in 1989 , a multidrug - resistant mrsa , known as the iberian clone , was identified during an outbreak in spain . this clone has spread to hospitals in portugal , italy , scotland , germany , and belgium . in 1998 , resistant shigella on parsley entered the united states from mexico , causing two outbreaks of shigellosis in minnesota . antibacterials are used around the world for a number of purposes in various settings , and their use can vary from country to country . antibacterial drugs are used in both people and animals . antiseptics and disinfectants are used in hospitals , homes , schools , restaurants , farms , food processing plants , water treatment facilities , and other places . while measures of total antibacterial use in most countries are not available , some data have been published on the total amount of antibacterials produced or sold in the united states . figure 4 shows the total weight of antibacterial drugs ( chemicals , not finished products ) produced in the united states from 1950 to 1994 . according to the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , a total of 3.3 billion pounds of active ingredients were produced for disinfectants in 1995 . many studies are also focused on bacteria isolated from patients . even where there is surveillance for resistance , the surveillance systems tend to be limited to the monitoring of specific bacterial diseases , such as tb and gonorrhea , or disease - causing bacteria , such as s. pneumoniae . therefore , less information is available on the prevalence of resistant genes in bacteria isolated from healthy people and that do not generally harm their primary host . nevertheless , there is some evidence that resistance genes in these bacteria may play a role in the spread of antibacterial resistance . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . for example , an interspecies gene transfer appears to have occurred in the united states in 1979 , when a multiresistant plasmid was identified in kentucky in hospital patients and personnel infected with s. aureus . a year earlier , a like plasmid was isolated from staphylococcus epidermidis on hospital patients , which suggests that the same plasmid was transferred from these bacteria to s. aureus . bacteria from different body sites of one host may also exchange genes .