additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . airports vary in their reliance on these sources of funds . aip grants are made available from the airport and airway trust fund.the federal aviation administration ( faa ) allocates most aip grants on the basis of ( 1 ) a legislated apportionment formula , tied to the number of passengers an airport enplanes , and ( 2 ) set - aside categories earmarked for specific types of airports and projects . faa has discretionary authority to allocate the remaining funds — about $300 million out of the $1.46 billion made available for fiscal year 1997 — on the basis of needs identified by airports . aip grants peaked in 1992 at $2.264 billion , as measured in 1996 dollars , and declined to $1.372 billion in 1996 , as shown in figure i.1 . if a difference exists between current funding and planned development , what is the potential effect of various proposals to increase airport funding ? to overcome past limitations in assessing the extent and variance of airports' financial capacity , we developed an extensive database of airport funding information linked to each airport and its level of activity . these data and our analytical methodology are discussed in appendix iii . building the data from the ground up allowed us to ensure more accurate totals and , in particular , to assess the varying capabilities of airports on the basis of their size . it also enabled us to better examine the possible effects of various proposals to increase airport funding . the united states , which possesses the largest , most extensive aviation system in the world , has more than 18,000 airports . u.s. airports range from large commercial transportation centers enplaning more than 30 million passengers annually to small grass strips serving only a few aircraft each year . if current funding levels continue , will they be sufficient to meet capital development planned for the 5-year period from 1997 through 2001 ? of these , 3,304 are designated as part of the national airport system and are therefore eligible for federal assistance . the federal interest in capital investment for airports has been guided by several objectives , most notably ensuring safety and security , preserving and enlarging the system's capacity , helping small commercial and general aviation airports , funding noise mitigation , and environmental protection . in addition , large and medium hub airports produced a mean operating ratio , a measure of operational liquidity , twice that of nonhubs and other commercial service airports , which generally operate at or below the break - even point . while operating revenue data for general aviation airports were not available , a recent study for faa by gellman research associates found that most general aviation airports operate at less than the break - even point , often having to rely on the local municipality for operating subsidies . according to rating agency officials , federal and state grants , pfcs , bonds , and airport revenue make up the vast majority of capital funding sources for airports .