( app . ii lists the refuges that provide a significant portion of a listed species' habitat and the specific species that occur at these refuges. ) some listed species use the refuges on a temporary basis for migratory , breeding , and wintering habitat . as previously shown in figure 1 , the refuges are often located along the primary north - south routes used by migratory birds . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . while the responsibility for developing and implementing the plans rests with fws' regional offices , recovery teams often include species experts from federal and state agencies ( including the refuges ) , conservation organizations , and universities . for example , a biologist at the san francisco bay nwr is helping develop a revised recovery plan for the salt marsh harvest mouse , the california clapper rail ( a species of bird ) , and other coastal california wetlands species . on the basis of their knowledge of the listed species , refuge staff are also asked to comment on draft recovery plans developed by others . for example , refuge staff at the moapa valley nwr in nevada were asked to review the draft recovery plan for the moapa dace ( a species of fish ) developed by a recovery team made up of representatives from a variety of organizations , including the department of the interior's bureau of reclamation ; the university of nevada , las vegas ; and the nevada division of wildlife . fws' regions are generally responsible for implementing the act . among other things , the act requires fws to develop and implement recovery plans for all listed species , unless such a plan would not benefit the species . recovery plans identify the problems threatening the species and the actions necessary to reverse the decline of a species and ensure its long - term survival . recovery plans serve as blueprints for private , federal , and state interagency cooperation in taking recovery actions . of all the listed species , 215 , or 24 percent , occur on wildlife refuges . ( see app . i for the listed species that occur on refuges. ) figure 2 shows the types of listed species found on refuges . as the figure shows , more than two - thirds of the species are plants , birds , and mammals . fishes ( 27 ) mammals ( 40 ) 9% reptiles ( 19 ) note 1: percentages have been rounded . note 2: the total number of species is 215 . note 3: “other” includes amphibians ( 2 ) , clams ( 6 ) , crustaceans ( 1 ) , insects ( 7 ) , and snails ( 1 ) . some refuges represent a significant portion of a listed species' habitat .