eds. , david g. victor , kal raustiala , and eugene b. skolnikoff . cambridge , mass . : mit press , 1998 . approach to climate change: where has it gone wrong ? ” perspectives on policy: do international environmental agreements really work ? washington , d.c.: resources for the future , dec. 1997 . danish , kyle . “the new sovereignty: compliance with international regulatory agreements.” virginia journal of international law , vol . 37 ( 1997 ) , pp . downs , george w. “enforcement and the evolution of cooperation ; a symposium on implementation , compliance , and effectiveness.” michigan journal of international law , vol . 19 ( winter 1998 ) , pp . gavouneli , maria . “compliance with international environmental treaties: the empirical evidence.” american society of international law proceedings , vol . 91 ( 1997 ) , pp . goldberg , donald m. , glenn wiser , stephen j. porter , and nuno lacastra . “building a compliance regime under the kyoto protocol.” washington , d.c.: center for international environmental law , dec. 1998 . hahn , robert w. , and robert n. stavins . “thoughts on designing an international greenhouse gas trading system.” conference presentation at climate change policy: the road to buenos aires , american enterprise institute for public policy research , sept. 14 , 1998. international institute for applied systems analysis . the implementation and effectiveness of international environmental commitments: theory and practice . jacobson , harold k. “afterword: conceptual , methodological , and substantive issues entwined in studying compliance ; a symposium on implementation , compliance and effectiveness.” michigan journal of international law , vol . 19 ( winter 1998 ) , pp . jones , timothy t. “implementation of the montreal protocol: barriers , constraints and opportunities.” environmental lawyer , vol . 3 ( 1997 ) , pp . kerr , suzi . “enforcing compliance: the allocation of liability in international ghg emissions trading and the clean development mechanism.” climate issue brief , no . washington , d.c.: resources for the future , oct. 1998 . la rovere , emilio lebro . “the key issue left unresolved in kyoto: penalties for non - compliance.” perspectives on policy: how workable is the kyoto protocol for developing countries ? washington , d.c.: resources for the future , july 1998 . moomaw , william r. “international environmental policy and the softening of sovereignty.” fletcher forum of world affairs , vol . 21 ( fall 1997 ) , pp . morlot , jan corfee . monitoring , reporting and review of national performance under the kyoto protocol . oecd information paper . paris , france: organisation for economic co - operation and development , 1998 . narain , sunita . “rising above the world of post - kyoto politics.” perspectives on policy: how workable is the kyoto protocol for developing countries ? washington , d.c.: resources for the future , july 1998 . o'connell , mary ellen . “enforcement and the success of international environmental law.” global legal studies journal , vol . 3 ( 1995 ) , pp .