( fig . 1.1 compares the sources of doe's total available resources — doe's adjusted new obligational authority and carryover balances — over the last 5 complete fiscal years. ) the congress , recognizing the growing significance of carryover balances , has begun to consider these balances when making decisions about providing new obligational authority . over the last 5 years , the congress has recommended that doe use its carryover balances in lieu of new obligational authority . most programs do not study their carryover balances to identify specific areas where excess balances exist and move these balances to meet other needs . typically , a program simply reduces its new obligational authority by the amount proposed for the use of carryover balances . often , the total amount of the reduction is simply prorated among program areas regardless of the status of the existing carryover balances . for example , within the nuclear energy program , some fiscal year 1995 obligational authority for some program areas — such as isotope support and test reactors — was reduced to compensate for the use of carryover balances , even though these program areas did not have any carryover balances . in 1994 , a subcommittee of doe's budget stakeholders group reported on doe's uncosted obligations . the report noted that budget balances must be carefully analyzed to ensure they do not exceed the amount of work that can be performed . the subcommittee found that “hoarding” of financial resources in excess of actual needs is a common management behavior . the report noted that while doe has continued to use carryover balances to reduce its request for new obligational authority , it is unclear whether the carryover balances have been minimized . the almost $1 billion in carryover balances actually used in fiscal year 1995 to reduce doe's budget request represented only 8 percent of the $12 billion in carryover balances doe held going into that fiscal year . we also obtained accounting reports from doe's cfo that track unobligated balances and discussed with that office doe's funding process and the reasons that unobligated balances exist . we examined reports from the current and past fiscal years to track the status of these balances over the last several years . we talked to budget officials for doe's programs and officials from doe's cfo to understand how , in developing its budget , doe considers unobligated balances as a potential way to reduce its annual budget request . in examining the uncosted obligations , we reviewed doe's reports on uncosted obligations for the past 3 years . in reviewing these reports , we attempted to verify the accuracy of the characterization by doe's contractors of the uncosted obligations as committed or uncommitted to meeting the programs' requirements . in our reviews over the first 2 years , we focused on the uncosted obligations relating to doe's defense programs and environmental management programs because they represent about half of doe's budget . however , in our most recent review , we expanded our scope to include other doe programs: energy efficiency and renewable energy , energy research , nuclear energy , and fossil energy . together , these six programs account for about 85 percent of doe's annual budget .