additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . there are statutory limitations on the size of these loans . farmers visit their county office three to four times and spend a minimum of 3 hours in total completing paperwork to obtain a loan . to obtain a direct loan , a farmer generally visits the fsa county office to obtain a farm programs application package , which includes all of the forms a farmer must complete . a farmer may complete some of these forms during this visit or may gather documentation and complete some of the paperwork before returning to the county office . credit managers indicated that they usually scheduled a visit to review the application . a complete application package generally includes a request for direct loan assistance ; a farm and home plan showing projected production , income , and expenses ; financial records for the past 5 years ; and various other documents that describe the applicant's operations . a farmer makes additional visits to provide more information and , if the loan is approved , to sign the loan agreement . after the loan is approved , a farmer may be required to visit the county office to get signatures on the checks that the farmer receives for selling commodities or to pay back the loan . the noninsured crop disaster assistance program ( nap ) protects the growers of many crops for which federal crop insurance is not available . fsa makes nap payments to eligible farmers when an area's expected yield is less than 65 percent of the normal yield . farmers who participate in nap make at least one visit for a minimum of 15 minutes to the county office each year to file an acreage report . if they suffer a disaster , they will make two additional visits and spend a minimum of 30 minutes for these two visits to apply for assistance . to be eligible for nap , a farmer must file an acreage report annually with the local fsa office . if a farmer suffers a disaster , that farmer can visit the fsa office to complete a request for acreage / disaster credit . after the area has been declared a disaster , the farmer signs the nap certification of income eligibility ; provides production records , if needed ; and signs a crop insurance acreage report and a production yield report . ronald e. maxon , jr. , assistant director fred light renee mcghee - lenart paul pansini carol herrnstadt shulman janice turner the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . we have expanded our recommendation in response to this comment . usda also commented that while most farmers experienced reductions in their administrative requirements , some farmers participating in programs not substantially affected by the 1996 act , such as those for peanuts and tobacco , experienced no change or slightly increased administrative requirements .