( app . iii summarizes the results of these inspections for each of the five states. ) state officials are working with the facilities' operators to resolve these issues . the state's three cement production facilities burning hazardous waste fuels were most recently inspected by epa regional officials between october 1995 and april 1996 . potential violations of the boiler and industrial furnace regulations identified at two of the facilities are under review by epa regional officials . at the third facility , epa found that several daily and quarterly audits of emission control equipment had not been conducted as required . epa sent a notice of violation to this facility . inspections completed between may 1995 and june 1996 identified potential violations at three of the state's four cement production facilities that burn hazardous waste fuels . epa officials are reviewing the results of these inspections and related information to determine whether violations occurred . an inspection of the remaining facility in the state identified no violations . the report on the april 1996 inspection of the one cement production facility in ohio that burns hazardous waste fuels has not yet been finalized ; therefore , an epa official told us that the agency could not provide us with information on the inspection's results . according to this official , the report of epa's inspection of this facility in 1995 is under review by epa regional staff . epa officials are currently reviewing information from a december 1995 inspection of one of pennsylvania's two cement production facilities that burn hazardous waste fuels . the results of a may 1996 inspection of the state's other facility were not available as of july 1996 . each permit must include conditions that are necessary for the facility to comply with rcra and its regulations . the facility's compliance with rcra is measured against the conditions included in the permit . the permit may incorporate these requirements by referring to rcra and epa's implementing regulations , or it may include specific requirements based on the act and regulations . for example , each facility's permit specifies the hazardous substances that must be monitored in the groundwater near the facility . groundwater - monitoring requirements are included in the regulations , but many aspects of the monitoring program depend on the site and , therefore , are developed for each facility's permit . to ensure compliance with their requirements for operating in interim status or with a permit , rcra requires treatment , storage , and disposal facilities to be inspected at least once every 2 years . epa classifies cement production facilities that burn hazardous waste fuel as industrial furnaces . as such , they are subject to the agency's boiler and industrial furnace regulations under rcra , which took effect on august 21 , 1991 . these regulations control emissions of hazardous organic compounds , toxic metals , hydrogen chloride , chlorine gas , and particulate matter from boilers and industrial furnaces burning hazardous waste . in addition , the rule subjects the owners and operators of these facilities to the standards that govern hazardous waste treatment , storage , and disposal facilities in general .