( app . ii provides estimates of fares , and app . iii provides the sampling error for each of these estimates. ) to determine why regional differences in airfares may exist , we analyzed dot's data on airline market shares at each of the 112 airports and discussed with dot analysts and airline representatives how the presence of different carriers may affect fares . to determine the extent to which economic changes could explain any observed regional differences , we analyzed data provided by the bureau of economic analysis on economic growth between 1979 and 1993 , which was the latest year for which data were available , for each of the 112 communities served by the airports we reviewed . appendix vii provides additional details on the scope and methodology of our analyses of airfares . to compare changes in the quantity of air service since deregulation at airports serving small , medium - sized , and large communities , we analyzed data for our 112 airports for may 1978 and may 1995 from the official airline guide ( oag ) , a privately published list of all scheduled commercial flights . specifically , we documented changes in the total number of departures as well as the total number of available seats for each airport . we examined data from 1978 because they provided information on air service before deregulation and data from 1995 because they were the latest available at the time of our review . we chose may to avoid the typical seasonal airline schedule changes that occur in the winter and summer months . we used the oag as our primary data source because dot's database on total annual departures by airport contains only the data reported by the airlines that operate aircraft with more than 60 seats . as a result , dot's data on airport operations do not provide information on departures by commuter carriers or air taxis . however , we analyzed dot's data on annual departures by the larger airlines and the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) estimates of annual commuter and air taxi departures for each airport to confirm the results of our analyses of the oag data . to compare changes in the quality of air service since deregulation at airports serving small , medium - sized , and large communities , we analyzed the oag data described above for the 112 airports in our sample . specifically , for each airport we calculated the changes in a number of indicators of service quality , including the number of destinations served by nonstop and one - stop flights and the percentage of jet departures . we then summarized these calculations for the three airport groups and compared the trends in the various quality indicators to gain an overall perspective on how service quality has changed . we did not , however , develop a formula that would weight these indicators and provide an overall “quality score” for each airport because developing such weights requires subjective judgments of the relative importance of each indicator .