we agree . the information on tax assessors' estimates of the value of recreation residence sites was used as a gross indicator of value and is not reliable as a site - specific estimate of fair market value . agency officials also provided some technical clarifications , which have been included in the report . we conducted our review from july 1995 through october 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we performed our work at forest service headquarters and field offices . we also contacted state and local officials in the areas where we did our field work . appendix ii contains further details on our objectives , scope , and methodology . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of agriculture ; the chief of the forest service ; and the director , office of management and budget . we will also make copies available to others on request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 if you have any questions about this report . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . to increase the efficiency of the special - use program , the forest service has recently begun a study to streamline the special - use permit process . among other things , the goal is to design a work process that reduces the time required to process applications . this effort began in mid - 1996 , and the report is due early in 1997 . however , it should be noted that similar attempts to improve the system have been made in recent years but have met with little success . a recent example was a national task force on special - use management , done in 1993 to 1994 , which addressed issues similar to the current streamlining effort . the task force identified numerous program problems and developed suggested ways to streamline the permit process and make the program more consistent service - wide . but , none of the task force's recommended actions were adopted because , like several of the other situations described earlier in this report , forest service officials told us that the initiative was discontinued because of other agency priorities . in light of the early stage of the newly initiated streamlining effort and the lack of follow through on previous efforts , it is too early to determine what , if any , improvements will arise from the current effort . a key to the success will be the commitment of the forest service leadership to support the findings and provide resources needed to implement recommended actions . as a part of our review , we identified a number of actions that need to be considered by the new study team and the agency as a whole to better administer the program within existing resource constraints . many of these actions are already being used by individual regions , forests or individual districts within forests and could have broader applicability as best practices throughout the agency . in addition to actions already being taken , administrators in the forests and regions provided us with many suggestions for improving efficiency . the specific efforts and suggestions we identified are summarized in table i.1 .