( app . i shows the location , scope , and status of each segment of the project. ) section 668 . in addition , fhwa's emergency relief manual provides fhwa's division offices , located in each state , with the operating procedures for implementing the program . these offices process state highway agencies' applications for funding and make decisions on the eligibility of specific projects . during the first 180 days following a disaster , the program covers up to 100 percent of emergency repairs to restore essential highway traffic service and protect remaining facilities . in addition , for the cypress viaduct replacement project , the congress made all repairs during the first 180 days 100 percent eligible for emergency relief funding . for permanent restoration work or repairs after the first 180 days , the federal share of costs varies with the type of federal - aid highway . for projects on the interstate system , the federal share generally is 90 percent of eligible costs . the cypress viaduct project reestablishes a link in the bay area's freeway system , which connects the east bay area ( including oakland ) with san francisco via the bay bridge and with interstate 80 to the north . the project replaces the 1.5-mile connection that was lost during the earthquake with roughly 5 miles of new freeway segments , providing direct access to both the bay bridge and interstate 80 . it also includes several new interchanges and improves access to the port of oakland . it realigns the original freeway to the west , taking it out of a residential neighborhood and into active rail yards ( see fig . the project comprises seven separate major construction projects , each covering a specific segment of the work and ranging in value from $22 million to $162 million . although the emergency relief program is designed to assist states in quickly repairing highways to predisaster conditions , several factors have slowed the replacement of the cypress viaduct . part of the delay in constructing the project has resulted from public opposition to replacing the old , doubled - decked structure in its original location . in response to public concerns , caltrans identified several alternative alignments that it studied in a 2-year environmental review . in 1991 , caltrans and fhwa decided to replace the destroyed 1.5-mile structure , which had bisected a residential area , with a new 5-mile structure running through active rail yards . further delays occurred because caltrans needed additional time to negotiate right - of - way issues with the railroads and because constructing the highway amid the rail yards created logistical problems . as of march 1996 , fhwa had obligated nearly $1 billion to the project , or about 35 percent of all the emergency relief obligations fhwa has made nationwide since 1989 . these obligations also represent over 95 percent of the emergency relief funding for the project . to date , caltrans has awarded contracts for all of the major construction projects . as table 1 shows , the seven projects are at various stages: one project is complete , five are under way , and one is just beginning .