iii ) . both offices also suggested technical clarifications , which we incorporated as appropriate . office of policy , planning , and evaluation officials said that appendix i of our report gives undue attention to the guidelines of a blue - ribbon advisory panel convened by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , which they believe implies that the recommendations have some relation to epa's use of contingent valuation . the officials also said that our report does not give a balanced view of contingent valuation and places too much emphasis on arguments critical of contingent valuation . furthermore , these interviews are also generally more successful with respondents whose reading levels are low in comparison to the complexity of the questions . the weaknesses of the method include higher costs because interviewers not only must be trained , but they must also travel to and from interviews — some of which may not be successful . in addition , interviewers , by their presence , may affect how respondents answer questions . however , epa did modify its model to address another complication . this complication stemmed from the possibility that reducing sulfur dioxide emissions could increase the amount of other visibility - impairing compounds to be formed . epa was concerned that , if sulfur dioxide was reduced , ammonia that would have combined with sulfur dioxide to form visibility - impairing sulfate would instead combine with nitrogen oxides , forming ammonium nitrate . epa modified its model to account for this potential “nonlinear” complication . epa assessed a variety of different scenarios to determine the potential visibility improvements . first , the model assessed the potential visibility improvements ( in terms of visual range — expressed in kilometers ) under average conditions found during the whitex study period that could result from emission control rates of 70 , 80 , and 90 percent at ngs . second , the model assessed the potential visibility improvements under the worst - case conditions found during the whitex study period that could result from removal rates of 70 , 80 , and 90 percent . epa assessed scenarios that assumed a linear relationship between sulfur dioxide emissions and visibility impairment and other scenarios that assumed a nonlinear relationship . model results showed a dramatic increase in estimated visibility improvements during the worst - case conditions compared to improvements during the average conditions . for example , the results showed visibility improvements under average conditions that ranged from approximately 11 percent for a 70-percent level of emissions reduction to approximately 14 percent for a 90-percent level of emissions reduction . these figures compare to the model's estimates of visibility improvements under worst - case conditions that ranged from approximately 60 percent for a 70-percent level of emissions reduction to approximately 94 percent for a 90-percent level of emissions reduction . because modeling average conditions does not necessarily represent actual conditions on a given day , epa also examined potential visibility improvements using actual data collected during the whitex study . in cases where total visibility impairment data were not available ( because of weather conditions during the study period — i.e. , during periods of cloud cover ) , epa reconstructed data that were measured during the study period .