fcc and the corporation accepted this recommendation . the corporation needed until early november 1998 to finalize its operating procedures , complete the testing of the automated systems supporting these procedures , and secure the office of management and budget's approval of the applicant and vendor forms needed for the reimbursement process . this delay occurred in part because on june 22 , 1998 , fcc released a reconsideration order that significantly altered the program . specifically , the program's funding year was changed from a calendar year cycle to a fiscal year cycle , and the period for the first round of funding was changed from 12 months to 18 months . the order also adjusted the maximum amounts that could be collected and spent during 1998 and the first 6 months of 1999 , directing the corporation to commit no more than $1.925 billion for the schools and libraries program during this time frame . because this amount was not expected to cover all of the applicants' requests , fcc directed the corporation to give funding priority to applicants' requests for telecommunications services and internet access . once these requests are satisfied , the remaining funds are to be used for internal connections , with priority given to applicants eligible for higher discounts . to implement these new priority rules , the corporation had to significantly revise its funding award process and automated support systems . they are also posting the results of their funding decisions on the corporation's web site , broken down by states , types of services funded , and the percentage of funding going to rural / low - income areas . in addition , corporation officials are currently exploring ways to measure the efficiency of their work processes . while these efforts are useful , it is important that fcc take the lead as part of its policy - making and oversight responsibilities to define specific goals and measures for the program , particularly as they relate to the outcomes being achieved by the expenditure of funds . when we completed our audit in early december 1998 , the corporation was finishing its review of applications and starting to make funding decisions , a process that was going much more slowely than expected . as a result , our review did not include certain key activities that the corporation had not yet completed or begun . these include implementing the newly revised review procedures , especially for high - risk applications ; setting priorities for funding commitments in accordance with fcc's orders dealing with applicants' appeals on commitment decisions , including establishing a funding reserve to cover those that are successful ; and reviewing and authorizing vendors' requests for reimbursement . these are challenging activities in themselves and will be even more challenging because they can overlap in time . for example , the reimbursement activity will involve processing tens of thousands of forms submitted by successful applicants and their vendors . while this activity is occurring , applications for the second funding cycle will be coming in . in addition , the corporation found that some established procedures needed to be modified as it learned lessons from reviewing the first round of applications .