in addition , executive order no . 12770 , signed in july 1991 , requires , among other things , that executive branch departments and agencies formulate a metric transition plan by november 30 , 1991 . for example , if all signs are not converted during the same time period , as aashto suggests , drivers might be confused when they see a speed limit sign in metric units , then one in english units . fhwa officials told us that , in implementing sign conversion , they hope to minimize the driving public's confusion and safety concerns by suggesting ways that states can call attention to the new metric signs . while no guidelines have been completed , fhwa officials said that one approach they are considering is to put metric units in yellow to differentiate them from the english unit signs drivers are used to . for any option , the american trucking association official told us that without a nationwide educational process before the conversion occurs , commercial truck drivers and the general driving public may not be familiar with metric units . this lack of education could result in safety concerns related to speed and also clearance heights on bridges and tunnels . alabama has begun to convert its highway signs . in a manner similar to fhwa's option 1 , alabama is replacing highway signs with metric signs through routine maintenance and for other reasons such as construction . however , alabama plans , unlike option 1 , to put an english measure overlay on the signs . under this approach , the state believes that it will save money because the signs need to be replaced anyway , and since signs and overlays are fabricated in the state's shop , all the overlays could be made now and would not be affected by the cost of future inflation . moreover , unlike fhwa's option 1 , this approach would also allow for the signs to be changed to metric concurrently over the same short period as overlays are removed or metric unit overlays are added for those english - unit signs that had not been replaced during maintenance . one open question concerning alabama's approach is whether the state will remove the overlays and convert to metric if fhwa decides not to require conversion . from a safety standpoint , it may not be prudent for one state to convert and the surrounding states to keep their signs in english units . fhwa officials said that they had not decided on a course of action if conversion were not mandatory and some states converted and others did not . fhwa has not estimated the nationwide costs of highway sign conversions . however , on the basis of canada's experience in metric sign conversion as well as the work done to date by alabama , “ballpark” estimates of about $334 million and $420 million can be calculated .