efforts. ) officials at the department of energy and the environmental protection agency — which are responsible for implementing the bulk of the ccap actions — noted that the reductions in the funding for the plan also have a substantial negative effect on the united states' ability to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 2000 by limiting the agencies' ability to implement voluntary initiatives in the plan . for example , in fiscal year 1996 , only about one - half of the requested funds were appropriated . table 3 provides annual budget requests and appropriations for fiscal years 1995 through 1997 . the negotiations are scheduled to conclude in 1997 . because of your concerns about the possible implications of such negotiations , you asked that we evaluate ( 1 ) the progress of the united states and other annex i countries toward meeting the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2000 and ( 2 ) the major factors that affect the countries' ability to reach that goal . as agreed with your office , in addition to the united states , we included in our review canada , germany , italy , japan , and the united kingdom — the six developed countries that are the largest emitters of carbon dioxide , the greenhouse gas considered to be the largest single contributor to human - induced climate change . according to a 1995 assessment by the ipcc , climate models project that increasing atmospheric concentrations of the primary greenhouse gases — carbon dioxide , methane , and nitrous oxide — and aerosols will raise the average global surface temperature between 1.8 and 6.3 degrees fahrenheit by 2100 . the ipcc estimates that such a temperature increase could lead to many potential impacts , including flooding , droughts , changes in crop yields , and changes in ecosystems . in an effort to address concerns about the possibility of global climate change , the united states and other countries signed the united nations framework convention on climate change at the rio earth summit in may 1992 . as of june 1996 , 159 countries had ratified the convention . the convention's ultimate objective is to stabilize the concentrations of human - induced greenhouse gases in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous interference with the climate system . to accomplish this objective , the convention directs the annex i parties to adopt policies and measures to limit greenhouse gases and to protect and enhance the greenhouse gas sinks and reservoirs that absorb and store carbon dioxide from the atmosphere . the convention also directs the annex i parties to submit plans to the conference of the parties with detailed information on the policies and measures that will help return net greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2000 . ( see app . i for more details on the convention and a list of annex i countries. ) as of may 1996 , 33 of the 36 countries listed under annex i had ratified the convention .