( app . i contains a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology. ) with a few exceptions , the volume of salvage timber the forest service has offered for sale has remained fairly constant over the years . however , as the green ( or nonsalvage ) timber sale program has decreased in size , the salvage sale program has increased as a percentage of the total volume offered for sale . in addition , the correction of individual mistakes or errors may not result in solving systemic problems . when reviews identify best practices or mistakes , some mechanism is needed to communicate this information throughout the agency so that all locations benefit . to help ensure that appropriate and consistent practices are in place to manage the salvage sale fund , we recommend that the secretary of agriculture direct the chief of the forest service to take the following actions: clarify the agency's guidance to emphasize that the salvage sale fund takes priority over the k - v fund for the distribution of salvage sale receipts until preparation and administration costs have been recovered . establish national guidance that identifies acceptable data sources and methods for calculating the cost estimates that determine the fund's replenishment requirements . establish national procedures to ensure that salvage sale plans will be adequately reviewed to detect errors . develop national follow - up procedures to ensure that errors , problems , or best practices found in one location are communicated , corrected , or implemented everywhere . we provided a draft of this report to the forest service for review and comment . the forest service said that the report accurately and fairly presented the information about the fund's balance and the management practices affecting the replenishment of the fund . the forest service agreed with the recommendations for corrective action . to respond to the assignment objectives , we reviewed pertinent legislation , the agency's guidance , the agency's financial records , monitoring reports , and selected salvage sales . we spoke with representatives from forest service headquarters , four regional offices , and four national forest offices to discuss how the forest service manages the salvage sale fund . we conducted our work from september 1996 through september 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . appendix i provides a detailed discussion of our scope and methodology . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of agriculture , the chief of the forest service , the director , office of management and budget , and appropriate congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others upon request . if you or your staff have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 206 ) 287-4810 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . sales of salvage timber represented nearly half of all timber offered for sale in fiscal year 1996 . because of this increase in salvage sales , the ranking minority member , subcommittee on interior and related agencies , house committee on appropriations , asked us to provide information on the status of the fund's balance and the management practices used by the forest service to replenish the salvage sale fund .