stakeholders agreed with this assessment . while faa has developed guidelines for considering human factors during the technology development process , it has not established a formal requirement for using these guidelines . in june 1996 , we reported that faa's work on human factors was not centralized , and we recommended that the secretary of transportation direct faa to ensure that all units coordinate their research through the agency's human factors division.according to some faa officials and one stakeholder , such coordination is still lacking and the agency's programs would benefit from assigning responsibility for human factors to a higher level within faa so that these issues can receive sufficient attention from the agency's senior management . in addition , several stakeholders stressed the importance of retaining the same members on teams that address concerns about human factors through the entire development process . one of these stakeholders believes that such continuity will help ensure that the team's efforts are not derailed late in the process by the inclusion of new members and the introduction of a range of new issues and methods of resolving them . ( see app . iii for a description of these capabilities and the expected operational benefits. ) for example , under this proposal , faa would provide more accurate weather information to pilots and controllers to improve safety and potentially reduce flight times . in addition , faa would improve airport surface navigation capabilities by providing pilots ( and operators of other surface vehicles ) with moving maps that display traffic in low - visibility conditions . faa and stakeholders also recommended that the program be renamed the “free flight operational enhancement program.” stakeholders and faa recognize that more detailed planning is needed — to identify risk - mitigation activities , select the final site , and estimate costs , schedules , and the number of required aircraft — and that this planning will require close coordination between faa and industry to ensure that plans are consistent with stated operational capabilities and are achievable by faa and users . faa is currently considering the proposed rtca roadmap for the restructured flight 2000 demonstration and expects to reach a decision in the fall of 1998 . if approved as scheduled , a detailed plan is expected by the end of 1998 . see appendix i for a list of these recommendations . since late 1995 , faa and stakeholders have been working on various free flight recommendations and many associated initiatives and , in august 1996 , agreed on an action plan to guide their implementation . according to faa , through july 1998 , they have fully implemented only 1 of the 35 near - term recommendations — to incorporate airline schedule updates , such as delays and cancellations , into faa's traffic flow management system to help it reduce unnecessary restrictions and delays imposed on airline operations . however , faa and stakeholders have made substantial progress in implementing many of the initiatives under the near - term recommendations .