( figs . 1.1 and 1.2 show the disposal facility in barnwell , south carolina. ) by march 1979 the disposal facilities in illinois , kentucky , and new york had been closed for a variety of reasons , including leakage at the sites . then , in july 1979 , the governor of nevada ordered the beatty facility shutdown after two incidents involving trucks carrying radioactive waste into the facility . thereafter , the governors of nevada , south carolina , and washington wrote to the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) for assurance that rules governing shipments would be enforced . the beatty facility reopened in late july 1979 . in october 1979 , the governor of washington ordered that state's disposal facility to shut down after deficiencies were found in waste shipments bound for the facility . among other things , a truckload of radioactive cobalt was leaking . also in 1979 , the governor of south carolina said that the state's disposal facility was receiving up to 90 percent of all commercially generated low - level waste and that decontamination of the disabled three mile island nuclear power plant would generate waste amounting to almost 50 percent of the total volume the state had received in 1978 . for this reason , the governor said that south carolina would not accept waste from the disabled plant . concerned about the potential loss of disposal capacity , several congressional committees held hearings in 1979 . initially , the committees considered legislation that would make the federal government responsible for the disposal of commercially generated low - level waste . the governors of the three states with operating disposal facilities , however , opposed this approach because they wanted states to have an opportunity to examine alternatives to federal disposal . by the end of the year , washington and nevada had reopened their disposal facilities , and the congress had deferred consideration of legislation to the next year . subsequently , a task force convened by the national governors' association recommended that responsibility for the disposal of low - level waste be assumed by the states . other state government organizations supported this approach . late in 1980 , the congress established a new policy regarding the disposal of commercially generated low - level waste by enacting the low - level radioactive waste policy act of 1980 ( p.l . the act made each state responsible for making disposal capacity available and stated that low - level radioactive waste can be most safely and efficiently managed on a regional basis . to implement this policy , the congress encouraged states to form compacts to meet their collective disposal needs and to minimize the number of new disposal sites . congressional consent was required for a compact to become effective . as an inducement to states to form compacts and develop regional disposal facilities , the act stated that compacts could , beginning january 1 , 1986 , restrict the use of their disposal facilities to wastes generated within their respective regions . the congress expected states to have new disposal facilities capable of handling their own low - level waste by that date .