mt . pinos ranger district , california . a second forest service location in california was selected because the use of ohvs in the state is high . all types of ohvs — including motorcycles , four - wheel drive vehicles , and atvs — are widely used in the mt . pinos ranger district on terrain ranging from chaparral at lower elevations to conifer forests at higher elevations . mesa ranger district , arizona . arizona ranks second to california in ohv use on forest service lands and sixth in the number of forest service acres in the conterminous united states . the mesa ranger district has the highest ohv use in the state . atvs and four - wheel drive vehicles are used most frequently for this arid terrain , which ranges from rolling hills to mountains . salt lake ranger district , utah . utah ranks fifth in ohv use on forest service lands and 10th in the number of forest service acres in the conterminous united states . the salt lake ranger district has some of the highest ohv use in the state . motorcycles and four - wheel drive vehicles are used most commonly for this terrain consisting of foothills and steep canyons . during our visits to each of the eight locations , we reviewed resource management plans and activity plans that addressed ohv management . additionally , to obtain information on funding and staffing , we held discussions with resource area and ranger district managers and their ohv program staff and obtained available documentation on funding and staffing . precise funding and staffing information was not available because none of the blm and forest service locations accounted for the ohv program separately from other recreation programs . ohv program staff provided us , for fiscal year 1993 , with estimates of the amount of federal funding and the number of staff that were being devoted to ohv activities at each of the eight locations and with the actual amount of state funding provided through cooperative partnerships at all of the locations except the one where state funding was not provided . to obtain information on the designation of land for ohv use , we talked with resource area and ranger district managers and ohv program staff and reviewed regulations , resource management plans , activity plans , and other documentation relevant to the determination of where ohvs are and are not allowed . we also obtained information on how these determinations were communicated to the public through such means as maps and signs . to obtain information on the monitoring of ohv use to identify its adverse effects and to determine compliance with regulations for it , we spoke with resource area and ranger district managers , ohv program staff , and law enforcement staff . we also reviewed regulations , resource management plans , activity plans , and other documentation to determine how and to what extent monitoring — systematic , documented monitoring as well as casual , sporadic monitoring — of ohv use was being done , how any adverse effects of such use and any needed corrective actions were being identified , and how regulations for ohv use were being enforced through the issuance of citations and other means .