apr . 1 , 1998 apr . 1 , 1997 mar . 1 , 1998 ( continued ) information on small commercial customers was unavailable from the gas utility . pacific gas and electric co. san diego gas and electric co. southern california gas co. central illinois light co . the peoples gas light and coke co. northern indiana public service co. bay state gas co. semco energy gas co. - battle creek div . michigan consolidated gas co. semco energy gas co. new jersey natural gas co. public service electric and gas co. public service company of new mexico ( continued ) brooklyn union - brooklyn , queens , staten island central hudson gas and electric corp. consolidated edison company of new york , inc. corning natural gas corp. new york state electric and gas corp. niagara mohawk power corp. orange and rockland utilities , inc. rochester gas and electric corp. cincinnati gas and electric co. national fuel gas co . peoples natural gas co. wisconsin gas co. gas utility not offering small commercial customer choice program , as of july 31 , 1998 . gas utility not offering residential customer choice program , as of july 31 , 1998 . information unavailable from gas utility . pacific gas and electric co. san diego gas and electric co. southern california gas co. central illinois light co . the peoples gas light and coke co. northern indiana public service co. semco energy gas co. - battle creek div . michigan consolidated gas co. semco energy gas co. new jersey natural gas co. public service electric and gas co. public service company of new mexico brooklyn union - brooklyn , queens , staten island ( continued ) central hudson gas and electric corp. consolidated edison company of new york , inc. corning natural gas corp. new york state electric and gas corp. niagara mohawk power corp. orange and rockland utilities , inc. rochester gas and electric corp. cincinnati gas and electric co. national fuel gas co . peoples natural gas co. wisconsin gas co. capacity assignment is not an issue in new mexico , given the location of gas fields in the state . pacific gas and electric co. san diego gas and electric co. southern california gas co. central illinois light co . the peoples gas light and coke co. northern indiana public service co. bay state gas co. semco energy gas co. - battle creek div . michigan consolidated gas co. semco energy gas co. new jersey natural gas co. public service electric and gas co. public service company of new mexico brooklyn union - brooklyn , queens , staten island ( continued ) central hudson gas and electric corp. consolidated edison company of new york , inc. corning natural gas corp. new york state electric and gas corp. niagara mohawk power corp. orange and rockland utilities , inc. rochester gas and electric corp. national fuel gas co . peoples natural gas co. wisconsin gas co. information not provided . we mailed a questionnaire to 43 gas utilities that had either , or both , residential or small commercial customer choice programs under way as of july 31 , 1998 .