( app . long - term stewardship covers activities required to protect human health and the environment from hazards remaining after cleanup is complete . such activities include maintaining records of contamination , maintaining and repairing closure caps , monitoring and treating environmental contamination and precipitation run - off , erecting and maintaining barriers , and enforcing land - use restrictions . doe recently reported that , for sites where cleanups do not reduce contamination to a level suitable for unrestricted use , the costs of stewardship activities are unknown.in october 1999 , doe announced a study on long - term stewardship , which it anticipates will be issued in late fall 2000 . “submit a report to the defense committees of congress not later than march 1 , 2000 , on the life - cycle cost comparisons of on - site versus off - site disposal of low - level radioactive wastes . the report shall assess the potential costs to the federal government for long - term monitoring and maintenance at doe - owned disposal sites.” doe issued its report in march 2000 . relying on data from studies previously prepared for other purposes , doe estimated that the life - cycle cost to dispose of its low - level and mixed wastes either primarily or exclusively at its disposal facilities would slightly exceed $4 billion ( in fiscal year 1998 dollars ) . in contrast , doe estimated that using only commercial disposal facilities would cost over $7 billion . the report does not provide the projected life - cycle costs for individual disposal facilities . thus , the report does not provide managers at doe's waste - generating sites or other program officials with the kind of disposal cost data that would be useful in making disposal decisions . doe recognized this limitation in the report by pointing out that , without additional and more detailed analysis , efforts to estimate and compare the life - cycle costs of doe and commercial facilities remain uncertain . doe's decentralized management approach encourages site - level decision - making on waste treatment , storage , and disposal . waste managers need consider only the effects of their decisions on their site's annual budget and may not consider the immediate or future costs of the decisions to the department . furthermore , because the costs for storage , treatment , and disposal are interdependent , managers may - without doe guidance - make decisions in their site's interests that could result in higher costs for other sites or for doe as a whole . for example , the fees that one of doe's waste disposal facilities would charge a waste - generating site would add to that site's waste management costs . higher waste management costs could , in turn , encourage the site to assign higher priority in its budget to other cleanup or operational activities . by contrast , the absence of disposal fees could encourage the same waste - generating site to assign higher priority to waste disposal activities .