ii. ) our review was conducted between june 1993 and october 1994 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . a discussion of the scope and methodology for our work is contained in appendix iii . unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter . this ruling was upheld on appeal . in july 1990 , the united states obtained a temporary restraining order restricting beach - cleaning activities on private land that could lead to the taking of four listed piping plovers . the involved parties subsequently signed a settlement agreement that provided protection for the birds while allowing some beach - cleaning activities to continue . in december 1993 , the united states brought suit to stop a logging company from harvesting timber on its lands in washington state . the united states alleged that the harvest would have resulted in the taking of a pair of listed northern spotted owls . the parties first agreed to a temporary restraining order that prohibited timber harvest activities pending a decision on the united states' motion for a preliminary injunction . in january 1994 , the parties agreed to continue the prohibition on harvesting until the matter is resolved at trial . an environmental group obtained a preliminary injunction in february 1994 to halt the logging of old - growth forest on private lands in california , which was allegedly resulting in the taking of the marbled murrelet ( a listed bird ) . concerning certain legal proceedings that claim a violation of the fifth amendment to the constitution resulting from species protection under the esa , as of may 1994 , according to the congressional research service , only two reported court decisions had been reached . in one case , a rancher sought compensation from the united states because the esa prohibited him from killing grizzly bears that preyed on his sheep . the court ruled that since the government neither owned nor controlled the grizzly bears , it was not responsible for their actions . the other case involved an individual who had transported a listed cougar and a listed leopard from florida to kentucky in violation of the esa's ban on the transportation of endangered animals in interstate ( and foreign ) commerce . the individual claimed that the government's seizure of these animals deprived him of his property without just compensation and due process . the court found no constitutional taking since the esa only prevented the sale of the endangered animals in interstate commerce , leaving the individual the option of selling the animals within the state of florida . in commenting on a draft of this report , the assistant secretary for fish and wildlife and parks , department of the interior , stated that the report's discussion of the application of section 7 and section 10 of the esa to nonfederal land use activities was accurate . ( see app . at that time , we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees ; the secretary of the interior ; and the director , u.s . fish & wildlife service . we will also make copies available to others upon request .