( see app . i for a detailed presentation of our analysis. ) faa did not include a cost for establishing telephone lines between grand junction and denver under the remoting option . the overlooked cost of annual telephone lines was $107,500 , or , when discounted over the 20-year life cycle of the project , $853,000 in 1995 dollars . the principal findings from our analysis are summarized below . we revised faa's estimated total telecommunications cost under the remote option upward by $853,000 , from $618,000 to $1,470,000 . faa overestimated the cost of staffing under each of the options studied because the agency used authorized staffing levels — even though the positions were often unfilled . ( 3 ) what can be done to improve faa's process for determining when and where to remote radar data ? faa conducted a series of analyses to identify the most cost - effective way to use the radar data from grand junction . on the basis of the results of a 1992 study , faa decided that building a tracon facility at grand junction was less costly than remoting the radar signal from grand junction to denver . however , in may 1994 faa conducted another cost analysis that factored in the use of a new technology for remoting radar signals known as video compression . the results of this analysis showed that it would be less costly to remote the radar signal from grand junction to denver , and in august 1994 , faa announced its choice of the less costly option . faa's decision to remote the radar signal also means that the tower at grand junction will be operated by a contractor . faa's decision to provide approach guidance to aircraft through the denver tracon dictates that the grand junction tower be classified as a level - 1 tower that operates using visual flight rules ( vfr ) . in 1993 , the house and senate appropriations committees directed faa to contract out all level - 1 vfr towers to the private sector . we discussed remoting and considerations about the safety and efficiency of a contractor - operated tower with officials at faa headquarters and at faa's northwest mountain region , who have jurisdiction over the grand junction and denver areas . we also discussed these issues with officials from major aviation - related associations . according to the air traffic officials in faa's northwest mountain region , the agency has successfully transmitted radar data hundreds of miles to its enroute centers for the past 30 years without compromising or affecting the system's safety . because faa's ability to transmit radar data over 250 miles of mountainous terrain was a concern to the grand junction representatives , we reviewed faa's information on the reliability and availability of radar data transmissions . the information showed that the reliability and availability of the transmissions averaged 99.98 percent nationally over the past 5 years and that they were unaffected by mountainous terrain . according to faa and aviation association officials , a controller's physical location is not a safety issue , and controllers routinely control air traffic safely without having visual contact with other air traffic controllers .