no further plans have been created . the project's sponsors have not released any cost estimates . a ridership and feasibility study is under way . joseph christoff helen desaulniers lewison lem david lichtenfeld ray sendejas the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . incremental improvements . to create a high - speed rail system connecting chicago and st. louis . the proposed system covers 282 miles and would also link springfield , illinois and bloomington - normal , illinois to chicago and st. louis . new trains are set to begin service in fall 1999 , with higher speed operation beginning sometime in 2000 . the illinois department of transportation ( idot ) plans to improve grade crossings across the state , rebuild track in the east st. louis area , and develop a new signal system on an existing rail line between chicago and st. louis . currently , trains in the corridor travel at a top speed of 79 mph , with the proposed improvements increasing speed up to 110 mph . idot estimates the cost of the project to be $350 million . idot is currently working on a draft environmental impact statement for the corridor and developing a grade crossing arrestor net that will block the road when trains approach to prevent train - vehicle collisions . also , idot is working with the association of american railroads and the federal railroad administration to develop a train control system that will increase safety along the line by overriding certain engineer actions . for example , the control system would automatically stop a train if the engineer runs a red signal or exceeds the speed limit . once these tasks are complete , idot will seek a private sector partner for the project . idot hopes high - speed service could begin in 2003 . since 1981 , the state of michigan has been exploring high - speed rail technology . under istea , the secretary designated the chicago - to - detroit corridor as a high - speed rail corridor . fdot expects the legislation to pass easily .