ii. ) in 1990 through 1994 , ntsb reported 201 accidents by commercial airlines that provide scheduled service . most airlines — both new and established — had no accidents during 1990-94 . for example , among the 29 new large airlines in our review , 3 had accidents ; the other 26 had no accidents during the 5-year period . similarly , an airline that began operating in 1986 would also be considered a new airline in our analysis of 1990 data , because that airline's fifth year of operations occurred in 1990 . however , beginning with the analysis of 1991 data , that same airline's operations would then be included in the comparison group of established airlines — those that had provided scheduled domestic service for more than 5 years during the 1990-94 period . thus , we considered any airline that began scheduled operations between january 1986 and december 1994 to be a new airline during relevant portions of the 1990-94 period . this definition of new airline differs from that normally applied in other aviation safety research . those studies have tended to define new airlines as being airlines that began interstate operations following the airline deregulation act of 1978 . however , airlines such as southwest airlines that began interstate operations immediately after that act have now been operating for nearly two decades . we believe that a review that focuses more on airlines with considerably fewer years of experience would provide more insight into the safety performance of new airlines . we discussed our definition of new airlines with faa , the department of transportation ( dot ) , and the national transportation safety board ( ntsb ) , none of whom raised any objection or concern . to determine which specific airlines should be designated as new airlines and which should be designated as established airlines , we reviewed records from dot's airline fitness division within the office of the secretary of transportation ( ost ) , the bureau of transportation statistics ( bts ) , and faa to develop a list of airlines subdivided into large and commuter new airlines and large and commuter established airlines . first , we obtained historical information from ost's files on airlines that it had found “fit” and to which dot had issued operating authority . we initially included as new airlines those that ost had recertificated following a substantial change in their operations . second , we used industry financial and operating records from bts to help determine the year in which airlines began scheduled operations , and divided the airline list into “new” and “established” by the year indicated in the records . because none of the automated databases we analyzed recorded any specific distinction between scheduled commuter airlines and on - demand air taxi services ( i.e. , chartered airlines ) , we relied on faa officials to provide this distinction . as a result , we eliminated on - demand airlines from our list . however , some commuters that operated as both commuters and on - demand airlines at different points during our 5-year period are included among our group of established commuters . bts and faa verified our airline lists .