we agree . the final report was revised to reflect usda's comment , as appropriate . we agree and have revised our report to state that the 5 years includes the testing phase of the development process . also , while we recognize that usda developed the adjusted gross revenue insurance plan for pilot testing in 14 months , other plans may require longer than 2 years to reach pilot testing , as we discuss in appendix iii of our report . for example , the aquaculture plan is in its fifth year of development and has yet to begin testing . we agree and acknowledge in our report that the adjusted gross revenue plan , if successful , will provide coverage for all specialty and nonspecialty crops . a judgment as to the relative riskiness is needed: that is , is the crop in question relatively more or less risky than the crop with more adequate data ? a premium rate is then established by using the existing premium rates for the reference crop or crops as a benchmark . for the experience rating method , usda considers only the actual insurance experience of a crop and uses only those data to compute the required premium rate . one example of this method is the calculation of loss - cost ratios to develop premium rates . briefly , usda uses average coverage and production data , among other things , to calculate a loss - cost ratio — claims payments divided by liabilities . in order to adequately reflect future losses , many years of historical loss data are typically needed . statistical modeling uses empirical or assumed probability distributions of key variables and draws thousands of observations from those distributions . at the end of the analysis , the events that resulted in a loss are totaled and divided by the total liability at risk . the result is an estimated premium rate . for example , usda used statistical modeling to determine rates for the pilot revenue insurance plans for avocados and pecans . simply put , the premium rates offered in these plans are developed through statistical models that construct a revenue distribution — a depiction of expected farm revenues — on the basis of actual price and yield data . in addition , usda used statistical modeling in order to set rates for fruit trees in florida , a program that provides insurance coverage for physical damage to the trees . we do not believe table 2 of our report is misleading . while crop insurance participation was required in 1995 as a condition of eligibility for certain federal farm programs , participation in recent years has declined , as table 2 shows . in october 1998 , the congress passed major ad hoc disaster assistance legislation because of losses in the plains states but also because of insufficient participation in the crop insurance program . we agree that since 1994 , in addition to developing insurance programs for specialty crops , usda's resources have also been used to develop insurance programs for nonspecialty crops .