dot numbers . mcsap coordinators for several states we contacted believe that their state could assume lead responsibility for conducting compliance reviews . however , mcsap coordinators in several other states expressed concern about further expanding their state's role in the compliance review program because of funding and personnel constraints . for example , one coordinator stated that , without additional mcsap funding , his state may have to reduce the number of roadside inspections to conduct more compliance reviews . some mcsap coordinators also told us that their state laws do not provide them with adequate legal authority to conduct compliance reviews of intrastate carriers or to impose civil fines for the violations found during a review . effective in fiscal year 1998 , omc initiated performance - based commercial vehicle safety plans to replace the state enforcement plan that each state submits annually as a basis for receiving mcsap funds . the new plan is intended to give each state more flexibility in choosing the combination of programs that would best achieve the goal of reducing motor carrier accidents in the state while retaining minimum levels of effort for roadside inspections . in contrast , the state enforcement plan had established safety activity goals for the forthcoming year , including the number of roadside inspections and law enforcement activities . in fiscal year 1996 , omc provided the states with $54 million for mcsap's basic grant program and $22.6 million for designated program activities , such as hazardous materials training and covert operations . ( see table i.5 in app . several mcsap coordinators suggested moving some of mcsap's designated program funding to mcsap's basic grant funding because , in accordance with the new commercial vehicle safety plans , the states should be given more flexibility to determine the best use of funds for reducing motor carrier accidents . some mcsap coordinators said that using funds for designated activities sometimes is not an efficient use of their state's limited resources , adding that their state could use these funds more productively in other motor carrier safety programs . omc and the states have rated the safety fitness of about 34 percent of the 379,000 commercial motor carriers currently engaged in interstate and foreign commerce . in 1989 , omc had announced its intention to assess the safety fitness of each commercial motor carrier . however , because the number of interstate carriers has grown rapidly in recent years and resources for conducting compliance reviews are limited , omc subsequently targeted compliance reviews on carriers that pose the greatest potential risk to highway safety . in fiscal year 1996 , omc and the states conducted 8,952 compliance reviews of commercial motor carriers , including about 4,324 first - time reviews and 4,628 follow - up reviews . in fiscal year 1996 , omc identified motor carriers for compliance reviews primarily through its selective compliance and enforcement ( sce ) list , which prioritized motor carriers on such factors as the commodity being transported and the carrier's out - of - service rate for vehicles , prior compliance reviews , and the written complaints that it had received .