( app . ii lists these 10 agencies and the percentage of their sales resulting from business travel. ) according to all of these agencies , several other factors have more of an impact on booking decisions than overrides . these factors include consumers' desire to obtain the lowest available fare and to accumulate frequent flier miles , scheduling convenience , and pre - existing contracts between individual businesses and particular airlines . how can we compete when 90 percent of travel agent customers are steered away from us ? ” the existence of overrides also tends to limit the entry of established carriers into new markets . senior executives at one major travel agency told us , for example , that when one established airline attempted to enter a number of markets dominated by another established airline , the nonincumbent complained that agents were not booking passengers on its flights in those markets . the travel agency , which has override agreements with both carriers , told the nonincumbent that it could not “support” it in those markets because it also had an override agreement with the incumbent carrier and that those were key markets for the incumbent . as a result , according to the travel agency's senior management , the nonincumbent later pulled out of those markets . our discussions with representatives of 9 of the 10 largest u.s. travel agencies , which in 1995 accounted for over one - third of all ticket sales by travel agents , generally confirmed the importance of overrides . nevertheless , most estimated that about 25 percent of the time , the customer defers to the travel agent , and in these cases overrides tend to be the “tie - breaker.” most agencies with whom we spoke termed overrides “very important.” representatives of one agency noted that because of the commission caps imposed by most of the established airlines , its entire profit last year was the result of overrides . in our august 1990 report , we expressed concern that overrides had the potential to influence a larger proportion of airline bookings than the proportion estimated by travel agencies . we cited , for example , a 1987 travel industry study which found that 51 percent of the travel agents who were surveyed chose a particular airline because of overrides at least some of the time . however , we concluded that , short of an outright ban on overrides , few policy options existed that would mitigate overrides' negative impact on new entry . since their inception in the early 1980s , frequent flier plans have become an increasingly effective tool to encourage customers' loyalty to particular airlines . under these plans , passengers qualify for awards by flying a certain number of miles with the sponsoring airline . thus , business passengers who travel frequently have a greater incentive to fly that particular airline continuously in order to build miles that may later be used for free trips . the director of advertising and promotions at one established carrier estimated that of the 20 million members of that airline's frequent flier plan , nearly 1 million fly more than 25,000 miles a year , and 25,000 members fly more than 100,000 miles a year .