under the provisions of h.r . 2195 , usda could have reduced fsa personnel by 1,823 staff years and saved approximately $332 million between 1997 and 2002 , using usda's assumptions about personnel costs . usda would not have realized dollar savings from the reduction of 197 of these staff years . these 197 staff years are associated with farm - measurement services , which are supported by the funds collected from the fees that farmers pay for the services . the savings would essentially have begun in fiscal year 1997 — the second year of implementation — and continued through fiscal year 2002 — the final year of implementation . the staff year workload would not have decreased in fiscal year 1996 , the first year of implementation , because of the increased workload associated with implementing the new program . for example , fsa's staff would have had to sign up owners and operators for the program and inform them of the new program's provisions . fsa would also have needed to inform participants how these provisions would affect their operations and payments . furthermore , although staff reductions would have begun in fiscal year 1997 , the savings during that year would have been partially offset by $28 million in employee separation costs . the personnel reductions would have decreased fsa's total staff by about 9 percent over the period . according to usda officials , because of the timing of the enactment of the 1996 farm bill , the full savings related to its freedom - to - farm and crop insurance provisions may not occur until 1998 . most of the personnel reductions resulting from h.r . 2195 would have occurred in fsa's county staff , particularly in five functional areas — payments under the commodity programs , maintenance of basic farm records , compliance activities , reimbursable farm - measurement services , and the establishment of bases and yields . usda anticipated that additional staff reductions would occur in fsa's headquarters , state offices , and technical offices . table 1 shows our analysis of the changes in staff years by work function . regarding payments for commodity programs , reductions would have occurred primarily because farmers would have signed up for the program only once , by entering into a contract at the start of the 7-year period . consequently , fsa would have performed the notification and recordkeeping associated with enrollment only once . in contrast , under the 1990 farm bill , farmers had to sign up annually for program payments . regarding basic farm records , staff reductions would have occurred because less recordkeeping would have been required for changes pertaining to owners' and operators' relationships . the proposals in h.r . 2195 and the balanced budget act of 1995 would have ended the 60-year - old requirement for farmers to idle farmland in order to qualify for federal support payments . farmers would have been expected to plant for the marketplace , and the federal government would have gradually reduced its role in agriculture . 2195 , farmers would have entered into 7-year market transition contracts and received fixed annual payments based on their production .