we agree . our point , however , is that some borrowers serve large numbers of customers , including some in nonrural areas , and that the congress may want to target loans to borrowers who serve rural areas more exclusively . usda's discomfort over options involving graduating borrowers and limiting borrowers' loan and debt levels reflects , in part , concern over possible detrimental impacts that these options may have on borrowers or their service to rural areas . it is difficult to predict the extent to which usda's concerns would be realized if these options were to be put into effect . however , we believe that the possible impacts to service in rural areas should be considered in developing specific implementation plans for these or any other options that the congress may choose to act upon . overall , usda's comments provide additional perspectives on issues discussed in the report and highlight the difficulties that face policymakers as they consider options for improving the effectiveness and efficiency while reducing the cost to the government of rus' electricity and telecommunications loan programs . a complete presentation of usda's comments and our response is provided in appendix iii . we performed our review of the operations of rus' electricity and telecommunications loan programs from may 1997 through december 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . our scope and methodology are discussed in appendix iv . as agreed , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 14 days from the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies of this report to the appropriate senate and house committees ; interested members of congress ; the secretary of agriculture ; the administrator of rus ; the director , office of management and budget ; and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others upon request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-5138 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix v . this appendix contains information on the financial characteristics of borrowers that obtained electricity and telecommunications loans during calendar years 1994 through june 30 , 1997 . table i.1 shows that the overwhelming majority of the borrowers had equity of $1 million or more at the end of the year prior to receiving the loans . table i.2 shows that most of these borrowers made a profit of at least $100,000 in the year prior to receiving the loans . tables i.3 , i.4 , and i.5 show that the current ratios , debt - to - asset ratios , and times - interest - earned ratios of the borrowers were generally favorable prior to receiving the loans . this appendix contains information on the dollar value of electricity and telecommunications loans made to borrowers during fiscal years 1994 through june 30 , 1997 . table ii.1 shows that while most of the 926 loans approved during this period were made for less than $10 million , 113 loans were for $10 million or more . the following are gao's comments on the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) letter dated december 18 , 1997 .