104-127 , apr . 4 , 1996 ) fundamentally changed the federal government's role in supporting production agriculture by replacing traditional commodity programs and reducing many of the administrative requirements related to the remaining agriculture programs . prior to the 1996 act , farmers participating in federal commodity programs were restricted to planting certain types and amounts of crops . following the 1996 act , farmers are expected to plant and market crops by considering market conditions rather than by relying on government programs . one farmer said that he appreciated receiving postcards from his county office when it was time for him to visit the office . under the commodity programs , for example , fsa staff reminded farmers 15 days prior to the ending date of a sign - up period that they had not enrolled in the current year's programs . providing prompt walk - in service . at most county offices , farmers can visit without an appointment and receive prompt service for commodity programs . this service could range from answering simple questions to filling out a farmer's paperwork . farmers like the flexibility of coming into the office when it is convenient for them — when the weather is bad , for instance , without having to make an appointment . in commenting on a draft of this report , fsa officials noted that while the results of usda's survey and our discussions with farmers indicate that most farmers are satisfied with the service that they receive , some are not . for example , some small and minority farmers involved in the farm loan programs have criticized usda recently for not providing adequate service . fsa officials stated that they would like to provide a better level of service for participants in the farm loan programs , but they lack adequately trained staff . as of december 1997 , fsa had 2,396 offices and 11,399 county office employees . these office and staffing levels reflect the closing of more than 300 offices and staff reductions of about 15 percent since december 1994 . if the 1998 budget proposal to further reduce staffing by an additional 50 percent and to close an additional 500 offices were carried out , fsa would average about two to three employees per office , in comparison with the current average of about five . as we have previously reported , county offices need a minimum of two staff just to conduct the administrative functions for maintaining basic office operations , such as obtaining and managing office space and processing the paperwork for the payroll . as a result , fsa staff in these smaller offices will have less time to provide service to farmers than they did when county offices were staffed more fully . the proposed staffing reductions will result in more county office closures than the 500 proposed , according to fsa officials we interviewed . as fsa closes offices , farmers will have to travel farther and visit offices that serve more farmers . although they stated that they are still receiving quality service , some farmers we spoke with whose county office had recently closed have already experienced the service impacts associated with these changes .