balance . about $99 million of exxon's payments through september 30 , 1997 , had not been disbursed . this amount included four annual deposits of $12 million for a total of $48 million to the future restoration reserve savings account and a fund balance of $51 million that had not been allocated to any specific activity as of september 30 , 1997 . for the most part , the approved activities to help restore injured resources funded by the trustee council — habitat acquisition , general restoration , and monitoring and research — appear consistent with the agreement and the policies in the restoration plan . however , a few research projects that were approved may not be consistent with one of two policies contained in the restoration plan: ( 1 ) projects should be clearly linked to the oil spill , and ( 2 ) approved projects should not be ones that would be funded under normal agency mission activities . the council has attempted to clarify its policies in an effort to eliminate funding of projects with questionable links to the oil spill . a few projects with questionable links to the oil spill or normal agency mission activities , however , continue to be funded . we found that nearly all disbursements by the trustee council were consistent with the memorandum of agreement and policies set forth in the restoration plan . the memorandum of agreement states that funds be used for restoring , replacing , rehabilitating , enhancing , or acquiring the equivalent of the natural resources damaged and the reduced or lost services provided by such resources ; be spent on natural resources in alaska ; and be spent as a result of the oil spill . the restoration plan provides the policy guidance in implementing the memorandum of agreement as well as guidance on funding projects that may be normal agency management activities . for the habitat acquisition activities , we reviewed the nine large parcel purchases and found that they were located in the oil spill area and were to either help or enhance damaged resources . on the basis of our review of the approved work plans for the 3-year period fiscal years 1995 through 1997 and our discussions with the council's chief scientist , we believe that the monitoring and research and general restoration projects fell within the definition of the categories in the restoration plan , were subject to independent scientific review , and addressed injured resources and reduced or lost services in the spill area , focusing on those not yet recovered . although most projects appear to be in keeping with the council's policies , some appear questionable and have generated disagreement in the review and approval process . during our review of the work plans , we noted that the council continued to fund sockeye salmon and killer whale projects that we identified in our 1993 report as either questionably linked to the oil spill or duplicating existing responsibilities of federal or state agencies . parties involved in the review process have disagreed about whether these studies fall within the restoration plan . as part of the review process , a scientific peer review is conducted .