no role . the canadian food inspection agency is a departmental corporation under the financial administration act . the new agency is headed by a president , who reports to the minister of agriculture and agri - food . the minister , in turn , reports to parliament on food safety inspection activities . the minister of health reports to parliament on setting human food safety standards and policies and assessing the effectiveness of the new agency's activities . the new agency , although supported largely through general tax revenues , has the power to raise and retain funds from its activities . for fiscal year 1998 , the new agency had a budget of about $355 million canadian dollars ( $238 million in u.s. dollars ) , which included about $25 million in start - up funds and about $330 million ( $221 million in u.s. dollars ) in appropriations . canadian officials expect the food safety agency's budgets to decline over the next 3 years , from about $330 million this year to about $311 million ( $208 million in u.s. dollars ) in fiscal year 2000 , about $304 million ( $204 million in u.s. dollars ) in fiscal year 2001 , and about $299 million ( $200 million in u.s. dollars ) in fiscal year 2002 . while most government departments are funded annually through parliamentary appropriations , the new agency has the authority to spend its annual appropriation over 24 months . according to officials of the new agency , this more flexible funding authority should allow the new agency to access funds over an extended period , providing for unplanned cash flows or other unforeseen expenses . unlike most other federal departments , the new agency is allowed to raise a portion of its annual budget by assessing user fees . in 1998 , the canadian auditor general estimated that in its first year of operation , the new agency raised about 12 percent of its budget through user fees . with respect to personnel , the agency's enabling legislation created a management and accountability framework that provides the new agency with some flexibility to replace traditional departmental approaches . for example , the new agency received “separate employer status.” that is , it has been delegated the authority to establish its own human resource management system , negotiate collective bargaining agreements with unions , and establish terms and conditions of employment . ( traditionally such authority is the responsibility of the treasury board — roughly equivalent to a combination of the u.s. department of the treasury , the office of personnel management , and the office of management and budget ) . thus , the new agency can work with unions to create a more flexible work environment , such as changing inspectors' duty hours or work - site assignments . in its first year of operation , the agency reduced the number of union bargaining units from 19 to 4 , thereby creating a more streamlined and efficient process . under the new system , existing departments provided the full - time equivalent of 4,500 staff years to the new agency .