we did not independently verify the statistics . for the information comparing pto with its counterpart patent offices in japan and europe , we used the trilateral statistical reports published as a joint effort by the three agencies for calendar years 1993 and 1994 . we supplemented these with discussions with pto officials and attorneys specializing in international patent issues . we did not independently verify the information obtained . we conducted our review from february 1996 through june 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . table ii.2: patent pendency by examination group for patents issued or applications abandoned during fiscal year 1994 general , metallurgical , inorganic , petroleum and electrical chemistry and engineering organic chemistry drug , etc . specialized chemical industries , etc . high polymer chemistry , plastics , coating , photography , etc . industrial electronics , physics , etc . computer systems , etc . packages , cleaning , textiles , and geometrical instruments electronic / optical systems , etc . communications , measuring , testing and lamp / discharge group material shaping , tools , etc . medical technology , sporting goods , etc . table ii.3: patent pendency by examination group for patents issued during fiscal year 1994 general , metallurgical , inorganic , petroleum and electrical chemistry and engineering organic chemistry drug , etc . specialized chemical industries , etc . high polymer chemistry , plastics , coating , photography , etc . industrial electronics , physics , etc . computer systems , etc . packages , cleaning , textiles , and geometrical instruments electronic / optical systems , etc . communications , measuring , testing and lamp / discharge group material shaping , tools , etc . medical technology , sporting goods , etc . more details on our scope and methodology are included in appendix i . a patent is a grant given by a government to an inventor of the right to exclude others for a limited time from making , using , or selling his or her invention . in the united states , the sole granting authority for patents is pto . while other countries throughout the world have patent offices of their own , the two largest counterparts to pto are the patent offices in japan and europe . within pto , the patent application examination process consists of several progressive phases . an applicant files a patent application with pto , where it is subjected to reviews for accuracy and completeness during a preexamination phase . following preexamination , the application is assigned , or “docketed,” to an examiner within an examination group that has expertise in a specific field , such as computer systems or biotechnology . at this point , the examiner begins the process of determining whether the invention is a new and useful process or product that should receive a patent . usually early in the process , the examiner makes a preliminary decision , or “first action,” which may then be followed by a series of contacts with the applicant to resolve questions and / or obtain additional information . possibly after a number of actions by the examiner , pto will decide whether to issue a patent .