( app . ii provides information on the dropout rates for various types of sponsors. ) for example , a school sponsor in south carolina decreased its workers' salaries from $7.25 per hour to $6.25 per hour . a school in texas did not pay cafeteria personnel the cost - of - living adjustments that they had received during the school year . a school in oregon hired fewer , less experienced staff and reduced their hours . fewer meal sites . according to pennsylvania officials , sponsors had to close or consolidate sites that were too expensive to operate . the small sites that served only 15 to 20 children could not afford to provide meals at the reduced rate . california officials also reported that some sponsors closed sites they could no longer afford to operate . for example , one school sponsor closed three of its six sites because it could no longer afford the labor costs . one of the largest sponsors in texas , a school district , closed almost all the sites that served fewer than 50 children a day in 1997 , and almost all the sites that served fewer than 100 children a day in 1998 . however , the total number of children served by the sponsor has increased since 1996 . more sponsors submitted operating costs that exceeded their federal reimbursements in fiscal year 1997 than in 1996 . this means that more sponsors are covering some of the cost of operating the program with other funds . in 1996 , prior to the rate decrease , 30 percent ( 1,084 ) of sponsors were reimbursed for all their reported program costs because these costs were equal to or lower than the maximum reimbursements ( total meals multiplied by the reimbursement rates ) . the remaining 70 percent , or 2,565 sponsors , reported costs exceeding their federal reimbursements . in 1997 , fewer sponsors — 25 percent ( 966 ) — were reimbursed for their reported costs , while more sponsors — 75 percent ( 2,831 ) — reported costs that exceeded their reimbursements . these totals include sponsors that dropped out of the program after 1996 and new sponsors in 1997 . the limited impact on the number of sponsors , children , and meals served that has been observed to date is due in part to sponsors' continuing to contribute funds to offset the decreased reimbursements . appendix iv provides more details on the type of sponsors that reported operating costs in excess of their reimbursements . we provided usda with copies of a draft of this report for review and comment . we met with food and nutrition service officials , including the branch chief for program analysis and monitoring branch , child nutrition division , who generally agreed with the report's findings and provided us wih a number of technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate . we are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees , interested members of congress , the secretary of agriculture , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available upon request . if you have any questions about this report , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-5138 .