that was not our intent . our work focused on the information contained in setting priorities , which states on page 15 that “a number of measurable short - term effects are expected to provide indicators of long - term economic success . in addition to straightforward tracking of technical milestones , these indicators include: . increased industrial collaborations and strategic alliances ; . we have not changed our position . our 1993 report did not evaluate nist's atp evaluation strategy but did present a nist - provided summary of the atp evaluation strategy . when asked “in the absence of this atp award , would your organization have pursued the development of this technology ? ” nearly as many respondents — 14 out of 26 — responded affirmatively . four respondents said they definitely would have ; 10 said they probably would have ; 7 said they probably would not have ; and 5 said they definitely would not have . in response to a subsequent question , the 14 respondents said they would have pursued the development of the technology at a different level of effort . thus , although 15 participants believed that atp enabled them to pursue this kind of high - risk , long - term research , 14 participants in the same study believed that they would at least probably have pursued the technology even without the atp award , although at a different level of effort . on the basis of the same survey , nist reported that the second most important effect cited by early atp participants was “forging new relationships between companies , and between companies and government or academic labs.” however , several discrepancies exist . we maintain that it is an overstatement to project the impact of this joint venture to the entire industry of over 800 manufacturers . for purposes of comparison , in the draft report we estimated spending for research and development ( r&d ) for the entire printed wiring board industry . we still maintain that these estimates are the correct figures to use for such purposes and that the figures further reinforce our conclusion . our analysis is based on the industry's overall expenditures for r&d for the following reason . as nist comments , only a portion of the industry's r&d is focused on advanced technology . but similarly , only a portion of the joint venture's r&d is focused on advanced technology , and the larger balance is devoted to incremental improvements in existing technology . nist's suggested analysis still does not demonstrate that atp has quadrupled total u.s. r&d work on advanced technologies for printed wiring boards . taking into account the department of energy's contribution of $5.2 million , or $1.04 million annually , the total annual spending on r&d by the atp - supported joint venture is that amount plus the joint venture's original annual expenditure of $5.7 million , for a total of $6.74 million . since less than half of that total is spent for r&d on advanced technology , $3.37 million , or a half , is a high estimate of the amount spent annually by the joint venture on advanced technology r&d .