1 and app . i for additional analysis of these violations ) . an increasing number of marine safety offices have initiated marpol v enforcement cases , indicating that the coast guard's enforcement efforts are becoming more widespread . during 1991 , two marine safety offices ( new york and corpus christi ) accounted for more than half of all enforcement cases , and only 20 of the 47 marine safety offices had initiated any cases . by 1994 , the distribution of cases had become less concentrated — the five marine safety offices with the most cases accounted for more than half of all enforcement cases . also , 33 marine safety offices had initiated at least one marpol v enforcement case . of the 725 marpol v cases reported as of february 15 , 1995 , 69 , or just under 10 percent , have resulted in the assessment of a penalty against the responsible party . the penalties ranged from a few hundred dollars to $50,000 and averaged almost $6,200 per case . however , 303 , or 42 percent , of the cases submitted are still in process , including two - thirds of all the cases initiated in 1994 . it is reasonable to assume that some percentage of the 303 cases still in process will also result in a penalty assessment and , therefore , that the percentage of cases which result in a penalty for this time period will likely increase over time . however , whether the coast guard's success in obtaining penalties is improving over time is not yet known because so many 1993 and 1994 cases are still being processed . the remaining enforcement cases — those not in process or not having resulted in a civil penalty — have been administratively settled by the coast guard . these actions include case closure or dismissal , the issuance of a warning letter , or a referral to the country where the ship is registered — a procedure known as flag state referral — for consideration of possible fines or other actions by another country . several factors impede the coast guard's efforts to identify violations and , once they are identified , efficiently and effectively process enforcement cases for a civil penalty determination . among these factors are ( 1 ) the inherent difficulty of enforcing marpol v , ( 2 ) the absence of a standardized marpol v inspection checklist , ( 3 ) diminished cooperation between the coast guard and aphis , ( 4 ) inadequate feedback on case development , and ( 5 ) a burdensome and ineffective management information system . to cite a vessel for illegally discharging garbage or plastics , someone must see the event and report it , or the coast guard must develop strong evidence that such a discharge occurred . it is rare that coast guard personnel or others actually witness a vessel illegally disposing of plastics or other garbage . a coast guard hearing officer told us that unlike oil or hazardous waste discharges , discharges of plastics and other garbage usually do not leave a trail of evidence that can be traced to the offending party .