( see apps . i through vi for details on each ez's activities as reported in 1997 ) . activities classified as related to economic development also generally accounted for a larger portion of the ezs' reported ssbg allocations than other activities . as table 2 shows , the ezs allocated from 31 to 97 percent of their grant funds for economic development activities . in general , the ezs provided updated information or clarification on the status of their activities , which we incorporated where appropriate . in addition , the new york ez provided current information on the funding of its projects . we did not incorporate this information because we did not receive similar information from the other ezs . to determine the progress that the atlanta , baltimore , new york , kentucky highlands , mississippi mid - delta , and rio grande valley ezs made in implementing their economic development activities and the causes for any delays , we reviewed documents prepared by the ezs , including memorandums of agreement , benchmark documents , and performance reports submitted to hud and usda . we did not review the accuracy of the information reported by the ezs in these reports ; however , we did review hud's and usda's methods for ensuring the reports' accuracy . we also reviewed hud's and usda's field evaluations for all of the ezs visited , interviewed hud and usda headquarters officials and field staff , and reviewed reports from entities that were under contract with hud and usda to evaluate the ez program . during our visits to the ezs , we interviewed their executive directors and toured locations where economic development activities were being implemented . table iv.1 shows each planned economic development activity , its status as reported by the ez in 1997 , and the amount of ssbg funds allocated to the activity . another factor affecting the progress of the ezs was the extent to which their management organizations had prior experience in implementing similar activities . specifically , hud conducted 10 workshops nationwide between april and may 1998 , while usda conducted 14 workshops nationwide between may and june . workshop topics included how to apply for the program , develop a strategic plan , develop a governance structure , design a performance management system , understand and market ez tax incentives , develop programs and projects to promote business development , and use job training and job placement services to help residents get jobs . in october 1998 , the congress provided $45 million for the 15 new urban ezs ( $3 million for each one ) and $10 million for the 5 new rural ezs . usda officials told us that they will allocate $2 million to each new rural ez.both agencies are evaluating communities' applications for designation . hud received about 120 applications , while usda received 169 applications , of which 160 were complete . program officials from both agencies told us that they expect the designations to be made no later than january 1 , 1999 , the statutory deadline . we provided a draft of this report to hud and usda for review and comment .