( see app . i for a list of the usic members as of sept. 30 , 1998 ) . in order to participate in the ipp program , a company is required to become a member of usic and pay dues based on its size . the dues structure is as follows: small companies pay $1,000 for a 2-year period ; consortiums and universities pay $2,000 for a 1-year period ; and large companies pay $5,000 for a 1-year period . andreyev acoustics institute , in moscow , received $68,200 of the $99,700 spent for the demonstration of an acoustic nozzle developed at the institute . however , the director of the institute told us that the institute actually received $27,000 . according to the director , about 40 percent of the $27,000 was allocated for the salaries of scientists and others participating in the project . an interlaboratory chairman is appointed for a 1-year period . the current chairman is from the national renewable energy laboratory . table 1.2 shows the distribution of ipp projects and associated funding among the national laboratories as of december 1998 . a consortium of u.s. industry participants , called the united states industry coalition ( usic ) , was established in 1994 to promote commercialization with the nis . usic is a private nonprofit entity headed by a president and board of directors and includes u.s. companies and universities . the ipp program comprises over 400 funded projects . these projects represent collaborative activities among doe's national laboratories , u.s. industry partners , and nis institutes . the purpose of the activities is to convert nis defense industries to commercial civilian applications . nis nuclear , biological , and chemical weapons facilities are supposed to be the recipients of ipp funding . also eligible are facilities that were associated with the development and production of strategic delivery systems or strategic defense systems . ipp projects are categorized in three phases — thrust 1 , thrust 2 , and thrust 3 . the first phase is geared toward technology identification and verification . thrust 1 projects are funded by the u.s. government and focus on “lab to lab” collaboration , or direct contact between doe's national laboratories and nis institutes . the second phase involves a u.s. industry partner that agrees to share in the costs of the project with the u.s. government to further develop potential technologies . the principal instrument used by doe to promote partnerships is the cooperative research and development agreement . the u.s. industry partner is expected to match funds provided by doe . industry costs can include in - kind support , such as employee time and equipment . projects that do not receive any financial support from the u.s. government , known as thrust 3 , are expected to be self - sustaining business ventures . according to doe , 413 ipp projects had received funding as of december 1998 . about 170 nis institutes and organizations have been involved in the ipp program . the distribution of the projects among the three phases — and the associated funding levels — is shown in table 1.3 . the ipp program is focused on four nis countries — russia , ukraine , belarus , and kazakhstan .