( app . i lists the council's membership ) . according to dot , the council was established to advise the department on implementing the access to jobs program , as well as to keep other agencies apprised of dot's actions . members of the council have worked on a number of issues associated with implementing the access to jobs program and have reviewed the program's draft guidance prior to issuance . , how the percentage of available jobs accessible to the target population by public transportation increased with the program ) ; ( 3 ) how many people are using these expanded services ; and ( 4 ) how the project's sponsors collaborated . these measures relate specifically to transportation services — not to other related services , such as those matching people to available jobs — and reflect dot's philosophy that transportation alone will not ensure successful employment for the target population . however , these steps set up a data collection plan without establishing how the program's success will be evaluated . dot's guidance does not specify key measurable goals for the program , such as increasing by an appropriate percentage the number of jobs accessible by public transportation . as a result , once the data are collected , dot has no standard for measuring success and no method for determining whether the data are indicative of the program's success . in responding to our may 1998 report , dot agreed to revisit and refine its strategic plan as it applies to the access to jobs program and to develop performance goals and performance measures for incorporation into the department's fiscal year 2000 performance plan . while dot's activities mark progress towards an evaluation process , dot has begun to implement the access to jobs program without plans for evaluating its effectiveness . according to dot's access to jobs coordinator , dot recognizes that evaluation is important to the access to jobs program . dot had included a specific provision on evaluation in its program proposal . but because dot wanted to distribute the money to start projects as quickly as possible , it chose to save evaluation issues until later . however , dot is not currently certain how it will analyze the collected data to evaluate the nationwide success of the access to jobs program or what additional information it may request from grantees for this purpose . while the program's guidance is essentially complete for fiscal year 1999 , the department may add further details on performance measurement when it awards funds to the fiscal year 1999 grantees . department officials said they plan to provide additional guidance on performance indicators for future applicants . since tea - 21 established the access to jobs program in june 1998 , dot has made important strides in developing an overall framework for implementing this new program . the department has resolved many of the program implementation challenges we cited in our may 1998 report . specifically , it has made some important decisions about how it will distribute the program's funds , what criteria it will use to review grant applications , and how it will coordinate the program with other federal agencies' efforts .