iv ) . the working group's 1994 annual report to the task force , issued as a draft in august 1994 and published in may 1995 , outlines general objectives for federal ecosystem management and recommends a large number of actions deemed necessary to restore the ecosystem . in general , the core group identified issues , effects , causes , data needs , strategies , and alternatives for addressing management issues . efforts by the core group were developed with , or reviewed by , local scientists and management experts . the sanctuary advisory council also reviewed and revised the work of the core group , often after conferring with constituents in the community . through the strategic assessment approach , stakeholders identified management actions or strategies and their operational requirements , institutional arrangements , implementation costs , and financing alternatives . many of these strategies point to the need for acquiring better knowledge of the resources before taking action . a noaa official stated to us that this “back to front” approach helps clarify research needs by identifying the research projects that would be most helpful in finding solutions to specific management problems . the sanctuary advisory council contributed directly to the development of a key component of the management plan establishing special - use zones within the sanctuary . zoning involved designating areas within the sanctuary for different types of uses and activities and for different levels of resource protection . while noaa and the core group developed the preliminary ideas for zones , the advisory council formed several subcommittees to examine these ideas in depth . the advisory council developed the criteria to be used in establishing zones , and the subcommittees then applied the criteria to develop proposed areas and refine boundaries . the subcommittees' proposals were ultimately presented to the public in an open meeting , and the entire advisory council publicly voted to recommend the subcommittees' proposals to noaa and the core group . the advisory council recommended a preferred management alternative to noaa and the core group , which noaa incorporated in the draft management plan . this plan and environmental impact statement were made available for public comment in april 1995 . afterwards , staff of the florida keys national marine sanctuary held or planned to hold ( 1 ) information expositions ( “expos” ) throughout the keys to answer residents' questions about the plan , ( 2 ) working sessions with various interest groups , and ( 3 ) public meetings before the comment period closes in december 1995 . according to a noaa attorney , the core group's participation in this inclusive , integrated approach complied with the federal advisory committee act ( faca ) . the core group was not a chartered advisory committee ; however , noaa's attorney maintains that because it served to exchange information , not advice , on how the state and federal governments conduct operations on sanctuary waters , it did not fall under faca's requirements . the citizen's sanctuary advisory council was chartered under faca . according to an official in noaa's strategic environmental assessment division , all participating stakeholders had opportunities throughout the process to raise concerns and have these concerns addressed in the management plan .