we have deleted this sentence from the report . 4 ( f ) . the text on page 12 of the draft accompanied figure 4 , both of which deal with contributions for the entire corridor . mbta is an independent state authority . the chairman of its board is the state's secretary of transportation . mbta's commuter rail provides access to boston for most of eastern massachusetts via 11 separate lines . the system covers 226 route - miles , of which 44 lie on the northeast corridor between providence , rhode island , and boston , massachusetts . mbta's 1993 commuter - rail ridership was 21.6 million . conrail began operations in april 1976 as a federal government - owned corporation , although its origins go back to the earliest days of railroading in north america . the oldest segment of what became conrail was the granite railway co. , built in 1826 to carry granite blocks for the bunker hill monument in massachusetts . by the early 1970s , scores of railroads in the northeast and midwest had been acquired or merged into six different lines , and all were bankrupt . the federal government , recognizing the national economic importance of the six railroads , responded by creating conrail and appropriating the funds needed to rebuild tracks , locomotives , and freight cars . in 1981 , conrail no longer required federal investment and finished the year with its first profit . in 1987 , the federal government sold its ownership interest in conrail through what at the time was the largest initial public stock offering in the nation's history . in 1996 , conrail operated a railroad route network of about 11,000 miles with a fleet of about 2,100 locomotives and nearly 53,000 freight cars . the providence and worcester railroad company is an interstate freight carrier conducting railroad operations in connecticut , rhode island , and massachusetts . the railroad interchanges freight traffic with conrail at worcester , massachusetts , and at new haven , connecticut ; with the springfield terminal railway company ( formerly the boston and maine railroad ) at gardner , massachusetts ; and with the new england central railroad ( formerly the central vermont railway ) at new london , connecticut . in 1994 , the railroad handled 28,404 carloads of freight and 45,405 containers . the providence and worcester railroad operates over 470 miles of track , approximately 170 miles of which it owns . on the northeast corridor , the railroad operates between providence , rhode island , and south norwalk , connecticut . reduced revenues could jeopardize this plan . a second key component of amtrak's plan is having a continuing source of capital funds . to conduct our work , we visited officials at amtrak's headquarters in washington , d.c. , and its northeast corridor strategic business unit in philadelphia , pennsylvania ; the federal railroad administration in washington , d.c. ; and the eight commuter railroads and the state and local agencies responsible for their operations . at these locations , we also obtained and reviewed pertinent documents and discussed activities relating to all aspects of operations on and funding for the corridor's main line from washington , d.c. , to boston , massachusetts .