( see app . ii for detailed descriptions of each program included in our analysis. ) even within fha , there are homeownership programs other than the section 203 ( b ) program . for example , fha also offers mortgages for individual condominium units under section 234 ( c ) , rehabilitation mortgages under the section 203 ( k ) program , home equity conversion mortgages under section 255 , and homeownership counseling . the section 203 ( b ) program , however , is fha's principal means of promoting affordable single - family homeownership . in 1995 , about 60 percent of all fha single - family mortgages were made under the section 203 ( b ) program . for the purposes of this chapter , we provide data for all of the federal programs , including the fha section 203 ( b ) program , which we use as a guide for describing the other programs . these programs assist homeowners by providing loans , guarantees , interest subsidies , help with down payments and closing costs , or other forms of assistance . in terms of what loans the gses purchase , an increasing proportion were made to persons in targeted income groups and locations during the first 2 years of the social goals . however , it may be too soon to judge the impact that the social goals ultimately may have . according to hud's data , the gses purchased a greater proportion of loans made to low - and moderate - income persons in 1994 than they did in 1993 — up 10 percentage points for fannie mae and 9 percentage points for freddie mac . this assistance may go directly to the homeowner or through an intermediary , such as a local government or nonprofit organization . this limit differs depending on the company . for loans with a 97 percent ltv ratio , four of the pmis specified $203,150 as their maximum loan limit when this was the conforming loan limit ; one stated that the limit was $250,000 ; and the remaining pmi did not specify a loan limit . va places no limit on the maximum loan that may be guaranteed , except that the mortgage may not exceed the home's appraised value plus the va funding fee , if it is financed . as a rule , however , lenders generally limit va loans to four times the va guaranty amount . since the maximum va guaranty is currently legislatively set at $50,750 , va loans will rarely exceed $203,000 . fha , pmis , and va differ in terms of their maximum allowable ltv ratios and how they calculate this ratio . fha and va allow higher ltv ratios than pmis . the ltv ratio represents the ratio of the unpaid principal balance of the loan to the lesser of the appraised value or the sales price of the property . ltv ratios are important because of the direct relationship that exists between the amount of equity a borrower has in his / her home and the likelihood or risk of default . the higher the ltv ratio , the less cash a borrower is required to pay out of his / her own funds .