( see app . some new data will be included when certain ongoing studies are completed . these studies include mortality studies of doe's workers at the idaho national engineering laboratory and the portsmouth gaseous diffusion plant in ohio ; a study of cancer incidence among workers at rocky flats by the national institute for occupational safety and health ; and studies from the national center for environmental health , including estimates of the effect of the radiation from hanford on the air and water in the surrounding area . while adding the results of these studies will make some of the data in cedr more current , the system will still lack the comprehensive data discussed above that would make it the valuable resource that the secretarial panel and nas recommended . updates are planned to the working data sets for at least two sites and the dosimetry data for several others . to determine how well cedr meets its intended objective of being a comprehensive resource , we ( 1 ) reviewed recommendations from reports by the secretarial panel for the evaluation of epidemiologic research activities and national academy of sciences ( nas ) on designing and implementing cedr ; ( 2 ) interviewed officials at doe headquarters — including the assistant secretary for environment , safety , and health ; the acting director of the office of epidemiology and health surveillance ; and the cedr program coordinator — and contractor staff at the lawrence berkeley laboratory concerning the current status of cedr ; ( 3 ) reviewed relevant doe directives , program plans , progress reports , and documentation on cedr ; ( 4 ) interviewed eight of the nine members ( attempts to contact the ninth member were unsuccessful ) of the nas committee responsible for monitoring and reporting on doe's progress on cedr ; and ( 5 ) interviewed the officials from the national institute for occupational safety and health and the national center for environmental health who were responsible for the studies conducted under the memorandum of understanding between doe and the department of health and human services ( hhs ) . to determine how accessible and usable cedr is for outside researchers we also ( 1 ) obtained authorization from doe to become cedr users and accessed and reviewed various files in the system and ( 2 ) interviewed cedr users about their experiences with the system . we also discussed these issues with the officials on the nas committee and at hhs mentioned above . we performed our review between february 1994 and may 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we discussed the facts presented in this report with cedr program officials at the lawrence berkeley laboratory and officials at doe headquarters and incorporated their views where appropriate . as requested , we also provided a draft of this report to doe for comment . although doe did not formally respond within the 15 days allowed , the views expressed by the acting director of the office of epidemiology and health surveillance and our evaluation of them are presented in the agency comments section of this report .