( see app . i for the types of certificates that faa issues. ) operators include , for example , airport operators , agricultural operators , scheduled and on - demand air carriers , and scheduled cargo carriers . faa's data did not include a certificate type for these actions . in fiscal years 1990 through 1997 , most violations that led to the issuance of emergency orders took many months to investigate , issue emergency orders , and resolve . for more than half the cases , over 13 months passed between the date of the violation and the final resolution of the case . once faa learned about the violations , about 2 percent were resolved within a month and 63 percent within a year , while the remaining 37 percent of the cases took more than a year to resolve . ( see table iv.1. ) after the issuance of the emergency order , cases were not resolved until any appeals were completed and certificates were returned to faa . at each step , the process was potentially subject to delays , some of which were not under faa's control . in 70 percent of the cases in which faa issued emergency orders , the agency did not learn of the violation on the date that it occurred . faa learned about approximately 30 percent of the violations on the date that they occurred and about nearly half of the violations within a month of their occurrence . but discovering violations often took months or years: while faa learned of 87 percent of the violations within a year of their occurrence , it did not learn of the remaining 13 percent of the violations for from just over a year to nearly 17 years from the date of occurrence . ( see table iv.2. ) faa learned more quickly about violations related to some types of certificates than about those related to other types . while a pilot's deviation from an assigned flight altitude may be detected promptly by an air traffic controller , faa might not learn about a falsification of maintenance records until years after the repair was made , according to the acting director of flight standards . faa became aware within 5 days of half of the violations that resulted in the issuance of emergency orders to revoke or suspend pilot licenses . these time frames were significantly longer for cases involving medical certificates ( 74 days ) or mechanic certificates ( 131 days ) . faa's investigation of violations that led to emergency orders and the issuance of those orders generally took months to complete . they provided a variety of opinions that reflected the tension between faa's responsibility to act prudently in investigating thoroughly before revoking or suspending a certificate and its responsibility to act swiftly in cases that present an immediate threat to safety or a demonstrated lack of qualifications . the scope of our review of faa's use of emergency orders did not permit the kind of case analysis that would determine whether faa had struck the appropriate balance between these competing responsibilities .