one strain — e . coli o157:h7 — causes potentially serious illness , particularly for children and individuals with weakened immune systems . each year in the united states , an estimated 50 to 100 people die from e. coli 0157:h7 infections . although antibiotics are not the recommended treatment for e. coli o157:h7 infections , antibiotics are often given because of the symptoms displayed in the patient and because some doctors believe antibiotics will help . antibiotic - resistant strains of e. coli o157:h7 have been identified in animals , food , and humans , and the emergence of antibiotic resistance in e. coli o157:h7 is of concern to scientists because laboratory studies have demonstrated that organisms may exchange genes , including the gene that allows an organism to resist an antibiotic . we recognize the complexity of antimicrobial resistance and have reviewed the considerable body of research on the human health implications of the agricultural use of antibiotics . however , this report is not intended to be a complete technical assessment of the public health issues surrounding the agricultural use of antibiotics . rather , it provides information on agricultural use and the implications of that use for human health , federal roles and responsibilities regarding the use of antibiotics in agriculture , and the issues surrounding the debate over whether to further regulate or restrict agricultural use . with regard to this debate , we present the many divergent , sometimes conflicting , viewpoints . for a more technical discussion of this complex public health issue , with citations to several specific research papers , see antimicrobial resistance: data to assess public health threat from resistant bacteria are limited ( gao / hehs / nsiad / rced - 99-132 , apr . the report acknowledges that the factors that contribute to antibiotic resistance include the nature of pathogens , environmental pressures , and the use of antibiotics in human medicine and in agriculture . the report also discusses three antibiotic - resistant foodborne infections linked to the use of antibiotics in food - producing animals . it was not our intent to suggest that a major scientific study should be undertaken to quantify agriculture's contribution to the resistance problem relative to other factors . however , the report does recognize that there is not consensus on agriculture's role . indeed , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) does not believe there is consensus among experts that research has linked the use of antibiotics in agriculture to the emergence of resistant strains of salmonella , campylobacter , and e. coli in humans . we revised the report to clarify the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) positions that research has established that the use of antimicrobials in agriculture contributes to resistant foodborne pathogens and that there is a pressing need to promote the more prudent use of antibiotics in each setting . hhs notes that growth promotants deserve careful scrutiny but that a simple ban on growth promotants would not address all uses of antibiotics in agriculture .