the other two were not . in response to interior's comment , we revised the report to reflect that while the bureau defers noncritical items , it does not defer items it deems to be critical . interior also notes that unfunded maintenance requirements do not necessarily indicate a deferred maintenance situation . in our view , any maintenance requirements that are put off until the future are deferred . however , we revised the report to state that deferred maintenance is not problematic as long as it can be managed . as requested by interior , we added “due to limited and declining federal budgetary sources.” 12 . interior clarified that the costs of rewinding the shasta units decreased from $10.5 million ( low bid ) in 1994 to $8.8 million in 1996 . the rewind contract was executed in 1996 to increase the rating to 142 mw per unit versus the higher - priced rewind in 1994 to 125 mw per unit . most importantly , the $21.5 million commitment includes the replacement of turbines in three units that were not included in earlier cost estimates . because of the new information provided regarding the nature of the additional work at shasta , we revised our report in chapter 3 to state that the bureau expanded the scope of work to be performed at the plant . as suggested by interior , we revised the text to state that the funding arrangements in the pacific northwest were necessitated by budget cuts during the 1980s . also , the need to fund about $200 million in maintenance in the near term would limit the bureau's ability to pay for maintenance and repairs in a steady , predictable fashion . as suggested by interior , we deleted the word “electricity” from the reference to the bureau's operation and maintenance budget . as suggested by interior , we revised the text to eliminate references to “separate” joint operating committees . as suggested by interior , we changed “defer spending” to “reschedule. on march 16 , 1999 , the department of defense ( including the army corps of engineers ) provided us with a letter acknowledging that the corps' verbal comments , discussed with us at a march 10 , 1999 , meeting , had been resolved . the primary verbal comment was that we did not reflect changes in the performance of the corps' hydropower plants that occurred in fiscal year 1998 . the corps suggested that we include these data in various graphs in our report . as discussed with corps officials , we addressed the changes in the corps' performance in the text of our report , primarily in chapter 2 . however , we declined to show changes in the graphs because the 1998 data were not available for the nonfederal hydropower generating units at the time we completed our review . the following are gao's comments on the department of energy's ( including the bonneville power administration's ) letter dated march 11 , 1999 . on march 11 , 1999 , bonneville provided us with general and specific comments regarding our draft report .