travel . we examined claims for travel expenses and found that they are carefully reviewed by administrative staff for compliance with the established procedures . if administrative staff determine that a traveler is not entitled to reimbursement ( for example , for a meal that was paid for as part of a conference fee ) , they deny payment for the item . we found instances in which such denials occurred . service contracting . is the council following sound business practices and exercising adequate oversight of business operations ? the council is a four - state body authorized by the congress and established as an interstate agency on april 28 , 1981 , by agreement among the four northwest states . its main purpose is to act as a regional planning and policy - making agency to ensure that the northwest has an adequate , economical , and reliable power system , while simultaneously rebuilding the fish and wildlife populations damaged by the operations of federal dams on the columbia river and its tributaries . the council members , two from each of the four states , are appointed by their respective governors and have two main functions: ( 1 ) representing their states in energy and fish and wildlife matters and ( 2 ) through the executive director , directing and overseeing the council staff . both the act and the council's by - laws specify that the members are responsible for overseeing both the council's program activities and its business operations , including approving major policy and personnel changes . as a four - state body , the council is neither a federal nor a state agency , and it has some flexibility in developing its own operating policies and procedures . the act directed the council to follow federal laws in its conduct of business operations “to the extent appropriate.” for example , all meetings of the council are held in public session , as required by federal law . the council's annual budget ( about $8 million ) comes from electric power revenues paid to the bonneville power administration ( bpa ) . the council's energy planning , conservation , and fish and wildlife efforts have been consistent with the goals and direction laid out in the act and other congressional direction . however , changing conditions in the utility industry and fish and wildlife mitigation have implications for the council's future roles and responsibilities . the act directed the council to prepare a regional conservation and electric power plan within 2 years of its establishment and at least every 5 years thereafter . the council has done so , developing four plans , the first in 1983 ; the most recent plan is still in draft form . each plan has included a 20-year forecast of the demand for electricity and options for meeting that demand . the act also directed the council to develop a program for protecting and enhancing the fish and wildlife affected by dams on the columbia river and its tributaries and to open it for review at least every 5 years . the council adopted its first fish and wildlife plan in november 1982 .