additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the infrastructure of these systems has long been problematic . in 1993 , for example , we reported on the basis of a 50-state survey that 15 to 20 percent of the nation's small community water systems needed “major improvements” in their water treatment facilities , water storage facilities , and water distribution systems . according to epa's needs survey , the total infrastructure investment needed by these systems through 2014 is $37.2 billion . in establishing the drinking water state revolving fund program , the congress added a number of important provisions in recognition of the special needs associated with small water systems . for example , the states are required to include affordability considerations in their criteria for setting priorities among loans and are allowed to use up to 30 percent of their allotments to provide loan subsidies for “disadvantaged” communities ( including many small water systems ) . the law also provides that at least 15 percent of each state's revolving fund ( which includes repayments , state match , and leveraged funds ) must be loaned to systems serving populations of less than 10,000 and that 2 percent may be set aside for providing technical assistance to these systems . officials from the national rural water association view these provisions very positively because , unlike the situation with the clean water state revolving loan fund , the states have the flexibility to address state - specific issues , including the problems experienced by small systems . while the drinking water state revolving fund program's effectiveness in meeting small systems' needs remains to be proven , major associations representing public water systems point to the inherent advantages that large systems have in competing for these funds . for example , the executive director of the association of metropolitan water agencies ( which represents larger systems ) told us that a fair number of large systems will probably apply for revolving fund money , noting that large systems will be in a position to “get the fund moving” by getting more money to revolve in and out of the fund . officials from the national rural water association , which represents smaller systems , predicted that the states will be less likely to provide substantial monies from the revolving fund to small systems because it is easier to administer fewer large loans than it is to administer many small loans and loans to larger systems are also less likely to adversely affect the states' bond ratings . national rural water association officials did note , however , that states have already used , or intend to use , the set - aside provisions , especially the 2-percent set - aside for technical assistance to small systems . available information on the program indicates that the states are using the revolving fund to provide technical assistance and loans to small water systems .