none . oak ridge allowed the addition of only 2 years to both age and pension credited service . most enhanced retirement offerings would not be available to employees hired after 9 / 27 / 91 because of minimum years of service requirements . the mound plan allowed an employee , if at least age 49 , to retire with an unreduced pension if age and years of service totaled 80 . what steps has energy taken to oversee the implementation of the plans ? to carry out its missions , energy relies on contractors for the management , operation , maintenance , and support of its facilities . since the end of the cold war , the agency's mission at its defense nuclear facilities has changed from weapons production to cleanup and environmental restoration , thus necessitating a change in employees' skills . energy's facilities have also had to reduce their workforce in response to overall cuts in the federal budget . at the end of fiscal year 1996 , total employment by contractors at the facilities was estimated at about 110,000 , down from a high of nearly 149,000 at the end of fiscal year 1992 . section 3161 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1993 requires that when a change in the workforce at a defense nuclear facility is necessary , energy must develop a plan for restructuring the contractor workforce . these plans are to be developed in consultation with the appropriate national and local stakeholders , including labor , government , education , and community groups . according to the act , changes in the workforce should be accomplished to minimize social and economic impacts , should be made only after 120 days' notice , and should be accomplished , when possible , through the use of retraining , early retirement , attrition , and other options to minimize layoffs ; the secretary shall submit to the congress a plan for a defense nuclear facility within 90 days after the date of the 120-day notice , or 90 days after the enactment of the act , whichever is later ; employees shall , to the extent practicable , be retrained for work in environmental restoration and waste management activities ; employees whose employment is terminated shall , to the extent practicable , receive preference in hiring ; and energy should provide relocation assistance to transferred employees and should assist terminated employees in obtaining appropriate retraining , education , and reemployment . in addition to the act's specific requirements , energy's guidelines provided that extended medical insurance should be offered to all separated contractor employees . moreover , although the act refers only to defense nuclear facilities , the secretary of energy determined that in the interest of fairness , the workforce restructuring planning process would be applied at both defense nuclear facilities and nondefense facilities . although energy provided guidelines to the field offices , these guidelines were intended to be general and not prescriptive . in order to allow for consultation with local stakeholders and to incorporate the unique needs at each facility , field offices were responsible for developing workforce restructuring plans .