where appropriate , we incorporated these changes . the fhwa and fta certification reviews are comprehensive . first , they cover all 129 tmas with the results of the reviews reflective of large urban areas . second , the reviews cover a range of planning topics focusing on six areas: incorporation of the 15 planning factors in the planning process , development of early and continuing involvement by the public , completion of detailed alternative studies when considering major transportation investments in a corridor , development of a congestion management system incorporating measures to reduce travel demand , assurance that plans and programs conform with air quality plans and the clean air act amendments of 1990 , and development of financial constraints on plans and programs . these requirements have been challenging to the mpos for a number of reasons . specifically , we found that istea's requirement for involving the public challenges the mpos to ( 1 ) significantly expand the resources devoted to that involvement , ( 2 ) develop new methods for soliciting public input , and ( 3 ) effectively use the results of their efforts to involve the public . these organizations are listed in appendix ii . the mpos we selected included those that had great or little difficulty with planning requirements ( on the basis of their responses to the narc survey ) and represented different regions in the united states . all but 1 of the 13 mpos we interviewed represent urban areas with populations of 200,000 or greater — the transportation management areas . with each mpo , we discussed why it did or did not have difficulty with selected planning requirements , the reasons for the difficulty or lack of it , the benefits and drawbacks of the planning requirement , and whether the congress should reconsider these or any other of istea's planning requirements . to determine whether dot's certification review process was ensuring that mpos comply with planning requirements , we obtained and reviewed dot's guidance for field staff conducting the reviews and discussed with fhwa and fta officials the rationale behind dot's approach to the reviews . we also obtained copies of the 55 certification reports published through january 5 , 1996 , and reviewed and analyzed their contents . finally , we spoke to selected mpos and states about their views on the advantages and drawbacks of the certification process . we performed our work from august 1995 through july 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . after providing a draft of this report to dot for review and comment , we met with dot officials , including the chief , metropolitan planning division , federal highway administration , and the chief , statewide planning division , federal transit administration . where necessary , we modified the report to address their comments and suggestions . three of istea's key planning requirements — for extensive public involvement in planning and programming , for the financial constraint of tips , and for the mpos' authority to select projects — posed significant challenges . despite these challenges , the mpos we interviewed believe that their efforts to meet these requirements have been beneficial .