( see app . even though the concentrations of these three metals were higher , epa found that these increases did not result in discernible differences in risk estimates between dust generated by cement kilns that burn hazardous waste and those that do not . to determine if epa is authorized to modify hazardous waste management requirements in regulating cement kiln dust , we reviewed rcra and epa's regulatory determination on cement kiln dust . epa further cautioned that all of the results from its analyses of indirect exposure risks should be carefully interpreted because its model was still under peer review . even so , office of solid waste officials said that the results of all of epa's analyses were cause for concern . epa's analysis of the effects of cement kiln dust on groundwater found that about half of the cement kiln facilities were built on bedrock having characteristics that allow for the direct transport of groundwater offsite . in its analysis of 31 of these facilities , epa found that dust from 13 of them could contaminate groundwater at levels that could exceed health standards . none of these 13 facilities had installed man - made liners under their dust piles and 11 lacked leachate collection systems . epa also found that groundwater at three of these facilities was within 10 feet of the bottom of their dust piles ; epa did not have information on the depth to groundwater at the remaining 10 facilities . in addition , some facilities managed cement kiln dust in quarries that could subsequently fill with water ; if this occurs , leachate could more readily contaminate groundwater . in addition to the potential risks from the disposal of cement kiln dust , epa is concerned over the use of this dust as a substitute for lime to fertilize agricultural fields . according to epa , this use of cement kiln dust could pose cancer risks and noncancer threats for subsistence farmers if that dust contains relatively high levels of metals and dioxins . richard p. johnson , attorney gerald e. killian , assistant director marcia b. mcwreath , evaluator - in - charge rita f. oliver , senior evaluator mary d. pniewski , senior evaluator the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . to determine whether epa believes that dust from cement kilns that burn hazardous waste should be regulated the same as dust from those not burning such waste , we reviewed epa's report to congress on cement kiln dust , its regulatory determination , and public comments received on that report as well as on other documents . we also discussed the basis for epa's determination with its special wastes branch officials as well as officials representing the hazardous waste industry , the cement kiln industry , and environmental groups .