project grants . funding levels . this program was initially funded in fiscal year 1992 . funding levels remained constant at $1.22 million through fiscal year 1995 . eligibility criteria . applicants must demonstrate that they will ( 1 ) make optimal use of available resources for agricultural extension , residents' education , and research by sharing resources between participating institutions ; ( 2 ) improve the competitive position of u.s. agriculture in international markets by disseminating information to producers , processors , and researchers ; ( 3 ) train students for careers in agriculture and food industries ; ( 4 ) facilitate interaction among leading agricultural scientists ; ( 5 ) enhance the ability of u.s. agriculture to respond to environmental and food safety concerns ; and ( 6 ) identify new uses for farm commodities and increase the demand for u.s. agricultural products in both domestic and foreign markets . proposals are invited from accredited institutions of higher education . intended beneficiaries . institutions of higher education , state and local governments , private organizations or corporations , and individuals . examples of funded projects . one project is to develop and deliver a model program for staff and faculty training in agricultural distance learning at 13 land grant universities . types of assistance . in another project , six land grant universities will develop a network training concept to improve the dissemination and sharing of academic instruction , extension programming , and research activities . direct loans . eligibility criteria . telephone companies or cooperatives , nonprofit associations , limited dividend associations , mutual associations or public bodies , including those located in the u.s. territories , are eligible for this program . intended beneficiaries . residents of rural areas and others who may also receive telephone service as a result of service provided to a rural area . examples of funded projects . since 1992 , loans have been made to rus borrowers to finance over $368 million in projects for fiber optic cable , over $350 million for digital switching equipment , $70 million for advanced telecommunications features , and $14 million for distance learning . rural telephone bank loans ( rural telephone bank ) , under rus , is designed to provide supplemental financing to extend and improve telecommunications services in rural areas . types of assistance . direct loans . funding levels . the program made loans totaling $177.0 million in fiscal year 1991 , $199.85 million in fiscal year 1994 , and $175 million in fiscal year 1995 . eligibility criteria . eligible recipients are borrowers , including those located in the u.s. territories , or possessions that have received a loan or loan commitment under section 201 of the rural electrification act or that have been certified by the administrator as qualified to receive such a loan . intended beneficiaries . residents of rural areas and others who receive telecommunications service resulting from service provided to rural areas . examples of funded projects . since 1992 , loans have been made to rus telephone borrowers to finance over $368 million for fiber optic cable , over $350 million for digital switching , $70 million for advanced telecommunications features , and $14 million for distance learning equipment .