in addition , 49 u.s.c . section 41310 states that the secretaries of state and transportation shall take appropriate action to eliminate any discrimination or unfair competitive practices faced by u.s. airlines overseas . this trend is expected to continue . the federal aviation administration ( faa ) estimates that by 2005 , international traffic will account for 35 percent of u.s. airlines' traffic . international traffic has increased in importance largely because the u.s. government adopted a market - oriented international aviation policy , and more efficient u.s. airlines have replaced financially ailing or failed carriers ( braniff , eastern , pan am , and twa ) in the international marketplace . the new u.s. competitors are more productive and have lower operating costs than many foreign airlines . for example , a study by the european union ( eu ) found that the overall operating costs of major european airlines were about 50 percent higher than the operating costs of major u.s. airlines in 1992 . in addition , u.s. airlines introduced into international markets the innovative operating and marketing practices , such as frequent flyer programs , that they had developed to compete in the deregulated u.s. market . these innovations also helped u.s. airlines successfully compete with foreign carriers for passengers traveling to and from the united states . by 1993 , the u.s. share of the trans - atlantic market had increased to 47 percent from 42 percent in 1980 ; in the pacific rim market , the u.s. share had increased to 53 percent from 41 percent . services across the atlantic and to the pacific rim are particularly important to u.s. airlines . as shown in figure 1.1 , these services accounted for about 85 percent of u.s. airlines' international traffic in 1993 . as shown in figure 1.2 , these two regions also accounted for 83 percent of u.s. airlines' international revenues . airlines retain the right to those slots that they used during the previous travel season — known as historical slots . part 213 to require foreign airlines to file their u.s. schedules ; dot can then curtail a foreign airline's existing services or deny proposed services to the united states to pressure the foreign governments . for routes between the united states and these regions , u.s. airlines are often competing against other countries' flag carrier , such as air france ( france ) , alitalia ( italy ) , lufthansa ( germany ) , japan air lines ( japan ) , or cathay pacific ( hong kong ) . although u.s. airlines have increased their share of international markets , they have had difficulty making a profit on these services . over the last 5 years , u.s. airlines have collectively lost over $4.1 billion on international services ( see table 1.1 ) . section 41310 have been used to resolve several problems in doing business abroad , many u.s. airlines believe the process is not a good way to resolve problems . first , because such complaints are confrontational , several airlines view the process as a last resort when other means fail .