none . child and adult care food programs in child care centers and homes limit assistance to children aged 12 or under , migrant children aged 15 or under , and children with disabilities who , if over the age of 12 , would be eligible to participate only in a center or home where the majority of those enrolled are aged 18 or younger . in adult day care centers , functionally impaired adults aged 18 or older and adults aged 60 or older who are not residents of an institution are eligible to participate in the program . income guidelines for free and reduced - price meals / snacks are the same as those indicated for the national school lunch and school breakfast programs . homeless children or adults who meet the basic eligibility requirements can receive benefits under the program . in addition , children from households eligible for assistance through the food stamp program , the food distribution program on indian reservations , or temporary assistance for needy families , as well as some children in head start programs , may automatically be eligible for free meals under the child and adult care food program . in addition , a person aged 60 or older , or an individual defined as “functionally impaired” under usda's regulations who is a member of a household that receives food stamps , food distribution program on indian reservations benefits , social security , or medicaid is eligible for free meals through the child and adult care food program . program limitations: according to a child and adult care food program official , there are no programmatic factors that prevent homeless children or adults , as defined by federal regulations , from participating in this program . administering agency: u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) funding type: formula grants the objective of the commodity supplemental food program is to improve the health and nutritional status of low - income pregnant , postpartum , and breastfeeding women ; infants ; children up to the age of 6 ; and persons aged 60 or older by supplementing their diets with nutritious commodity foods . information on the number of homeless persons served by the program is not available . state agencies , such as departments of health and social services , administer this program . the department purchases food and makes it available to the state agencies , along with funds to cover administrative costs . the state agencies store and distribute the food to public and nonprofit private local agencies . the local agencies determine applicants' eligibility , give approved applicants monthly food packages targeted to their nutritional needs , and provide them with information on nutrition . the local agencies also refer applicants to other welfare and health care programs , such as the food stamp program and medicaid . the department is required by law to make 20 percent of the program's annual appropriation and 20 percent of any carryover funds available to the states to pay the costs of administering the program . none .