data not available . the objectives of our review were to ( 1 ) describe the process used by the park service to develop budgets and establish operating priorities ; ( 2 ) determine the limitations , if any , of the agency's priority - setting processes at a sample of parks ; ( 3 ) determine what , if any , implications the government performance and results act ( gpra ) has for the park service ; ( 4 ) provide information on trends in cutbacks of visitor services at the parks ; and ( 5 ) compare funding levels for park operations with those for other federal land management agency operations . to determine the process used by the park service to establish operational priorities and any limitations of the process at a sample of parks , we interviewed park service officials at headquarters , at the four regional offices that oversee the parks included in our sample , and at the four parks in our sample . ii ) . we reviewed park service headquarters and regional office directives , guidance , and practices for identifying operational priorities ; park service budget documents ; and park planning documents . we visited four parks: great smoky mountains national park , independence national historical park , olympic national park , and yellowstone national park . as agreed with your offices , we selected these four parks because they ( 1 ) include large natural and historical parks , ( 2 ) are located in different regions of the country , and ( 3 ) reported several cutbacks in visitor services . we also limited our review to four parks so that we could respond to your need for information by early april 1997 . although we cannot generalize the results of our work to all 374 park units , the parks selected are among the most visible and notable in the national park system . hence , the information collected should provide a meaningful indication of how the park system establishes operational priorities . to respond to the third objective , we reviewed gao documents on implementing gpra and interviewed officials at park service headquarters , the four regional offices , and the four parks to discuss how these parks' processes for establishing operational priorities relate to gpra's requirements and to obtain information on the status of the park service's implementation of gpra . we did not specifically review the park service's processes for implementing gpra . to obtain information on trends in cutbacks in visitor services , we held discussions with officials from park service headquarters , the four regional offices , and the four parks included in our review and obtained documentation related to this issue . as agreed with your offices , we requested trend information for the past 5 years . also , because servicewide trend information was not available from park service headquarters , we collected data on cutbacks in visitor services from the four parks we visited . the park service is now in the process of implementing gpra . in october 1996 , the agency issued the final draft of the national park service strategic plan . although the proportions differ , similar scenarios played out at the other parks we visited .