our report does not draw this conclusion . these figures do not include salvage permits . in fiscal year 1994 , the forest service did not distinguish between green and salvage permits ; however , most permits , such as personal firewood permits , are for relatively low volumes . appeal of two of the sales because the issues in the appeal were either adequately covered or mitigated by the forest service subsequent to the filing of the appeals . for the final appealed salvage sale , the forest service's reviewing officer affirmed the district ranger's decision that this sale conformed to the applicable laws and regulations and thus denied the appeal . although our analysis indicated that the salvage rider provision exempting salvage sales from appeal had little effect on the number of sales or the volume of salvage timber offered for sale under the emergency salvage program , officials from three of the four national forests we visited told us that the provision should be made a permanent part of the forest service's policies and guidelines because it has the potential to expedite the efforts at the national forests to offer salvage timber for sale after the expiration of the salvage rider . for example , officials at the clearwater national forest said that exempting salvage sales from appeal could speed up the forest's preparation for a salvage timber sale in two ways . first , the time between making the decision to proceed with a salvage sale and offering the sale would be reduced . second , the salvage sale would not be submitted to a rigorous appeals resolution process that requires that national forest staff respond to comments , prepare transmittal letters , coordinate with forest management , and meet with the appellant . on the other hand , officials from three of the four national forests said they found the appeals process to be beneficial to them in that it provided them with a forum for resolving environmental issues , thereby reducing the potential for legal challenges and costly delays in awarding the salvage sales . the salvage rider provided an expedited judicial review process for those salvage sales for which legal challenges were received . the provision contained a number of elements for expediting the judicial review process , including the following: ( 1 ) salvage sales shall be subject to review only in the united states district court for the district in which the federal lands are located , ( 2 ) any challenge to salvage sales must be filed in the district court within 15 days after the date of the initial advertisement of the challenged sale , and ( 3 ) the district court shall render its final decision relative to any challenge within 45 days from the date that such challenge is brought , unless the court determines that a longer period of time is required to satisfy the requirement of the united states constitution . our review showed that the 45-day time limit provision of the expedited judicial review process had minimal effect on the number of sales or volume of salvage timber offered for sale under the emergency salvage program because few legal challenges were brought against salvage sales offered for sale in fiscal year 1996 .