qtc ) . • all 82 level - 2 priorities identified by qtc , plus 52 other level - 2 priorities that have an estimated cost of $2 million or more to correct . as of the end of april 1995 , alyeska had completed the corrective actions and its quality assurance group had approved those actions for 76 of these key items , or about 33 percent ( see table 2.4 ) . alyeska had developed caps for all of the 224 items requiring caps , and jpo had approved 179 of these caps . five items did not require caps — four of them are closed . alyeska has also developed an operations impact plan to select and manage the work that involves field resources . according to alyeska officials , the primary purposes of this plan are ( 1 ) to set priorities for work that requires field technicians' time and ( 2 ) to schedule work according to its priority and the amount of technicians' time available . this plan represents an important change in approach because it moves away from alyeska's earlier approach of attempting to correct all deficiencies concurrently without considering priorities . according to alyeska officials , the five items with the highest priority will be worked on first during 1995: ( 1 ) preparing for compliance with title v air quality regulations , ( 2 ) developing a maintenance management system , ( 3 ) enhancing the local and wide - area communications facilities , ( 4 ) resolving electrical integrity problems , and ( 5 ) developing a quality assurance program . these items are expected to be completed by december 1995 . further down in the rankings are such matters as developing a technician training and advancement program based on tested performance and an information management system that will provide the operations organization with on - line access to various information , such as equipment drawings . while alyeska's success in resolving the action items has been slower than originally anticipated , the company has made substantial progress . when alyeska anticipated that everything could be quickly corrected , it essentially tried to do everything at once , without considering the significance of the problem . now that its schedule has been extended , alyeska is trying to match priorities with available resources so that higher priority items are corrected first . we analyzed three areas in which qtc identified substantial deficiencies — the integrity of electrical systems , the quality program , and alyeska's approach to preventive and predictive maintenance . qtc had concluded that problems in these areas presented potential threats to the safety of the public and the environment . our objective was to examine alyeska's actions in these areas to determine whether the planned actions will address the problems qtc identified . although the implementation of corrective measures in all three areas is not yet complete , alyeska is making progress in correcting these deficiencies . the actions taken and planned , if fully carried out , appear adequate to address the problems that were identified .