we agree . in fact , crowded parking at one refuge was a big enough concern that managers were considering measures to better handle visitation during peak periods . the fish and wildlife service also commented on the need for greater coordination among the agencies . the agency noted that cooperative fees have been tried in many instances where they are appropriate and that some of these have resulted in moderate success . we encourage the agency to continue to look for opportunities to coordinate since it would generally increase the level of service provided to the visiting public . the department of agriculture's forest service agreed with the recommendation for the agencies to look for opportunities to coordinate their fee programs . data from recreational fee demonstration sites participating in 1997 suggest that the new or increased fees have had no overall adverse effect on visitation , although visitation did decline at a number of sites . such data , however , are based on only 1 year's experience , so the full impact of fees on visitation will not be known until completion of the program . early research on visitors' opinions of the new fees has shown that visitors generally support the need for , and the amount of , new fees . however , these conclusions are based on limited analysis in that only two of the four agencies — the park service and the forest service — have completed visitor surveys at a small number of sites participating in the demonstration program . accordingly , the survey results may not represent visitors' opinions at all participating sites or represent views of nonvisitors . each participating agency planned to conduct additional visitor surveys in 1998 and 1999 to more fully assess the impact of fees on visitation . however , some interest groups and recreation fee experts have identified some research gaps , such as potential visitors who do not come to recreation sites or who do go to sites but drive off because of the new or increased fees and fail to participate in the survey . a number of interest groups we contacted were generally supportive of the program . however , some had concerns about the program and how it was being implemented . although data for more years will be needed to fully assess the effect of increased recreational fees on visitation , 1997 data from the 206 sites participating in the demonstration program preliminarily suggest that the increased fees have had no major adverse effect on visitation . except for blm , each agency reported that , overall , visitation increased from 1996 to 1997 at its sites , even though some individual sites experienced declines in visitation , especially when new fees were charged . data from 1997 are the first available to assess the impact of the fee demonstration program on visitation , since the four agencies spent 1996 designing the program and selecting the sites . overall , of the 206 demonstration sites operated by the four agencies , visitation during 1997 increased by 4.6 percent from 1996 .