complying with these requirements can be expensive . for example , one facility we visited spent $750,000 in 1987 to meet the minimum technological requirements for a 2.5-acre surface impoundment . because these technological requirements were designed for facilities that manage waste from ongoing industrial operations ( called process waste ) , they may be more stringent than necessary for some remediation waste , according to epa and the majority of the state cleanup managers we interviewed . for example , a temporary waste pile must meet the same requirements as a pile where hazardous waste will be treated or stored for many years . as a result , these requirements can be counterproductive for some cleanups and unnecessarily increase their costs , according to epa , most state officials , and the industry representatives we interviewed . disposing of remediation waste , particularly lower - risk waste , in accordance with the minimum technological requirements may add unnecessary costs . for example , parties that want to dispose of waste that has already been treated to meet land disposal requirements must still use a landfill that meets the minimum technological requirements . epa and several state cleanup officials we interviewed were doubtful that compliance with these requirements would be worth the cost , given the low level of risk that treated remediation waste poses . according to epa , disposing of waste in a hazardous waste landfill can cost $200 per ton , compared with $50 per ton to dispose of it in a municipal or industrial landfill . thus , for the average superfund site with 34,000 tons of contaminated soil , it would cost about $6.8 million to dispose of the treated soil in a landfill that meets these technological requirements , compared with about $1.7 million to dispose of it in a municipal or industrial landfill . rcra generally prohibits the treatment , storage , or disposal of hazardous waste without a permit . because the process of obtaining a permit involves a step - by - step approach with substantial requirements for documentation and review , obtaining a permit can increase cleanup costs and cause delays . in addition , under rcra , facilities that require a permit in order to clean up a portion of a site must also address cleanup requirements for the entire site . consequently , parties may try to avoid triggering the permit requirement . the administrative cost of obtaining a rcra permit can range from $80,000 for an on - site treatment unit , such as a tank , to $400,000 for an on - site incinerator , and up to $1 million for a landfill , according to epa's estimates . in addition to these costs , a party may incur other costs for tasks needed to obtain a permit , such as assessing a site's conditions in order to design a groundwater monitoring system or conducting emissions testing and trial burns for an incinerator . the time required to obtain a permit can also be extensive , according to almost all of the state cleanup managers we interviewed .