( see app . ii for state - by - state information on these surveys. ) as table 5 indicates , as of march 1997 , fsa's state offices had reviewed 3,622 of 4,479 cases , leaving 857 cases that needed review . in addition to these cases , as table 6 shows , 11 states had not received responses to their survey questions from every employee and county committee member . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . usda pays county committee members for their services . among other tasks , county committees review loan applications to determine if the applicants have sufficient farming experience to qualify for an fsa farm loan . in addition , each fsa state office has a committee of farmers who provide advice on farm program operations . within fsa , the operations and offices of the former fmha and ascs offices have been consolidated . former ascs employees who have fsa farm loans may be physically located at the same office as the fsa employees who approve and service these loans . in addition , fsa anticipates that some former ascs employees will be assigned to assist in administering farm loans . fsa has adopted procedures to avoid conflicts of interest in loan - making and servicing decisions . these rules are similar to those used by the former fmha . for example , loan - processing , approval , servicing , and review activities can be conducted only by fsa employees who are not immediate family members or relatives of loan applicants and who have not had a business or a close personal association with these applicants . table 1 provides information on the number of direct and guaranteed loans obtained by fsa's federal employees , nonfederal employees , and county committee members , as well as other borrowers . while the outstanding principal of the direct and guaranteed loans of fsa employees and county committee members was about $265 million of the $16.9 billion in fsa's outstanding loan principal as of september 30 , 1996 , we found some differences in the average amount of loans , loan delinquencies , and debt relief received by fsa employees and county committee members in comparison with other fsa borrowers . fsa has not developed information about the comparative loan sizes for these groups nor examined why these groups would differ in their loans , repayment history , and debt relief . consequently , fsa officials do not have specific information that would explain the sources of these differences .