( app . i lists states that are subject to safeguards inspections , as of february 1998. ) iaea safeguards are a set of technical measures and activities by which iaea seeks to verify that nuclear material subject to safeguards is not diverted to nuclear weapons or other proscribed purposes . material - accounting measures verify quantities of nuclear material declared to the agency and any changes in the quantity over time . in contrast , u.s. officials believe that it is unwise to drop existing measures , such as interim inspections that have proven effective , and replace them with the untested new measures . u.s. officials stated that iaea should implement and assess the new system over a period of years and replace existing measures as it builds confidence in the system . iaea hopes to reduce the costs of safeguards by implementing advanced safeguards technologies that reduce inspector effort . these technologies include remote monitoring and environmental sampling . however , the extent of potential savings from implementing these new technologies is not fully certain . for example , in 1995 iaea estimated that the use of remote monitoring , for containment and surveillance of material at 79 nuclear facilities located in canada , japan , south korea , switzerland , and taiwan , could save $2.3 million a year by reducing iaea's inspection effort by two - thirds at these facilities . in addition , the use of unattended monitoring systems to verify the nondiversion of nuclear material at on - load reactors could save $2.9 million a year in inspection effort . however , according to iaea , several factors could reduce the amount of savings derived from remote monitoring . iaea noted that any failures of equipment would jeopardize the potential savings in the inspection effort , since additional inspections would be required to reestablish the inventories of nuclear materials in the facilities . also , according to an iaea safeguards division director , while remote monitoring would reduce the number of costly site visits , it may not significantly reduce the number of inspectors ( whose salaries accounted for 58 percent of the direct safeguards inspection costs in 1996 , according to our calculations ) because they would be needed to analyze the data transmitted to agency headquarters and regional offices . in addition , iaea has stated that it may have to use short notice inspections to provide additional assurances that the remote monitoring equipment has not been tampered with . the costs of analyzing environmental samples also may reduce potential savings . for example , according to u.s. officials , the average costs of analyzing environmental samples is about $2,700 and $4,000 per sample , depending on the type of analysis performed . iaea has not determined the number or frequency of samples that will be taken during routine inspections at enrichment facilities and hot cells . while iaea plans to reimburse , on a limited basis , member states participating in its network of analytical labs , a large percentage of the costs of analyzing environmental samples is being borne by the united states . in addition , iaea has not yet fully determined the impact that environmental sampling at declared sites will have on reducing inspection efforts at the sites .