vandalism is also costly . vandals rip out copper pipes from vacant units , steal security windows and street signs , and shoot out lights . the units' age contributes to the cost of their maintenance because door frames are deteriorating , water pipes break and leak into units , and screen doors and appliances have outlived their useful life and are constantly in need of repair . housing management officials attributed other increasing costs to the development's architectural design: porches and sidewalks have no underlying support , and the building pilings are sinking or leaning , becoming safety hazards to residents . how well does pfs meet the subsidy needs of individual housing agencies ? how does hud develop budget estimates of housing agencies' annual need for operating subsidies and are the estimates appropriate ? what are some of the possible options that hud might have for changing pfs to make it a more effective tool for subsidizing housing agencies ? to answer these questions , we relied on information from hud ; our visits to four housing agencies in los angeles , california ; baltimore , maryland ; kansas city , missouri ; and miami , florida ( see apps . i , ii , iii , and iv for summaries of our work at these housing agencies ) ; our analysis of hud's application of its pfs methodology ; a database of public housing operating expenses for fiscal years ending in 1992 through 1996 ( see app . v for a limited analysis of several aspects of that database ) ; and work we have completed or have under way related to other formula - driven federal programs , including medicaid , the older americans block grant , the law enforcement block grant , and highway grant formulas . under the housing act of 1937 , as amended , the congress created the federal public housing program to assist communities in providing decent , safe , and sanitary dwellings for low - income families . however , it was not until 1975 that hud established a permanent system known as the performance funding system ( pfs ) for subsidizing public housing . for years , the public housing program was self - sufficient because it was open only to residents whose incomes were high enough for them to be able to pay rents that would cover operating costs . the program began to move toward serving poorer households with the housing act of 1949 , which required incomes of eligible households to be 20 percent below the income necessary to rent decent private housing . also , during the 1950s and 1960s , the average income of public housing tenants began to fall as the more upwardly mobile households found affordable housing elsewhere . by 1969 , public housing had shifted to serving the poorest households , those who had difficulty paying rents that were high enough to cover the full costs of public housing operations .