( see fig . similarly , usda officials told us that the sale of generic or store brands of infant formula is a growing trend in the industry , offering another lower - priced alternative to the major brands . while experts on the infant formula market told us that carnation has had difficulty increasing its market share because it does not market its product through medical channels , the existence of a lower - priced competitor would generally tend to put competitive pressures on the industry . in fact , price increases by other manufacturers were relatively low in the year that carnation entered the u.s. market and have since risen more slowly then they did prior to 1989 . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . then , assuming that the manufacturers' shares of the wic juice market mirrored those shares in the entire juice market for the state , the wic agency estimates the amount of sales for which companies should be billed . although juice companies helped devise this billing method , one company has begun to question the amount of wic sales for which it is being billed . texas wic officials also told us that the use of rebates in their state would not be feasible until it is possible to accurately track product sales . one possible solution to these problems would be the use of a method — currently under design in some states — whereby wic agencies provide an electronically coded card to wic participants to be used at grocery stores for the purchase of wic - approved items . when the card is used , data are automatically collected about each purchase ; therefore , the card would provide an efficient and accurate way to keep track of wic sales for rebate billing . complexities of monitoring sales and billing for rebates . with multiple products in a food category , tracking sales to ensure appropriate billing for rebates becomes more difficult . for example , a redeemed wic food voucher will indicate that frozen juice was purchased but does not specify the type of juice among approved varieties , nor the quantity that was purchased . to overcome this problem in california , the state wic agency contracted with a company to supply data on the quantities of each brand and type of juice sold in the entire california market . other forms of cost savings , such as the use of the least costly brands , may be more effective than rebates for some food products . for example , the texas wic agency determined that the savings generated by specifying that wic participants use the least costly product available would be greater than from using rebates . the least costly product could be , for example , a generic label or a national brand . this marketing process is referred to as medical detailing .