sec . 521 — rural rental assistance ( $489 million ) administrative expenses ( $395 million ) sec . 502 — single - family ( $249 million ) sec . 515 — rental housing ( $149 million ) outlays for the housing loan programs are lower than the loan amounts because they are based on subsidy costs and projected losses that are less than loan levels . for example , while proposed single - family guaranteed loans were the single largest portion of proposed loan levels in figure i.1 ( $1.3 billion ) , the proposed outlays associated with this loan level were $6 million ( these outlays are included in the “other” category in figure i.2 ) . this occurs because the guaranteed program's borrowers do not receive interest subsidies and because expected default rates are lower than for the direct program . the rural rental assistance program is the costliest program because it is a direct outlay program . the rural housing and community development service ( rhcds ) estimates that it will need more than $2.4 billion just to renew existing rental assistance contracts that will be expiring over the next 5 years ( fiscal years 1996-2000 ) . this amount assumes renewals of expiring contracts over a 5-year period . given that the trend in tenants' average household incomes appears to be heading down , the cost may go even higher , according to rhcds officials . the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda ) inspector general ( ig ) has found instances of fraud , waste , and abuse by a number of participants in the rural housing and community development service's multifamily housing loan program . some of the more serious and persistent findings have been ( 1 ) inflated , improper , and undocumented charges for project construction costs ; ( 2 ) unauthorized use of project operating funds and reserve accounts ; ( 3 ) failure to perform essential maintenance ; and ( 4 ) inadequate verification of tenants' incomes . the instances of abuse often have involved ownership or management ties between project developers' construction contractors , material suppliers , and property management firms . the ig's recently issued report on the multifamily housing loan program addresses another potential area of abuse on which we testified in 1992 — that of developers realizing excessive profits on projects through the combined benefits derived from rhcds' programs and federal low - income - housing tax credits . rhcds has taken a number of specific actions designed to address the problems identified by the ig's work , and more are under way . these actions relate to health and safety violations at rhcds' projects , rhcds' enforcement tools , and the agency's efforts to improve verification of tenants' incomes . because of confirmed reports of serious uncorrected health and safety problems at selected projects , rhcds during 1994 conducted a nationwide review and inspection of all rhcds - financed rural rental housing projects that were over 5 years old . about 7 percent of the 14,142 projects reviewed were found to have health and safety violations . according to rhcds officials , these violations encompass a wide range of severity — from inoperable smoke alarms to severe structural deficiencies .