operations . this integration is important because gpra performance information is to be used to guide an array of congressional and executive branch decisions . consistent congressional interest — in hearings such as today's , for example — on the status of an agency's gpra efforts , the performance measures it is using , and how performance information is being used to make decisions will send an unmistakable message to agencies that congress expects gpra to be conscientiously implemented . mr. chairman and members of the committee: we are pleased to have this opportunity to discuss the key steps and challenges in using the government performance and results act ( gpra ) to improve federal civilian science agencies' management and congressional decisionmaking . each year , american taxpayers invest about $70 billion of federal funds in military and civilian research and development ( r&d ) efforts . over the years , this investment has yielded substantial benefits to the health , welfare , and security of the american people . yet the powerful pressures to reduce the deficit are forcing congress and the executive branch to undertake a basic reexamination of the value of programs across the federal government and to update the nation's spending priorities . doe's mission and priorities have changed dramatically over time so that doe is now very different from what it was in 1977 when it was created in response to the nation's energy crisis . while energy research , conservation , and policymaking dominated early doe priorities , national defense and environmental clean - up now overshadow those efforts . the effort to reduce the deficit is therefore placing pressure as never before on all federal agencies , including the civilian science agencies , to clearly demonstrate that they are making sound and effective use of taxpayers' dollars . each new phase in doe's evolution has been accompanied by new leadership with vastly different agendas concerning doe's basic mission and how it should be managed . the collective strengths of the laboratories to meet pressing national needs . as a result , doe was unable to address issues that required cooperation and coordination across its many mission areas . fortunately , the landmark gpra provides a legislative vehicle for agencies to use as they seek to demonstrate and improve their effectiveness . equally important , if successfully implemented , gpra should help congress make the difficult funding , policy , and program decisions that the current budget environment demands . under gpra , agencies are to set strategic and annual goals , measure performance , and report on the degree to which goals are met . congress intended for gpra to fundamentally shift the focus of federal management and accountability from a preoccupation with staffing and activity levels to a focus on “outcomes” of federal programs . outcomes are results expressed in terms of the difference federal programs make in people's lives . in crafting gpra , congress recognized that the types of management changes that successful implementation will require will not come quickly or easily for many agencies .