“the importance of this . demands that the highest standards of peer review extend to the risk characterization itself . although it can be argued that this is in fact being carried out by this sab committee , submitting the risk characterization chapter for external peer review prior to final review by the sab would serve to strengthen the document , and assure a greater likelihood of its acceptance by the scientific community - at - large . it is recommended strongly that: a ) the risk characterization chapter undergo major revision ; and b ) the revised document be peer reviewed by a group of preeminent scientists , including some researchers from outside the dioxin “community” before returning to the sab.” members of congress also criticized epa's risk characterization document and its lack of peer review . in the house and senate reports on the fiscal year 1996 appropriations bill for epa , concerns were raised that the draft document “does not accurately reflect the science on exposures to dioxins and their potential health effects . epa selected and presented scientific data and interpretations . dependent upon assumptions and hypotheses that deserve careful scrutiny . and inaccuracies and omissions . were the result of the agency's failure to consult with and utilize the assistance of the outside scientific community . .” the committees directed epa to respond to the sab's concerns and consult with scientists in other agencies in rewriting the risk characterization chapter . the house committee also restricted epa from developing any new rules that raise or lower dioxin limits on the basis of the risk reassessment . as of july 1996 , epa was in the process of responding to the committees' , sab's , and the public's comments . the risk characterization chapter is being subjected to a major revision and will be peer reviewed by external scientific experts prior to referral back to the sab . the sab will then be asked to evaluate epa's response to their suggestions and the adequacy of the additional peer review conducted on the draft report . section 112 ( m ) of the clean air act amendments of 1990 required epa to determine if atmospheric inputs of pollutants into the great waters warrants further reductions of atmospheric releases and to report the agency's findings to the congress 3 years after the act's enactment . the great waters program includes the great lakes , lake champlain , chesapeake bay , and the coastal waters . epa made its first report to the congress in may 1994 . the scientific and technical data in this report , deposition of air pollutants to the great waters: first report to congress , were peer reviewed by 63 reviewers . the reviewers represented a number of different perspectives , including academia , industry , environmental groups , epa offices , other federal and state agencies , and canadian entities . according to the great waters program coordinator , the reviewers were given copies of all the report chapters , except the conclusions and recommendation chapter , so that they could prepare for a peer review workshop . the reviewers then met to discuss the report and provide epa with their views .