( see app . i for more details on o&m activities at specific sites. ) the policy changes under consideration include the following: changing the preference for treating highly contaminated waste to also consider the option of containing this waste . because o&m costs are associated with containing waste , not with treating waste , o&m cost responsibilities will fluctuate depending on how often containment options are used . changing the rules on the time frames for responsible parties' liability . the responsible parties are currently liable for cleaning up contamination that occurred before superfund was passed in 1980 . if this requirement is eliminated , the federal government's and the states' portions of o&m costs would increase . changing the rules on responsible parties' liability . the responsible parties may currently be required to pay for all site cleanup , even if they did not contribute all the waste . proposals for reauthorizing superfund have called for the federal government to pay for those costs that cannot be allocated to responsible parties , thus increasing the federal share of o&m costs . changing the current o&m cost - share provisions between the federal government and the states . recently proposed legislation would have implemented different cost - sharing provisions . doing so would shift o&m cost responsibilities between the federal government and the states . limiting the number of new sites added to the npl . proposals for reauthorizing superfund have called for placing a cap on the sites added to the npl in the future . if this proposal is adopted , the o&m costs for future npl sites will be lower than the $7 billion we estimated . as stated in the report , monitoring o&m activities is important because it provides assurance that the cleanup remedies continue to protect human health and the environment . both we , through our review of 17 case studies and our analyses of 43 5-year reviews , and epa's inspector general have identified cases in which covers were not maintained and groundwater sampling was not performed as required in the o&m plans . the following cases highlight these instances . in our discussions with officials in epa's region iv , we identified a significant problem in monitoring o&m activities at the a.l . taylor site ( valley of the drums ) , located in bullitt county , kentucky . the state is now responsible for monitoring the waterproof cover used to contain chemical waste . however , local land - use controls to prevent activities that could potentially damage the cover have not been implemented . epa and the state have had difficulty implementing land - use controls because the site is privately owned . implementing land - use controls could have been critical at this site because the landowner was using the site as a junkyard for cars , potentially damaging the cover . after discussions with the state , however , the landowner agreed to remove the cars . such a situation stresses the importance of continuous monitoring . without it , epa may not be aware of similar problems that may be occurring at other sites .