we have clarified the report where appropriate . however , we asked agencies to report on programs that in their opinion helped address nonpoint source pollution . by including programs in this report , we are not suggesting that all the programs focused exclusively on nonpoint source pollution . defense and transportation had no comments . we also provided relevant sections of the draft report to representatives of each of the five states included in our review to verify statements attributed to them and other information they provided . we made revisions as appropriate to incorporate their comments . as the nation's lead environmental organization , epa implements a number of significant programs to deal with nonpoint source pollution . other federal agencies , however , have also made considerable investments in addressing the problem . usda funding in particular has eclipsed epa's financial commitment by a significant margin . overall , the seven agencies we surveyed reported obligating about $14 billion for fiscal years 1994 through 1998 on 35 programs addressing nonpoint pollution . total obligations during this period have been relatively stable — at about $3 billion each year — but obligations at epa in particular , increased significantly during this period . in february 1998 , the administration proposed a plan designed to more effectively address the nation's remaining water quality problems . the clean water action plan proposed $568 million in additional funding for fiscal year 1999 , and a total increase of $2.3 billion over the 5 years from fiscal years 1999 through 2003 . according to the action plan , many of its activities will augment programs at epa and a number of other agencies to deal with nonpoint source pollution . $2.46 to measure the impact of farming systems on water ( $20.38 ) quality , identify processes that control fate and transport of chemicals and other contaminants , and determine social and economic impacts of alternative management systems . $.006 to address agricultural nonpoint source pollution problems in watersheds . ( 0 ) $11.30 to conduct long - term studies of the effects of natural ( $69.46 ) events and land management activities on water quality , quantity and timing to provide a scientific basis for land managers' efforts to protect and restore watershed and riparian ecosystems . $59.2 to measure the impact of farming / ranching practices and ( $273.8 ) systems on water quality ; identify processes that control fate and transport of chemical and other contaminants ; develop cost - effective , alternative farming / ranching practices and systems for all nonpoint source contaminants including salts , toxic trace elements , nutrients , pesticides , pathogens , and other waterborne diseases ; deliver technologies , models , decision support systems , and management information to enhance or protect water quality . $24.36 to restore habitat for federal trust species through voluntary agreements with private landowners . ( $97.87 ) ( $5.58 ) $0.86 to protect and enhance the quality of the habitat and environment on which fish and wildlife trust resources depend , and provide recommendations and support state and other federal agencies in implementing management actions to resolve contaminant problems .