iii . table iii.1 provides a range of the estimated lost revenues from cigarette excise taxes for each state. ) the states that stand to lose the most tax revenues are those with large populations of smokers and / or the highest state rates for cigarette excise taxes . for example , michigan , which has one of the highest rates , could lose from about $50 million to $220 million in annual tax revenues . on the other hand , ohio , which has approximately the same population of smokers as michigan , or more , would stand to lose from $26 million to $117 million because of its much lower tax rate . overall , all but one state would lose less than 2 percent of their total tax revenues from all sources ( see app . iii , table iii.1 ) ; on average , states would lose less than 1 percent of their total tax revenues . smuggling cigarettes from low - to high - tax states , or interstate smuggling , which was prominent in the 1970s , may now be a reemerging problem.the opportunity for individuals to profit from interstate smuggling exists because of the wide disparity in excise taxes across the states . currently , the states' cigarette excise taxes range from 2.5 cents per pack in virginia to $1.00 per pack in alaska . ( see fig . according to the department of the treasury's bureau of alcohol , tobacco , and firearms ( atf ) , cigarettes are currently being smuggled across state borders to avoid the payment of state excise taxes . this activity can violate federal and / or state laws . a january 1997 study by the washington state department of health estimated the extent of interstate smuggling activity in terms of packs per capita by state — which we converted to the associated loss ( or gain ) of state tax revenue . ( see app . iv , table iv.1. ) according to our analysis of these data , some states are losing up to about $100 million annually in potential tax revenues . as expected , the washington state study indicated that substantial smuggling occurs from states with low tax rates to states with high tax rates . for example , washington and michigan , states with among the highest tax rates , had estimated annual losses in tax revenues of $51 million and $105 million , respectively . on the other hand , exporting states — such as kentucky , north carolina , and virginia — did not show revenue losses ; however , at most , they showed only modest revenue gains because their tax rates are so low that extra sales to buyers in the high - tax states do not generate significant tax revenues . recent experience demonstrates that international smuggling can occur when differences in cigarette tax rates are substantial . for example , international smuggling has occurred recently between canada and the united states . from 1984 through 1993 , the average real price of a pack of cigarettes in canada — in 1994 canadian dollars — increased from $2.64 in 1984 to $5.65 in 1993 , as a result of sharp increases in canadian federal and provincial cigarette taxes .