soil . approximately 50 million crp acres and other cropland acres are least able to sustain soil productivity , according to usda's erodibility index . this index , a commonly used measure of soil productivity , compares the amount of potential wind - or water - caused erosion with the amount of erosion the soil will tolerate . ( see fig . about 8 million crp acres are included in this estimate . conservation practices that help sustain soil productivity include crop rotations , reduced tillage , and appropriate chemical application . a different soil indicator — the land capability class — measures a field's suitability for crop production on a scale of 1 through 8 , with 8 being the least suitable for crop production . the land capability class was one of the measures used to determine eligibility for crp enrollment . approximately 24 million crp acres and other cropland acres nationwide , concentrated in the great plains and the midwest , have the least suitable soil for crop production , according to this index . ( see fig . approximately 4 million of these acres are in the crp . while proper soil management techniques , including multiyear cover crop rotations , can enable some of these acres to sustain crop production , other acres may be best suited for rangeland or pastureland rather than cropland . while the erodibility index and the land capability class are traditional usda measures of soil productivity , soil scientists generally agree that more complete measures of a soil's overall quality are needed . in addition to productivity , soil quality measures would include texture , density , the ability to absorb chemicals , and the ability to retain water . usda is currently developing soil quality measures that will examine the effects of long - term crop production on these characteristics . wildlife habitat . crop production improves the habitat for some wildlife species while adversely affecting others . therefore , it is difficult to estimate the amount and location of environmentally sensitive cropland for this factor . wildlife biologists agree that the effects of production on wildlife can be mitigated through the use of conservation practices such as periodic rotations of cover crops , proper cover crop management on yearly set - aside acres , and greater use of multiyear set - aside acres . however , of the five environmental factors , damage to wildlife habitat is the most difficult to mitigate while leaving the land in production . for those acres requiring conservation practices , usda conservation programs that currently require or encourage the use of such practices can prevent a return to pre - crp environmental conditions or could be strengthened to increase environmental benefits . for example , one program — conservation compliance — requires farmers who want to receive usda program benefits to use appropriate erosion control practices . this program could cover nearly 65 percent of crp land if farmers wish to return this land to production and receive program benefits . alternatively , tightening the erosion control standards could further reduce erosion .