electricity loans . rus makes direct loans primarily to construct and maintain electricity distribution facilities that provide electricity to rural users . rus also places guarantees on loans made to finance the construction , repair , and improvement of electricity generation and transmission facilities . the following are the types of loans provided in the electricity program: direct loans with a 5 percent interest rate . these loans , referred to as hardship rate loans , are made to borrowers that serve financially distressed rural areas . direct loans with an interest rate that is tied to an index of municipal borrowing rates . these loans , referred to as municipal rate loans , have a maximum interest rate of 7 percent when the borrower meets , at the time of loan approval , either a consumer density test or both a rate disparity test and a consumer income test . to meet the first test , the average number of consumers per mile of line of the borrower's total electric system has to be less than 5.5 . for the rate disparity test , the borrower's average revenue per kilowatt hour sold has to be more than the average revenue per kilowatt hour sold by all electric utilities in the state in which the borrower provides service . for the consumer income test , either the average per capita income of the residents receiving electric service from the borrower has to be less than the average per capita income of the residents of the state in which the borrower provides service or the median household income of the households receiving electric service from the borrower has to be less than the median household income of the households in the state . if these tests are not met , the interest rate may exceed 7 percent . guaranteed loans . rus places a usda repayment guarantee on loans made by the ffb ; these loans have an interest rate that is the treasury's cost of money plus one - eighth of 1 percent . if the applicant selects the ffb as the lender , rus is required to place a 100-percent guarantee on the loan . while rus can also place a 100-percent usda guarantee on electricity loans made by commercial lenders , it has not guaranteed any such loans in recent years because all applicants have applied for loans to be made by the ffb . telecommunications loans . rus' direct and guaranteed loans are made primarily to build and improve telephone services and telecommunications facilities in rural areas , including loans for advanced telecommunications facilities and services such as fiber - optic cabling , digital - switching equipment , and educational television applications . current ratio . the ratio is used to measure the extent to which current assets , if liquidated , would cover current liabilities . it is computed by dividing current assets by current liabilities . debt - to - asset ratio . the ratio is used to measure the proportion of assets that are financed by debt . it is computed by dividing total debt by total assets . times - interest - earned ratio . this measure shows the extent to which a borrower has sufficient current assets to cover its current liabilities .