the 2020 plan is still evolving . because the reforms are not yet complete and some of the plan's approaches are untested , the extent to which its proposed reforms will result in the plan's intended benefits is unknown . in addition , because the downsizing target of 7,500 staff is not based upon a systematic workload analysis to determine needs , it is uncertain whether hud will have the capacity to carry out its responsibilities once the reforms are in place . furthermore , the plan references legislative proposals , some of which , if not enacted , could affect workloads and staffing needs . how does hud plan to manage the personnel changes that will result from the reforms and downsizing ? the information in this report is based on a review of documents provided by hud and on interviews with key officials involved in the 2020 planning process . we did not independently verify the accuracy of data in the documents that hud provided . hud is the principal government agency responsible for programs dealing with housing , community development , and fair housing opportunities . hud's missions include making housing affordable through fha's mortgage insurance for multifamily housing and the provision of rental assistance for about 4.5 million lower - income residents , helping revitalize over 4,000 localities through community development programs , and encouraging homeownership by providing mortgage insurance . hud is one of the nation's largest financial institutions , responsible for managing more than $426 billion in mortgage insurance and $497 billion , in guarantees of mortgage - backed securities , as of september 30 , 1996 . the agency's budget authority for fiscal year 1998 is about $24 billion . hud's major program areas are housing , which includes fha insurance and project - based rental assistance programs ; community planning and development ( cpd ) , which includes programs for community development block grants , empowerment zones / enterprise communities , and assistance for the homeless ; public and indian housing ( pih ) , which provides funds to help operate and modernize public housing and administers tenant - based rental assistance programs ; and fair housing and equal opportunity ( fheo ) , which is responsible for investigating complaints and ensuring compliance with fair housing laws . hud has been the subject of sustained criticism for weaknesses in its management and oversight abilities , which has made it vulnerable to fraud , waste , abuse , and mismanagement . in 1994 , we designated hud as a high - risk area because of four long - standing department - wide management deficiencies: weak internal controls , inadequate information and financial management systems , an ineffective organizational structure , and an insufficient mix of staff with the proper skills . in february 1997 , we reported that hud had formulated approaches and initiated actions to address these deficiencies but that its efforts were far from reaching fruition . hud began a number of reform and downsizing efforts prior to the 2020 plan . in february 1993 , then - secretary cisneros initiated a “reinvention” process in which task forces were established to review and refocus hud's mission and identify improvements in the delivery of program services .