pct . pct . pct . pct . mindi weisenbloom the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . app . i provides additional details on the number of agreements by type . agency officials had different viewpoints on the relative advantages and disadvantages of developing agency - level bilateral agreements that relate to government - level agreements . at the national institute of standards and technology , over 80 percent of the agency - level bilateral s&t agreements refer to existing government - level agreements . program officials at the national institute of standards and technology said that they believe that it is easier to negotiate an agency - level agreement that is related to a government - level agreement because intellectual property rights issues have already been resolved in the government - level agreement . department of state officials agreed . office of science and technology policy officials added that having agency - level agreements related to government - level agreements provides it and the department of state some degree of oversight to ensure that agency programs are consistent with nonproliferation , trade , and other national security interests . at the department of energy , on the other hand , 40 percent of the department's agency - level bilateral agreements are not related to a government - level s&t agreement . according to department of energy officials , having agency - level agreements that are related to government - level agreements under certain conditions can impose an administrative burden . government - level agreements with some countries may require numerous meetings and reports to monitor the status of projects and actions . according to these officials , agency - level agreements related to such government agreements would also require similar meetings and reports . these meetings and reports can increase the cost and decrease the time available for actual research or project implementation . the distribution of the 575 agreements varied widely among the seven agencies we reviewed . as figure 3 shows , the number of agreements varied from 26 for the national science foundation to 257 for the department of energy . the seven agencies that we reviewed have bilateral agreements with 57 countries from almost every region of the world and multilateral agreements with 8 international organizations and 10 groups of organizations and / or countries . figure 4 summarizes the distribution of bilateral agreements among major regions of the world .