( fig . 2 illustrates the location of the human factors division within faa's organizational structure. ) on april 1 , 1996 , faa changed its acquisition process and method of incorporating the consideration of human factors into that process . the creation of an office of system safety in 1995 may further affect the organizational structure for human factors . human - centered automation research focuses on the role of the operator and the effects of using automation to assist humans in accomplishing their assigned tasks with greater safety and efficiency . the research in this area is designed to identify and apply knowledge of the relative strengths and limitations of humans in an automated environment . it investigates the implications of computer - based technology for the design , evaluation , and certification of controls , displays , and advanced systems . research conducted under this area seeks to improve safety and performance by addressing the presentation and transfer of information among components in the national airspace system ( nas ) , including controllers' workstations , the flight deck , operational and airway facilities , and all the interfaces in between . the national airspace system's efficiency and effectiveness are enhanced through research to understand the relationship between human abilities and the performance of aviation tasks ; to enhance the measures and methods for predicting future job / task performance ; to develop a scientific basis for designing training programs , devices , and aids ; to define criteria for assessing future training requirements ; and to identify new ways for selecting aviation system personnel . the recipients of research findings on selection and training are flight crews , air traffic controllers , airways facilities systems management personnel , aircraft maintenance technicians , airport security personnel , and others in the aviation community who contribute to safety and efficiency through staffing and training decisions . areas of ongoing research selection , training , certification , and staffing of atc personnel model advanced qualification program ( aqp ) ( atcs / pts ) . research in this area is designed to improve the understanding of human performance capabilities and limitations in aviation and the means to measure them . individuals' cognitive and interpersonal skills , teams' characteristics , and organizational factors directly shape the safety and efficiency of aviation operations . this research will provide information to improve safety and productivity through better equipment design , training , and system performance .