there are two aspects to this issue . one is partial coverage of a workforce . some state workers' compensation programs do not allow partial coverage of a workforce . instead , all privately employed individuals must be covered unless certain numerical thresholds are met , employees fall into an excepted group , or a waiver is granted . the second issue is potential exemption from coverage . in january 1995 , the department of labor reported that 15 states allowed exemptions from their workers' compensation programs if employers had fewer than a threshold number of workers or met other conditions . while the requirements varied , in general , exemptions could be granted for employers with less than three to five employees . our survey of the small railroads found that 116 railroads ( about 30 percent of the 398 respondents ) employed five or fewer employees . the opting - out alternative would necessitate changes in federal law . not only would fela have to be amended , but legislation might be required to provide for alternative coverage . for example , feca and lhwca could be modified to cover all railroad workers currently subject to fela . feca currently covers employees of the alaska railroad who incurred any injuries or illnesses before the railroad was transferred to the state of alaska in 1985 . feca also covers those railroad workers who are federal civilian employees . lhwca also covers those workers who work for a railroad but who are engaged in maritime activities , such as loading and unloading vessels . in assessing this option , the congress would need to consider the extent to which the federal government would be responsible for handling and / or adjudicating railroad workers' claims for benefits and the potential impact on federal agencies' budgets and operations from assuming these responsibilities . allowing railroads to opt out of fela might also require changes in state law . fela currently preempts state law in the coverage of work - related injury compensation of railroad workers . however , in our review of state workers' compensation law in the 10 states with the most railroad workers , we found that some railroad workers might not be covered if the railroads opt out of fela and changes are not made in state law . for example , in 3 of the 10 states — georgia , nebraska , and virginia — interstate railroad workers are specifically excepted from state workers' compensation programs . railroad workers also might not be covered in texas if a railroad elects not to be covered by state workers' compensation . coverage of railroad workers in the other six states was less clear and could depend on a number of factors , including legal interpretations about the extent to which states have the power to regulate businesses engaged in interstate commerce . the congress could elect not to subject the current railroad workers to any one or all of the proposed modifications to fela . in fact , if the congress chose to replace fela with a nationwide no - fault system or allow the railroads to come under state workers' compensation systems , it still could choose to allow existing employees to remain under the current fela system .