we did not propose such a recommendation . we merely observed that deciding to develop a waste storage facility near yucca mountain before the department has determined that the proposed repository site complies with applicable siting guidelines , standards , and licensing regulations could be perceived as a firm commitment to eventually disposing of nuclear waste at the site . we revised our observation section to make clear that we were not proposing any recommendation . doe also said that we appear to be misinformed about its plans to continue addressing the uncertainties related to hydrology , the effects of heat from waste on the performance of the repository , and waste package materials . the department intends to make every reasonable effort to reduce uncertainties and , in a license application , will identify and discuss any remaining major uncertainties and the steps planned to reduce them . it is important to note , doe added , that it is not required to demonstrate the performance of the repository system or components of this system until it submits a license application . we disagree that we are misinformed about doe's plans for addressing key technical issues . our report states that , on the basis of the limited information that doe has collected and concerns raised by technical experts , resolving existing uncertainties about these issues could affect the department's ability to achieve its objectives and schedule for the repository project . whether or not doe's current plans to address key uncertainties are adequate can be definitively answered only after the department has submitted an application to construct a repository . doe provided other specific clarifying comments that we incorporated as appropriate . nrc pointed out that its previous and ongoing reviews of doe's site investigation project and interactions with the department have documented feedback to doe on what is needed for licensing . therefore , nrc's comments on the viability assessment's discussion of doe's plans for the license application will reflect whatever significant differences remain between nrc's staff and the department . moreover , nrc said , interactions between the two agencies focused on resolving licensing issues will continue , and should differences of opinion persist , they will be documented in the commission's preliminary sufficiency comments to be included in doe's site recommendation report . nrc provided other specific clarifying comments that we incorporated as appropriate . we performed our review at doe's headquarters in washington , d.c. , and at doe's yucca mountain site characterization project office in las vegas , nevada . we also performed our review at the headquarters of nrc in rockville , maryland , and epa in washington , d.c. we visited the yucca mountain site in southern nevada and met with representatives of the state of nevada and clark county , nevada . we conducted our review from february 1996 through january 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( see app . v for details of our scope and methodology. ) a list of related gao products appears at the end of this report . we are sending copies of this report to the secretary of energy ; the chairman , nrc ; the administrator of epa ; and the director , office of management and budget .