oldemeyer . forest and snow components of selkirk mountain caribou early winter habitat . unpublished report , u.s . fish and wildlife service , fort collins , colorado . 45 pp . the selkirk mountain caribou population of northern idaho , northeastern washington , and southeast british columbia was listed as an endangered species in 1983 under the endangered species act of 1973 . this isolated remnant caribou population resides primarily in british columbia , with a few individuals as part - time residents in the united states ( scott and servheen 1985 ) . although woodland caribou originally occurred in all canadian border states ( hall 1981 ) and 350 miles south of their present range in idaho ( johnson 1967 ) , the selkirk population of 25-30 woodland caribou is considered the last remaining herd in the 48 contiguous states . selkirk caribou select seasonal habitats within their home range and movements include the classic double migration described by edwards and ritcey ( 1959 ) for woodland caribou in wells gray provincial park , british columbia . ecological and socioeconomic factors combine to make early winter habitat the most critical seasonal habitat . early winter habitat is located in the old - growth cedar / hemlock forest types and between this type and the higher - elevation spruce / fir forest type . most early winter habitat occurs between 1375 and 1675 meters , generally on northerly slopes ( scott and servheen 1985 ) . old - growth cedar / hemlock is economically important to the timber industry because of the efficiency of harvest and consequently has been extensively logged in both canadian and u.s. caribou habitat . caribou begin a major shift in diet selection during the onset of early winter as plant aging and early snows decrease the availability and efficiency of harvest of vascular plants . soft deep snows physically inhibit caribou from using the arboreal lichen component of the spruce / fir community until snow packs settle and harden . therefore , caribou must adapt a foraging strategy intermediate to open fall grazing and late winter foraging on arboreal lichens . weather conditions make early winter the most difficult time to monitor woodland caribou . lack of information during early winter for selkirk caribou and studies of woodland caribou ( edwards and ritcey 1959 , stardom 1975 , bloomfield 1980 , antifeau 1985 ) and the need to better understand caribou use of early winter habitat in relation to forestry practices was the impetus for this research . rominger , e.m. , and j.l . oldemeyer . habitat component mapping of selkirk mountain caribou early winter habitat in southeastern british columbia , canada . unpublished report , u.s . fish and wildlife service , national ecology research center , fort collins , colorado . 56 pp . the selkirk mountain caribou population of northern idaho , northeast washington , and southeast british columbia was listed as endangered in 1983 in accordance with the endangered species act of 1973 . this isolated remnant caribou population resides primarily in british columbia , with a few individuals as part - time residents in the united states ( scott and servheen 1985 ) .