( see fig . commercial passenger vehicles enter the united states through the u.s. customs service's passenger vehicle ports of entry , which are physically separate from the crossings that commercial trucks use to enter the united states . fhwa inspectors in california and state inspectors in texas had not conducted any inspections as of may 1997 . the dearth of safety inspections , coupled with insufficient information on the number and kinds of mexican commercial passenger vehicles entering the united states , precludes any assessment of whether these commercial passenger vehicles are safe and are being operated safely . fhwa and state officials told us that because many more commercial trucks enter the united states from mexico than do commercial passenger vehicles , they spend most of their time inspecting commercial trucks . about 12,000 commercial truck crossings occur along the border each day compared with about 598 commercial passenger vehicle crossings ( a 20-to - 1 ratio ) . moreover , about 45 percent of the 25,000 trucks inspected upon entering the united states from mexico were placed out of service for serious safety violations in calendar year 1996 . fhwa is not conducting safety inspections of commercial passenger vehicles entering california from mexico . according to an fhwa official in california , the two federal inspectors assigned to the california border are focusing all of their inspection efforts on the commercial trucks entering the united states from mexico because ( 1 ) these trucks continue to display serious violations of insurance and operating authority requirements and ( 2 ) congestion at the border crossings does not allow adequate space for vehicle inspections to be conducted . california state safety inspections of commercial passenger vehicles entering the united states from mexico have been limited to two 1-day strike force efforts ( see fig . in total , the california highway patrol conducted level - 1 inspections of 144 vehicles and placed 37 ( 26 percent ) vehicles out of service for serious safety violations , such as steering or brake problems . during the first strike force effort on april 20 , 1997 , safety inspectors inspected vehicles near the passenger vehicle border crossings at san diego and otay mesa . at the san diego crossing , state officials directed commercial passenger vehicles to stop at a curbside about 1 mile from the border crossing for inspection because space was insufficient to conduct vehicle inspections at the customs border crossing ( see fig . for vehicles crossing at otay mesa , state officials diverted commercial passenger vehicle traffic from the passenger crossing to the state truck inspection facility about 1 mile away . the second strike force took place at two federal immigration and naturalization service border patrol posts just north of san diego on april 26 , 1997 . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . twenty - eight ( 21 percent ) of these vehicles were placed out of service for serious safety violations , such as inoperative brakes or air suspension problems . in comparison , the out - of - service rate for the 10,000 u.s. commercial passenger vehicles inspected on the nation's roads from october 1996 through june 1997 was about 10 percent .