2 ) — in our review . the irrigation canals found throughout the foothills of the sierra nevada were originally hand - dug earthen ditches constructed in the 19th century for use in gold mining , according to irrigation system managers . later , these canals began to be used for agricultural irrigation or for the logging industry , and more recently , the canals have also served as a source of residential water for pockets of homeowners living in remote areas of the foothills . until the past few years , according to state , county , and irrigation system officials , some counties permitted homes to be built in areas that lacked public drinking water systems but had access to untreated irrigation water . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . the manager of a rural water supply corporation that provides treated water in the lower rio grande valley agreed that the cost of connecting isolated households can be substantial . he estimated that in 1998 , the cost of installing pipelines from public main water lines to homes ranges from $2.25 to $3.00 per foot . thus , a customer who lives 3 miles from the nearest public water main would have to pay more than $35,000 for the pipeline alone . the manager told us that he periodically gets inquiries about hooking up to his system , but people often become discouraged after learning how much it would cost . similarly , in california , an official with the placer county water agency agreed that location can greatly affect the cost of providing treated water . while the cost of connecting a household to one of this agency's treated water systems is , on average , about $6,000 , the cost can be much higher , depending on the location of the household . for example , in 1996 , the agency constructed a small water system to serve 97 households at a total cost of $1.5 million . the average cost per household , including the cost of pipelines from the water main to individual homes , the connection fees , and interest , was $15,000 to $18,000 . according to the official , the high cost was attributable to the small number of households served by the system , the distance between customers , and the hilly terrain . in addition , we met with representatives of irrigation districts from each of the selected counties , including the association of california water agencies and the lower rio grande valley water district managers association , and other knowledgeable officials . to supplement the testimonial evidence , we obtained and analyzed relevant reports and other supporting documentation . the state and local officials we interviewed in california and texas also provided information on the sources and costs of the water used by households relying on irrigation systems and the cost and feasibility of alternative sources .