we did not receive any explanation . however , the program officer said that while the contractual documentation for this particular effort does not contain specific reference to nonlinear 3d - fem as a pavement design and analysis method , the documentation does not exclude the use of such a method either . the pavement design guide developed and updated by aashto over the years for designing and analyzing highway pavement structures is outdated . nchrp has undertaken a 5-year effort to update the guide employing improved design approaches . research on nonlinear 3d - fem and documented successes in its application suggest that this method could be an important tool for accurately ( 1 ) designing and analyzing new highway pavement structures and ( 2 ) analyzing the response of deteriorated pavement structures for rehabilitation . we believe it should be considered in nchrp's ongoing efforts to update aashto's current pavement design and analysis guide . the recent decision to rebid the contract for the design guide update provides an opportunity for fhwa to specify the consideration of this method . to better assist states in designing safer , longer lasting , and more cost - effective new , reconstructed , and overlay highway pavement structures , we recommend that the secretary of transportation direct the administrator , fhwa , to ensure that nonlinear 3d - fem is considered in the current update of the pavement design guide . we provided a draft of this report to dot for its review and comment . in written comments dated october 31 , 1997 ( see app . ii ) , dot stated that it has maintained a long - standing commitment to ensuring that the nation's investment in its highway infrastructure is cost - effective . dot concurred with our recommendation that nonlinear 3d - fem be considered in the current update of aashto's pavement design guide . dot stated that it would work with nchrp to encourage full consideration of the method along with other quantitative analytical methods . as part of its commitment to a cost - effective highway infrastructure , dot stated that fhwa has supported research efforts at its own turner - fairbank highway research center as well as efforts by aashto , nchrp , and trb . dot further stated that fhwa is fully aware of and recognizes the potential benefits to highway design offered by 3d - fem . according to dot , fhwa has supported the development of this technology at its turner - fairbank facility and with individual states through the state planning and research program . dot stated that fhwa considers 3d - fem to be a very useful research tool for analyzing pavement structures but that it will be up to nchrp and aashto to determine whether the method has achieved the maturity necessary to become a practical engineering tool . we are pleased to hear of dot's interest in and acceptance of nonlinear 3d - fem as an analytical tool for designing and analyzing highway pavement structures .