irp loans . irp loans are direct government - funded loans made for relending , mostly to nonprofit community development organizations , and , to a lesser extent , to other borrowers , such as for - profit and nonprofit cooperatives . specifically , the irp loan funds are deposited into a revolving fund that an rbs borrower — an intermediary — has established . the intermediary relends the money to its borrowers — which may be individuals , public or private organizations , or any other legal entity — for financing business or community development projects in rural areas . irp loan funds are not allowed for certain purposes , including funding gambling facilities , race tracks , and golf courses . rbs' approval is required for the intermediary's relending of the irp loan funds . rbs charges its borrowers a 1-percent interest rate on irp loans . the interest rate on a loan from the revolving fund is the rate agreed to by the intermediary and its borrower . rbs does not specify what this rate should be . red loans . red loans are also direct loans made for relending . the loans are made only to borrowers that have outstanding electricity or telecommunications loans from usda's rural utilities service ( rus ) and to former rus borrowers that repaid their electricity loans early at a discount . unlike irp loans , a red loan , when approved , is targeted to a specific project . the red loan funds are deposited into a fund that the rus borrower has established . the rus borrower relends the money to other borrowers , which may be any public or private organization or other legal entity , for an economic development and job creation project . these projects include new business creation , existing business expansion , community improvements , and infrastructure development . red loan funds cannot be used for certain purposes , including the rus borrowers' electricity or telecommunications operations or a community's television system or facility , unless tied to an educational or medical project . red loans are interest free , and rbs requires that loan funds be relent interest free . ( app . i provides more descriptive information on each of rbs' loan programs. ) for example , rbs approved 190 guaranteed b&i loans in fiscal year 1993 with a total value of more than $187 million . as table 1 shows , this compares with 663 loans in fiscal year 1997 and 377 loans in the first half of fiscal 1998 , which have total values of more than $816 million and about $540 million , respectively . the maximum loan currently is $25 million , which is also a borrower's maximum debt level . in addition , rbs provides the following guarantee percentages: 80 percent on loans of $5 million or less , 70 percent on loans between $5 million and $10 million , and 60 percent on loans of more than $10 million . however , a guarantee of up to 90 percent can be provided on a loan of $10 million or less if rbs' administrator approves the higher percentage .