ii. ) eight states account for 70 percent of total upb eight states each have over $150 million in upb . new york has $1.2 billion in upb , which is 32 percent of the total . massachusetts , ohio , virginia , new jersey , illinois , rhode island , and pennsylvania together account for 38 percent of the total . hud asserted that the nursing home program serves those not served by the private sector . however , hud acknowledged that it does not have data to substantiate its position . in our view , without such data , it is not clear to what extent fha - insured facilities serve a need that would not otherwise be met by the private sector . in our report , we provide information on the number of nursing homes in each state compared with the number of nursing homes currently in fha's loan portfolio to show that participation in fha's nursing home program varies widely by state . hud stated that fha's share of the market should be computed by comparing what has happened in the market over the last few years . we noted in the draft report that the data presented provide an approximate representation of fha's role in providing nursing homes in each state , and we identified the limitations in the data provided . for example , “actuarial” studies conducted periodically on these programs focus primarily on the number of defaults and the original loan balances associated with the defaults but do not analyze the full costs of the programs . therefore , this information does not establish whether the programs operate at a profit or a loss . furthermore , while hud's data systems currently track receipts and expenditure data associated with its individual mortgage insurance programs , cumulative receipts and expenditure data for its insurance programs are not available because historically the data systems have not tracked these data for the department's individual programs . consequently , the actual financial performance of the nursing home and retirement service center programs can only be estimated . data from hud that may be used to approximate the financial performance of the nursing home program from its inception to september 30 , 1994 , indicate that losses were likely incurred under this program . for example , hud is planning to assign loan originations for assisted living facility loans for its region 10 offices in alaska , idaho , oregon , and washington state to the seattle , washington , field office to bring efficiency and specialization to the loan origination process for nursing home loans that are unlike other multifamily loans . the deputy assistant secretary said that concentrating highly experienced staff in a few locations will reduce the risk associated with certain types of loans , such as those of assisted living , board and care , and intermediate care facilities . in addition , the deputy assistant secretary indicated that hud is currently redesigning its program for nursing homes and other residential health care facilities . the department is considering changing fees and premiums as well as basic underwriting terms , such as reductions in loan - to - value limits and shorter mortgage terms .