( see fig . according to the forest service , of the 96 million acres within national forests that contain timber suitable for commercial harvesting , 49 million acres , or 51 percent , have been approved for timber harvesting in the agency's forest plans . another 10 percent is distributed to the general fund of the treasury and the remaining 40 percent goes to a reclamation fund used for the construction of irrigation projects.however , in 1991 , after the passage of interior's appropriations bill , states receiving revenue from federal onshore minerals development began paying a portion of the costs to administer the onshore leasing laws — a practice known as “net receipts sharing.” net receipts sharing became permanent with the passage of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 , which effectively requires that the federal government recover from the states about 25 percent of the prior year's federal appropriations allocated to mineral - leasing activities . in fiscal year 1996 , 41 states received about $481 million in revenue from the development of federal onshore minerals . the states paid the federal government about $22 million as their portion of the costs to administer the onshore leasing laws . sharing revenue after deducting these costs may provide a strong incentive for the states to ensure that the costs are contained or reduced . the congress has given the forest service the authority to obtain fair market value for some goods or to recover costs for some services . however , the agency has not always taken advantage of this authority , as the following examples from our prior work show . in june 1997 , we reported that the sealed bid auction method is significantly and positively related to higher bid premiums on timber sales . however , the forest service used oral bids at single - bidder sales rather than sealed bids , resulting in an estimated decrease in timber sales receipts of $56 million from fiscal year 1992 through fiscal year 1996 . in december 1996 , we reported that , in many instances , the forest service has not obtained fair market fees for commercial activities on the national forests , including resort lodges , marinas , and guide services , or for special noncommercial uses , such as private recreational cabins and special group events . fees for such activities are the second largest generator of revenue for the agency , after timber sales . the forest service's fee system , which sets fees for most commercial uses other than ski operations , had not been updated for nearly 30 years and generally limited fees to less than 3 percent of a permittee's gross revenue . in comparison , fees for similar commercial uses of nearby state - held lands averaged 5 to 15 percent of a permittee's total revenue.in december 1996 , we also reported that although the forest service had been authorized to recover the costs incurred in reviewing and processing all types of special - use permit applications since as far back as 1952 , it had not done so . on the basis of information provided by the agency , we estimated that in 1994 the costs to review and process special - use permits were about $13 million .