the idaho agreement is flexible . its action plan states that no reasonable amount of investigation can resolve all uncertainty and that once remedial actions have been initiated , they must be allowed to change . the agreement encourages the timely selection of remedies , flexibility for remedial action , and the adoption of alternative solutions in response to new information discovered during investigations . the idaho agreement encourages the parties to consider the cost - effectiveness of remedies designed to reduce risks at sites . the accompanying action plan gives project managers the flexibility to prioritize and organize work so as to maximize the benefits that can be achieved with available funds . furthermore , the document supports a “bias for action” through minimizing the duplication of analyses and documentation , expediting the cleanup process as much as possible , and providing the necessary flexibility to reach an early determination on a unit when there is sufficient information . after the idaho agreement went into effect , one of the first planned remedial investigations at the site was for the test reactor area . this area houses test reactors and extensive support facilities for studying the effects of radiation on materials , fuels , and equipment . sites within this area that were investigated included pits , tanks , rubble piles , ponds , cooling towers , wells , french drains , and spills . the u.s. geological survey had been collecting data on groundwater at the idaho site since the 1950s , when the facility was put into operation . although these data had not been collected under the cercla agreement , the parties agreed that , because the data had been collected consistently for 40 years , they were useable along with data collected more recently under a previous rcra consent order . the decision to use the available data eliminated the need for a work plan and further field data collection and analysis . as a result , a remedy was selected for the site about a year ahead of schedule . analysis of the data showed that groundwater and a percolation pond were contaminated . the parties considered a variety of remedies , ranging in estimated cost from about $6 million to more than $43 million , but decided , ultimately , that there was no need to remediate the groundwater . because ( 1 ) doe had previously reduced or eliminated the sources of contamination , ( 2 ) the levels of contamination were declining , and ( 3 ) no people were living in the area , the parties agreed to consolidate the contaminated sediments in the percolation pond and place a soil cap on top . according to the parties , the costs of implementing a groundwater remedy were not worth the possible benefits . the parties' ability to reach a potentially controversial decision was attributed to the teamwork and bias for action articulated in the idaho agreement . particularly for the state , the decision was not easy to support because the public was concerned about the possible contamination of the aquifer , on which the agricultural community depends . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii .