( see app . i for the requirements for the final report. ) we also relied on a database of sbir award recipients maintained by the small business administration ( sba ) , as well as the results of our 1991 survey of award recipients from the first 4 years of the program — 1984 through 1987 — and the results of a 1996 department of defense ( dod ) survey of dod's award recipients , which closely followed our 1991 survey format . sba currently has a survey under way of all non - dod sbir award recipients , which is being conducted by the same contractor that performed the dod survey and which also closely follows our earlier format . because of the ongoing sba survey , we did not conduct our own follow - on survey . sba expects to report on this survey by february 1999 . ten federal agencies participate in the sbir program . five of them — dod , the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) , the department of health and human services and , particularly , its national institutes of health ( nih ) , department of energy ( doe ) , and the national science foundation ( nsf ) — provided over 95 percent of sbir funds in fiscal year 1996 . ( see table 1. ) dod provides over 50 percent of sbir funding . each agency manages its own program , while sba plays a central administrative role , such as issuing policy directives and annual reports for the program . the small business innovation development act of 1982 required that agencies with extramural r&d budgets of $100 million or more set aside not less than 0.2 percent of that amount for the sbir program and provided for annual increases up to a ceiling of not less than 1.25 percent of the agencies' budgets . current law essentially defines “extramural budget” as an agency's budget obligations that do not support activities conducted by agency employees . therefore , there is little assurance that the sbir program is being funded at the levels required by statute . to ensure that sbir funding levels are correct , we recommend that the administrator of sba provide additional guidance to the participating agencies on how to calculate their “extramural budgets. we provided dod , doe , nasa , nih , nsf , and sba with draft copies of this report for their review and comment . we discussed the draft with sba's assistant administrator for technology , who stated that the report was balanced and that the agency agreed with our recommendation that sba provide participating agencies with more guidance in determining extramural activities . dod , doe , nih , and nsf program officials provided us with technical corrections and clarifications that we incorporated where appropriate . as a result , ongoing research may be delayed , and the “time - to - market” — that is the length of time from the point when research is completed to the point when the results of the research are commercialized — may be severely impaired , thus limiting a company's commercial potential .