( see app . i for examples of how ams calculates rates for an imported cotton product. ) because the check - off program is federally authorized , the secretary of agriculture and ams have certain oversight responsibilities . the secretary must approve the cotton board's recommended program plans and budgets before they can become effective . the imposition of the cotton import assessment has not prevented increases in the u.s. consumption of cotton . between 1984 and 1991 , the u.s. consumption of raw cotton and cotton products grew from 4 billion pounds to 6.2 billion pounds , an average annual growth rate of 6.6 percent . following the imposition of the cotton import assessment in 1992 , the u.s. market continued to grow at about the same rate through june 1995 . the u.s. consumption of cotton may exceed 8 billion pounds in 1995 . ( see fig . government and other experts knowledgeable about the u.s. textile and apparel industry agreed that the imposition of the cotton import assessment beginning in july 1992 has had no significant impact on the long - term growth in u.s. consumption of domestic cotton . they pointed out that the relatively small size of the cotton import assessment — about one - half cent per pound of raw cotton equivalent — is likely to have little effect on retail prices . according to these experts , the primary factor explaining the growth in cotton consumption since 1984 is consumers' increasing preference for cotton apparel — per capita consumption increased from 17 pounds to 30 pounds between 1984 and 1994 . they also said that technological developments , such as wrinkle - resistant cotton fabric and different denim finishes , have further enhanced consumers' preference for cotton apparel . in addition , these experts said that the cotton check - off program has contributed to consumers' preference for cotton , although they could not cite any study measuring the extent of the program's contribution . according to usda's chief economist , a positive correlation generally exists between increased promotion and increased sales of a particular product . however , he also said that researchers measuring this positive correlation have found that it can vary from small to large , depending on the product , the time period involved , and other factors . as discussed in the conference report on the 1990 farm bill , some lawmakers were concerned that while importers would be contributing to the check - off program on an equal footing with domestic producers , they would be denied equivalent access to the u.s. cotton market because of tariffs and quotas . according to the ustr , in 1992 the united states maintained quotas for about 67 percent of imported cotton products . about 60 percent of those voting approved these revisions in july 1991 . in effect , the approved changes made the program mandatory for both domestic producers and importers . after the final regulation was issued and other administrative procedures were completed , import assessments on cotton products began to be collected on july 31 , 1992 . the assessments are collected by customs and remitted to the cotton board through ams on a monthly basis .