we agree with those comments . but we disagree with bia's characterization as “meaningless” our statement that , under the current method for distributing tpa funds , there is no assurance that the funds are effectively targeting the most pressing needs among tribes . without assessing the relative needs of the tribes , bia cannot know if the most pressing needs are effectively being met . and while the relative needs of the tribes have changed over time , bia's distribution of tpa base funds — which is based on historical levels — has not changed to accommodate them . we continue to believe that tribal needs assessments would assist bia in developing criteria by which to equitably allocate tpa funds . our report recognizes that a tribe's revenues do not , in and of themselves , serve as the only measure of its needs . the information on tribal revenues is presented to illustrate one of the changing factors that is currently not being addressed in the distribution of tpa funds and to provide information for the policy debate on this issue currently before the congress . setting aside the policy question of whether tribal revenues should be considered in the distribution of tpa funds , the underlying issue remains: whether tpa funds are appropriately distributed among the tribes under existing indian policy . even without considering tribal revenues , improvements in the distribution of tpa funds could be made under existing indian policy . much of the criticism of tpa distributions over the last 20 years has been that relying on historical distribution levels has resulted in inequitable funding among the tribes . bia acknowledged that the tpa process has been faulted in many areas over the years , including the inequities in the historical distribution method . in response to these criticisms , bia has made a number of key improvements in the tpa process but , after repeated attempts , has yet to implement a more equitable tpa distribution method . as noted in the report and in bia's comments , bia has created another working group to address this issue . regarding the additional information that could be helpful in determining a revised distribution method , bia emphasized that the purpose of the single audit act was to safeguard federal funds , not to require complete financial reporting on tribal businesses . we agree that , if the congress wishes to consider the tribes' own revenues in distributing tpa funds , more complete and reliable financial information on the tribes would be required than that currently available in the reports filed under the single audit act . furthermore , bia commented that there would be costs associated with “compiling , reporting , analyzing , and making funding decisions” on the basis of the additional types of information discussed in this report . we agree that the costs associated with implementing and maintaining a revised tpa distribution method would be an important factor to consider in developing a new approach . however , bia has not yet developed a revised approach , so it is not possible to estimate what those costs would be . bia also provided several technical clarifications , which we incorporated into the report where appropriate .