( see app . the airport and airway trust fund was established by the airport and airway revenue act of 1970 ( p.l . 91-258 ) to finance faa's investments in the airport and airway system , such as construction and safety improvements at airports and technological upgrades to the air traffic control system . historically , about 87 percent of the tax revenues for the trust fund have come from a tax on domestic airline tickets . the airline that lands at o'hare to transfer the passenger to another flight to orlando has twice as many takeoffs and landings as the airline that flies nonstop between st. louis and orlando . as a result , the costs imposed by the hubbing airline on the air traffic control system are greater . however , by charging $4.50 per “originating” passenger , the airline that flies the passenger from st. louis to orlando via o'hare would pay the same amount as the airline that flies the passenger nonstop between st. louis and orlando , even though the hubbing carrier puts a greater burden on the system . in addition , by charging $0.005 per “nonstop passenger mile” — or the straight - line distance between the points of origin and destination — the formula does not charge the hubbing airlines for the circuitous routings that are common to their hub - and - spoke operations . as a result , the airline transporting a passenger 297 miles from st. louis to o'hare and then flying that passenger 1,157 miles to orlando would be charged the same as an airline flying a passenger nonstop from st. louis to orlando , even though the hubbing carrier placed a greater burden on the air traffic control system . because the seven largest airlines operate hub - and - spoke systems and most low - fare and small airlines operate point - to - point systems , the proposed fee system would shift the financial burden away from the larger airlines and onto their competitors . for example , as figure 2 shows , on the basis of faa's traffic forecasts for fiscal year 1997 , if the ticket tax were replaced by this proposal , the cost to the nation's seven largest airlines would decrease by nearly $600 million , while the cost to southwest airlines , america west , and other low - fare and small airlines would increase by nearly $550 million . in addition , the coalition's proposal would charge commuter carriers $1 per seat while charging airlines $2 per seat . most major commuter carriers are owned by or affiliated with one of the coalition airlines ; continental express , for example , is a wholly - owned subsidiary of continental airlines . as a result , by charging commuter carriers less per seat , the proposal would provide the coalition airlines with an additional benefit . implementing a proposal that would shift nearly $600 million in costs from one segment of the industry to another could have substantial competitive impacts and needs to be studied first . while the ticket tax might provide low - fare airlines with a competitive advantage , other public policies favor some large carriers .