occurred . ashland 1 , tonawanda , n.y . begin removal of contamination . complete record of decision . occurred . ashland 2 , tonawanda , n.y . begin removal of contamination . complete record of decision and initiate remediation . occurred . bliss & laughlin steel , buffalo , n.y. no fy 1998 milestones . release engineering evaluation / cost assessment to the public . delayed because of lack of access to site . linde , tonawanda , n.y. demolish building no . occurred . decontaminate building no . complete decontamination of building no . occurred . ( continued ) ventron , beverly , mass . issue final certification document . has not occurred because of corps' desire not to put out record of decision for public review prior to completion of negotiations related to the owner's plans to sell the site . shpack landfill , norton / attleboro , mass . remove from program . remove from program . has not occurred because of the need to review more records than originally anticipated . maywood , maywood , n.j . complete residential vicinity properties . begin remediation of municipal vicinity properties . remediate 13 vicinity properties . exceeded . completed 15 vicinity properties and began remediation of 6 vicinity properties scheduled for fy 1999 . completed four additional properties not originally in the program . middlesex sampling plant , middlesex , n.j . complete engineering evaluation / cost assessment . remove 50 percent of waste pile . issue engineering evaluation / cost assessment . remove half of contaminated waste pile . exceeded . issued engineering evaluation / cost assessment and removed entire waste pile . wayne interim storage facility , wayne , n.j . complete removal of waste pile . begin removal of subsurface contamination . issue engineering evaluation / cost assessment and remove 10,000 cubic yards . occurred . colonie , colonie , n.y . complete vicinity property cleanup . begin subsurface soil remediation . award contract for total site remediation . conduct various decontamination and removal activities . occurred . dupont chambers works , deepwater , n.j . remove drums containing waste . issue engineering evaluation / cost assessment and remove drums containing waste . occurred . drums removed under a post hazard assessment document . ce site , windsor , conn. start site characterization . initiate site characterization . the corps is reviewing the proposal . unknown information on the niagara falls storage site mentioned earlier also has the potential to change the cleanup costs and completion schedule contained in the report to congress . both the baseline and conservative estimates assumed unconstrained funding . whether the baseline or conservative assumptions are closer to the cleanup that is actually implemented will depend on the results of the corps' risk analysis and coordination with the environmental protection agency and state and local representatives . soon after fusrap was transferred , the corps developed cost and schedule estimates for each fusrap site . fusrap currently consists of 22 sites and was funded at $140 million in both fiscal years 1998 and 1999 .