( app . i shows usda's staff by mission area and agencies and headquarters staff offices. ) of the seven mission areas , five include more than one agency . in four of these five mission areas,usda has designated one agency as the lead administrative agency for the mission area . in light of these weaknesses , we suggested that the congress consider limiting funding for information technology for these agencies' field offices to no more than the level needed to meet year 2000 compliance requirements until appropriate action was taken to resolve these weaknesses . usda started acquiring new hardware and software for its common computing environment at the end of fiscal year 1998 , when it purchased over 16,000 personal computers . while this purchase was principally made to replace computers that are not year 2000 compliant , usda also expects this procurement to enable its field - based agencies to use common software applications that will support administrative convergence in such areas as human resources , procurement , and travel . usda officials emphasized the need for the secretary to move quickly to fill key leadership positions for the support services bureau and charge the appointed officials with the responsibility to implement the administrative convergence plan once it has been approved . according to the leader of the implementation planning team , assigning leadership responsibilities and providing the appropriate authority to carry out those responsibilities are critical to the plan's success , given the host of decisions to be made and actions to be taken in implementing the convergence plan . these decisions include determining how the new organization will be funded in the long term , how authority will be delegated within the organization , and how staff will be classified . currently , three separate administrative structures provide support to seven agencies in 50 states , two territories , and several fas overseas offices . as mentioned earlier , these agencies have developed different approaches to delivering administrative services to their customers . the administrators for these three structures are focused on the delivery of several programs in addition to administrative support . usda officials said , and we agree , that unless the secretary moves quickly to appoint the leaders to translate the plan into a workable operation , it is unlikely that substantial progress will be made . while usda has estimated the savings it will achieve through staff reductions resulting from the administrative convergence , it has not estimated the costs associated with the convergence . usda officials believe that administrative convergence will allow the department to reduce the number of administrative staff by 45 percent from 1993 through 2002 . however , they acknowledge that budgetary savings from staff reductions will be decreased in the next several years by the costs of collocating state offices , modernizing business processes , and acquiring and implementing a common computing environment . if the administrative convergence is fully implemented in 2002 , the savings in administrative staff is projected to total about $144 million annually .