( app . i provides additional information on the forest service's and blm's procedures. ) from october 1992 through june 1996 , the forest service and blm paid more than $6.6 million in claims for 49 contracts that were suspended or canceled to protect threatened or endangered species . the forest service had 48 of the claims ; blm had 1 . what actions are the forest service and blm taking to minimize the future liability arising from suspended or canceled timber sale contracts ? as agreed with your office , we limited our work to timber sale contracts that the forest service and blm had suspended or canceled to protect threatened or endangered species and the resulting claims or lawsuits settled or pending between october 1992 and june 1996 . to provide the most current information , we updated the data on pending claims through october 1 , 1996 . the forest service , through its 9 regional offices , and blm , through its 12 state offices , award contracts to individuals or companies to harvest and remove timber from the federal lands under their jurisdiction . the contracts set forth specific terms and provisions of the sale , including the estimated volume of timber to be removed , the period for removal , the price to be paid to the government , and the environmental protection measures to be taken . for contracts valued at $2,000 or more , for fiscal years 1990 through 1995 , the forest service reported that it had awarded almost 24,500 timber sale contracts valued at about $27 billion ; for fiscal year 1996 , data from the forest service showed that it had awarded over 8,000 timber sale contracts valued at more than $4 billion as of the end of april 1996 . blm had about 200 contracts valued at more than $173 million . both the forest service's and blm's regulations and procedures specify that the agencies can extend the time for completing a timber sale contract under certain circumstances and that they can modify , suspend , cancel , or partially cancel a timber sale contract for various reasons , including the need to protect threatened or endangered species and their habitat . the forest service's and blm's procedures outline similar steps to take when deciding whether to suspend or cancel a timber sale contract . for example , within the forest service and blm , the contracting officer can suspend a contract to protect threatened or endangered species . however , only the chief of the forest service and blm's state directors are authorized to cancel contracts for environmental reasons . the agencies have paid the purchasers for the value of replacement timber , interest , lost profits , and unrecovered costs incurred under the contracts . blm settled its claim of almost $228,000 ( plus interest ) by modifying another contract held by the purchaser to reduce the amount paid to the government without changing the original volume to be harvested . data from the forest service show that it settled 48 claims ( totaling almost $6.5 million ) from timber management appropriations . what amounts and types of claims are pending against the forest service and blm , and how do the agencies expect to pay the claims ?