( see app . ii for additional information about each proposed revision. ) department of transportation: university research activities need greater oversight ( gao / rced - 94-175 , may 13 , 1994 ) . energy management: controls over the livermore laboratory's indirect costs are inadequate ( gao / rced - 94-34 , nov. 16 , 1993 ) . federal research: minor changes would further improve new nsf indirect cost guidance ( gao / rced - 93-140 , june 3 , 1993 ) . federal research: system for reimbursing universities' indirect costs should be reevaluated ( gao / rced - 92-203 , aug. 26 , 1992 ) . federally sponsored research: indirect costs charged by selected universities ( gao / t - rced - 92-20 , jan. 29 , 1992 ) . federally sponsored research: indirect costs charged by stanford university ( gao / t - rced - 91-18 , mar . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . specifically , we asked each surveyed university to ( 1 ) verify indirect cost rate data that its cognizant federal agency had provided for fiscal years 1992 , 1993 , and 1994 and ( 2 ) provide its modified total direct costs for fiscal years 1992 and 1993 . if the university and cognizant agency disagreed , we asked the agency to reverify its rate information . we did not fully analyze the effect of these suggested options . almost all of the agency officials we interviewed and universities we surveyed opposed capping indirect cost rates — through either a system of flat rates or an overall cap — because they believe that limiting cost recovery for facilities would adversely affect universities' ability to provide the modern laboratory facilities and equipment needed to perform advanced scientific research . in addition , citing their commitment to modernize university research facilities , the office of science and technology policy and omb recently concluded that it would be poor science policy to cap facilities rates . the 1991 revisions to omb circular a - 21 have reduced federal spending for administrative costs by about $104 million per year , while the 1993 revisions will further reduce these costs by at least $7 million per year . these revisions have made universities' overall indirect cost rates more uniform . because the 26-percent cap has limited future growth of administrative costs , further initiatives to control the growth of indirect costs will primarily affect facilities costs . omb's recent proposed revision to circular a - 21 would tighten controls over the growth of facilities rates without imposing a cap and improve consistency in the way universities treat costs . one 1993 change modifying the accounting of tuition remission for graduate research assistants affects four universities that account for a significant portion of the doctoral degrees in engineering . these universities and nsf have expressed concern about the effect of this change on doctoral programs in scientific and engineering fields .