additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . he derived these estimates from sales prices and reserve estimates for the properties . he then applied the estimated prices per ounce for the prior sale of the new world property and the sale that he judged most comparable to the estimated reserves for the new world property to obtain an appraised value for this property . under the bulk sale discount approach , the appraiser used data on prior sales to calculate for each the ratio of the sales price to the potential retail income from the estimated gold reserves on that property . he inferred from these ratios , particularly the ratio for the most comparable sale , a comparable ratio for the new world property . he then applied that ratio to the estimate of potential retail income from the new world property to estimate the likely sales price . the appraiser then made two adjustments that reduced the $72 million value to the appraised value of $69,076,000 . the first adjustment reflects a royalty interest owned by kennecott corporation for its interest in several claims . this money would have been paid from future income from the proposed mine . the appraiser discounted the proposed mine's projected cash flow and estimated the present value of the outstanding debt to be $1,900,000 . the second adjustment reflects the restrictions imposed by the conservation easement on the private lands . the appraiser assumed that 931 acres — those acres associated with property owned by the individual — would remain in private ownership and could be used only for recreational activities , in accordance with the terms of the easement . accordingly , the appraiser identified comparable sales of land for recreational use and reduced the crown butte appraisal by $1,024,000 . in estimating the fair market value of the proposed mine , the appraisal relied on several assumptions that could have tended to overstate the appraised value . in general , the need to make assumptions about key unknown factors increases the uncertainty associated with any estimate of appraised value . although we have not determined the cumulative effect of relying on these assumptions , it appears to us that they would tend to increase the appraised value compared to the value that might have been obtained with different assumptions .