management . a typical program is managed and operated by a foqa manager , one or more analysts , and a foqa monitoring team ( sometimes referred to as the exceedance guidance team ) made up of airline pilots who work on foqa on a part - time basis . generally , the majority of the monitoring team's pilots are also representatives of the pilot union . these individuals manage the foqa program in strict adherence to the agreements made with the pilot union , most notably on ensuring the confidentiality of pilots' identities . this group is responsible for defining and refining exceedances and parameters , reviewing and analyzing data , and determining and monitoring corrective actions . data capture . the first step is the capture of data over the duration of the flight . flight data comprise snapshots of values or measurements from various aircraft systems . each data item represents information from a discrete source , such as an instrument or sensor . generally , these data items are referred to as “parameters.” examples of parameters are “altitude” or “landing gear position.” recording rates vary , depending on the parameter , ranging from many times per second to about once per minute . although flight data recorders continuously record , at a minimum , faa - mandated parameters during every flight , they typically are not designed to provide frequent access to their data but rather to survive the extreme conditions during and after crashes to preserve flight data for accident investigations . these devices are housed in crash - resistant , sealed containers designed to withstand high “g” forces , submersion in water , and fire . obtaining frequent access to flight data recorders for foqa purposes , however , would produce increased wear on internal mechanisms and result in shortened mechanical life and increased expense for a very specialized device . also , flight data recorders may not capture a sufficient number of parameters to be useful for foqa purposes . currently , faa requires from 16 to 29 parameters to be recorded on flight data recorders in transport aircraft ; a foqa program , however , would likely capture many more parameters . typically , the 200-500 parameters available on modern digital aircraft allow a more comprehensive set of conditions to be monitored . finally , flight data recorders hold about 25 hours of flight data , a relatively short time period . instead , some u.s. airlines use a device called a quick access recorder ( qar ) to record foqa data to a removable optical disk or personal computer memory card international association ( pcmcia ) card . qars record flight data that are output from the aircraft's digital flight data acquisition unit ( dfdau ) , the same device that feeds parameters to the flight data recorder . on average , qars hold from 100 to 200 hours of flight data . data transfer . as aircraft receive periodic servicing , the medium ( optical disk or pcmcia card ) containing flight data is removed from the qar and sent to a central location for analysis . a new disk or card is inserted into the qar for the next round of flights .