( app . i shows the steps in each agency's declaration process. ) sba's declaration process and criteria are published in the code of federal regulations . the criteria provide that assistance from sba may be provided if , as a result of disaster - related damage to a county , at least 25 homes or businesses have sustained uninsured losses of at least 40 percent of their replacement value or at least three businesses have sustained uninsured losses of at least 40 percent of their replacement value and , as a direct result of the disaster , at least 25 percent of the workforce in the community would be unemployed for at least 90 days . with some exceptions , the times taken for governors to request a presidential or sba disaster declaration and the times taken for the president or sba administrator to reach a decision were longer for rural and very rural counties . consequently , the overall times from disaster incidents to decisions on federal aid were longer for these counties than for urban or very urban counties . to determine the amount of time that the declaration process takes for requests to the president through fema , we reviewed all counties for which emergency and / or major disaster declarations were requested in calendar 1993 and 1994 . these totaled 2,874 counties , divided as follows: ( 1 ) 2,157 counties that were included in original gubernatorial requests ( “initial” counties ) and ( 2 ) 717 counties that governors subsequently asked fema to make eligible for assistance ( “add - on” counties ) . because fema does not maintain centralized records of add - on counties that were turned down , the add - on counties for which we obtained information are limited to those that were declared eligible for federal assistance . the total time that elapses between a disaster incident and a decision on federal aid depends on how quickly a governor asks for assistance , as well as how quickly federal officials act on the request . accordingly , for each initial county we computed the numbers of days that elapsed from the disaster incident to the gubernatorial request ; from the gubernatorial request to the date that a declaration decision was made ; and the total time that elapsed from incident to declaration decision . for example , the number of homes destroyed or sustaining major damage might be expected to be larger in more densely populated areas than in less densely populated areas . according to the branch chief , these factors serve as guidelines for fema staff who evaluate disaster declaration requests . staff are encouraged to apply the factors consistently , but there is no formula for applying them quantitatively . fema officials stated that fema relies most heavily on how the assessment of a state's capability compares with the costs entailed by the disaster . however , they acknowledged that “capability” is not precisely defined and that determining a state's capability is subjective . the flexibility and generally subjective nature of fema's criteria have raised questions about the consistency and clarity of the disaster declaration process .