reg . 14359 , apr . 17 , 1990 ) explaining how the agency would use action levels . fda stated that , according to ffdca , “in the absence of a tolerance , any amount of a pesticide residue in a food or feed is unsafe and therefore renders the food or feed adulterated.” but when a food or feed is unavoidably contaminated with certain persistent pesticides that do not have tolerances , fda said that it would use action levels to provide guidance for determining when enforcement action was warranted . most of the action levels that epa has proposed or recommended have been for a group of chlorinated compounds — including ddt , chlordane , and dieldrin — that were widely used in u.s. agriculture during the 1950s and 1960s . because these compounds were later found to pose unacceptable chronic health risks to humans and to affect reproduction and cause birth defects in wildlife , most of their registrations were canceled during the 1970s . however , unlike most pesticides , these compounds have not readily broken down . today , they are still found in soil , sediment , and water . chlorinated compounds are not highly concentrated in plants , but they are accumulated in other organisms , particularly in fish , which are at or near the top of the aquatic food chain . unlike the herbivorous land animals eaten by humans , fish are often predators . when they prey on other aquatic animals , they may ingest and accumulate compounds that their prey have already accumulated . according to epa , aquatic organisms may accumulate environmental contaminants in concentrations up to 1 million times greater than are found in the surface water from which the organisms are taken . although these chlorinated pesticides were never registered for use on fish , they have been found in fish for decades , largely because agricultural runoff transported the pesticides to the nation's rivers and lakes . since these pesticides did not have tolerances for fish , fda established action levels as guidelines for determining when enforcement action was warranted . according to epa , most foods and feeds either contain no detectable residues of these canceled pesticides or contain residues that are well below the recommended action levels . therefore , epa believes that the dietary risk from these canceled pesticides in most foods is low . but because of the relatively high potential for these persistent pesticides to be concentrated in fish , health risks from dietary exposure to these canceled pesticides are greater in fish than in other foods . when epa decides to revoke a pesticide's tolerances , it first verifies that all of the registrations associated with these tolerances have been canceled . it then reviews monitoring data to determine whether and to what extent residues of the canceled pesticide remain in foods and whether action levels are needed to replace the existing tolerances . epa also analyzes the economic impact of revoking tolerances on domestic food producers and on imported commodities . then , epa prepares and issues a preliminary notice in the federal register stating its intent to revoke certain tolerances and requesting comments from interested parties .