, has encouraged participation . by delegating its loan - processing responsibilities to its risk - sharing partners , hud has been able to deliver multifamily insurance more expeditiously through the risk - sharing demonstration programs than through its traditional multifamily insurance programs . furthermore , because hud has also delegated the responsibilities for monitoring the performance of insured properties and for foreclosing on any properties in serious default , hud will continue to accrue administrative benefits throughout the terms of the insured loans . hud has not formally assessed how much staff time it has saved through risk sharing . a bill ( h.r . executive directors and risk - sharing program managers from several housing finance agencies indicated that , in place of rss , they would prefer a reporting system that relied on personal - computer - based software . such a system with a data dictionary , they agreed , would provide program mangers at all levels with consistent , easily accessible data for program evaluations . in addition , they agreed that state - of - the - art spreadsheet or database software would provide user - friendly editing and reporting capabilities that would also enhance the reliability of the data . according to hud headquarters officials , the problems associated with rss , a stand - alone system , should be resolved in the broader context of ongoing efforts to overhaul and fully integrate all of hud's management information systems . currently , hud is installing a personal - computer - based software suite departmentwide . this suite , called hudware ii , includes word processing , spreadsheet , database , and graphics / report software packages . hud is training its staff in the use of the new software as it is installed in headquarters and the field . we found that hud field offices were using the new spreadsheet packages to partially fulfill their monitoring requirements under the credit enhancement program . a senior hud headquarters program official also told us that suite software such as hudware ii would provide sufficient capacity to monitor and report on the risk - sharing program . managers at all levels could consistently use such software for program oversight functions . because the risk - sharing demonstration programs delegate virtually all critical loan - processing and administrative functions to hud's risk - sharing partners , it is imperative that hud ( 1 ) establish procedures for ensuring that its partners are carrying out their responsibilities in accordance with the programs' regulations and risk - sharing agreements and ( 2 ) monitor its partners to ensure that these procedures , regulations , and / or agreements are being followed . hud has established reasonable administrative controls for overseeing the programs ; however , it is somewhat premature to assess hud's application of these controls , given the programs' limited activity to date . nevertheless , we did observe some problems with hud's implementation of these controls . hud is aware of these problems and plans to address them . procedures for implementing the credit enhancement demonstration program are contained in a june 1995 handbook .