additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the numbers reported were confirmed by the department . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . what is the status of the department's indian housing block grant funding for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 ? until fiscal year 1998 , indian housing authorities and tribes received most of their funding for low - income housing through programs established under the u.s. housing act of 1937 and administered by hud's office of native american programs . through its headquarters and six field offices , and with the help of 217 indian housing authorities , hud administered the housing programs that benefited native american families that live in or near tribal areas . hud provided funding to construct , maintain , and rehabilitate low - income housing through programs such as development , operating subsidies , and modernization . on october 26 , 1996 , the native american housing assistance and self - determination act was signed into law , separating indian housing from public housing , administratively and financially . the regulations implementing nahasda were developed by a negotiated rulemaking committee . the committee had 58 members , 48 of them from geographically diverse small , medium , and large tribes ; the other 10 were hud employees . after review by the office of management and budget , hud published the final rule implementing nahasda on march 12 , 1998 ; it went into effect on april 13 , 1998 . nahasda eliminated 9 of hud's 14 separate indian housing programs , replacing them with a single block grant program with one set of funding criteria for hud to administer and , according to hud officials , one system for managing and accounting for funds . adding this amount to the $669,606 the entity receives for operating housing results in a total grant of $1,015,904 for operating and modernizing housing . for fiscal year 1998 , hud derived the number of housing units and areas served from reports submitted by indian housing authorities or tribes . hud adjusted costs for inflation using the housing cost component of the consumer price index , published annually by the bureau of labor statistics . hud adjusted for geographic differences in the cost of operating housing ( for example , the costs of maintenance and tenant services ) using the larger of the entity's historical allowable expense levels for calculating operating subsidies under the public housing program ( prior to october 1 , 1997 ) or the private sector housing fair market rents , data collected and published annually by hud . fair market rents represent the rental cost of private sector housing units and reflect geographic differences in rental housing supply and demand in local u.s. housing markets . hud based the geographic cost factor used to calculate funding for modernizing housing on the cost of building a standard housing unit of moderate design in various geographic locations .