therefore , we have not changed our report . senators joseph r. biden , jr. , and joseph i. lieberman asked us to examine various issues related to the safe operation of commercial nuclear power plants . are nrc's processes focused on safety ? according to the director of nrc's office of nuclear regulatory research , the steering committee for the study discussed whether the center would define “an acceptable level of safety.” recognizing that providing such a definition is a difficult and challenging task that nrc and others have attempted over the years , the study's steering committee believed that the center should focus instead on how safe nrc expects commercial nuclear power plants to be and how consistently nrc applies that expectation to the plants . the center expects to issue its report in april 1999 . commercial nuclear power plants will continue to generate electricity for some time in the future . nrc issues a plant operating license for 40 years . after 20 years , a utility can apply to extend the license for an additional 20 years . table 1 shows the time frames during which the existing plant licenses could expire . the energy policy act of 1992 has resulted in the restructuring of the nation's electric power industry and the emergence of competition in the business of electricity generation . as the electric utility industry is restructured , operating and maintenance costs will affect the competitiveness of nuclear power plants . competition challenges nrc to ensure that utilities do not compromise safety through cost - cutting measures . as of february 1999 , 18 states had implemented plans to restructure the electric utility industry by enacting legislation or adopting final orders . in the 13 states that have enacted legislation , utilities operate 34 nuclear power plants that produce between 20 percent and 59 percent of the states' electricity . in the 5 states that have adopted final orders without enacting legislation , utilities operate 17 nuclear plants that supply between 15 percent and 74 percent of the states' electricity . competition will pose difficult issues for some nuclear utilities , and efforts to achieve economies of scale will spur the growth of nuclear operating companies as a means of minimizing overhead and maximizing institutional experience . other cost reduction efforts being pursued by the industry include mergers , acquisitions , the use of contract operators , and spin - offs of generating assets . for example , alabama power company and georgia power formed a subsidiary — southern nuclear operating company — to operate six plants for the utilities . are nrc's rules and regulations properly focused on safety ? 1998 ) , and the general statement of policy and procedures for nrc enforcement actions ( nureg - 1600 , rev . in addition , in july 1998 , amergen energy company , a joint venture formed in 1997 by peco energy company and british energy , announced plans to purchase three mile island 1 from gpu nuclear corporation . furthermore , duke power bought pan energy ( a gas company ) as a means of diversifying its operations .