the results of this examination were not completed until 1997 . in addition , in november 1996 hud identified approximately $1.6 billion that had not been obligated to the tenant - based program — and therefore was also unexpended . hud called this amount “carryover” and used it to offset the department's fiscal year 1998 contract renewal needs . identifying this carryover occurred too late in the budget process to have an impact on hud's fiscal year 1997 budget request . therefore , hud reflected it in the department's fiscal year 1998 budget request by reducing the estimate of section 8 tenant - based contract renewals by $1.6 billion . at the request of the chairman of the subcommittee on va , hud , and independent agencies , house committee on appropriations , we reviewed hud's fiscal year 1998 budget request for section 8 contract renewal funding . in february 1997 , we briefed the subcommittee and provided testimony for the subcommittee's hearing on march 18 , 1997 . we informed the congress that hud had a significant amount of unexpended funds in the section 8 tenant - based program and that once hud completed its examination of the housing agencies' accounts , the likely total amount of available unexpended funds would far exceed the $1.6 billion that hud disclosed in its fiscal year 1998 budget request . in chapter 2 , we discuss hud's actions to further identify the unexpended budget authority in the tenant - based program . the sharp growth in expirations has two causes . first , the number of contracts expiring for the first time will increase sharply in the coming years . these consist of 15-year contracts issued in the late 1970s and early 1980s and short - term ( 5 years or less ) tenant - based contracts issued since the early 1990s . second , hud must renew an increasing number of contracts that it has renewed at least once previously , a circumstance that has begun to occur more frequently as contract terms have grown shorter . renewing expiring contracts will require a sharp increase in budget authority over the next several years , as shown by figure 1.1 . in 1995 , the congress encouraged hud to use available unexpended funds in the section 8 program to offset the budget authority requirements for contract renewals . budget authority appropriated for section 8 tenant - based contract renewals is “no - year” money and does not expire if it is not expended . these unexpended funds have been obligated to the housing agencies but will not be needed to meet planned requirements ; the funds are , in effect , credited to housing agencies' program reserve accounts . in fiscal year 1995 , hud began to draw on unused budget authority from previous years to extend the terms of expiring contracts . to identify unexpended balances to help offset the cost of section 8 contract renewals , hud began in february 1996 an extensive examination , called “reconciliation,” of the section 8 tenant - based program's reserve accounts at all housing agencies . the accumulation of unexpended funds in housing agencies' reserve accounts resulted from hud's method of estimating budgets since the beginning of the program .