at the mt . hood national forest , officials said that in recent years they had underestimated their costs to prepare timber sales and administer harvests when developing their annual budget requests . they noted that between fiscal years 1990 and 1991 , preparation and administration costs rose by about 39 percent , and between fiscal years 1991 and 1992 , these costs rose by an additional 147 percent . factors contributing to these increases in costs included requirements for ( 1 ) conducting surveys of cultural and historical resources and of threatened and endangered species that took more time and resources than had been anticipated and ( 2 ) switching from clearcutting to other harvesting methods and shifting timber harvests out of owl habitat to comply with court injunctions . while preparation and administration costs increased by only 8 percent between fiscal years 1992 and 1993 , forest officials believe that they will increase by another 51 percent between fiscal years 1993 and 1995 as the new pacific northwest forest plan is implemented . given the uncertainties inherent in developing asqs , shortfalls between asqs and timber sales should be expected . an asq is , to some extent , imprecise because it is based on estimating techniques and forestwide data rather than on detailed , on - the - ground data from the timber sale area . even more significantly , however , an asq represents a planning “snapshot” that can quickly become outdated as new forest management issues emerge and priorities change . as the value placed on timber production shifts toward other forest uses , asqs established under earlier , somewhat different priorities may no longer reflect estimated sale quantities . although forest planning allows asqs to be updated as needed , the experience of the five forests we reviewed indicates that events may quickly overtake even revised asqs . we discussed the facts and observations contained in a draft of this report with officials from forest service headquarters , including the deputy director , budget analyst , staff assistant , and interdisciplinary forester ( forest plans ) within the timber management staff ; the planning specialist within the land management planning staff ; and the interdisciplinary analyst within the program planning and development staff . we also discussed the facts and observations with senior regional and forest officials from the two regions that we visited . in general , these officials agreed that the information was accurate , and we have incorporated changes that they suggested where appropriate . to determine why timber sales often fall short of asqs , we met with timber management , program development and budget , and land management planning officials from forest service headquarters ; the pacific northwest regional office in portland , oregon ; and the southern regional office in atlanta , georgia . we also met with forest service officials from the chattahoochee - oconee , deschutes , gifford pinchot , mt . hood , and ouachita national forests . we selected these two regions because they had the largest timber sales for fiscal year 1993 . we judgmentally selected the specific forests because of their geographical proximity to the regional offices .