( see app . i for additional information on these two technologies. ) the next generation of cellular communications is called personal communications services . in this system , inexpensive , pocket - sized communications devices that use digital technology will deliver voice , data , and images . they will operate at higher radio frequencies ( between 1,850 and 2,200 mhz ) and will likely use less power to operate than the current generation of portable cellular telephones . a personal communications device carried from place to place will enable the person to be reached at any location by dialing a single telephone number . because personal communications services devices are still under development , it is not clear whether the antenna will be in close proximity to the user's head when the device is in use . three federal agencies play a role in ensuring the safety of cellular telephones by sharing responsibility for regulating devices that emit radio - frequency radiation and protecting the public from exposure to radiation: the food and drug administration ( fda ) , the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , and the federal communications commission ( fcc ) . under the radiation control for health and safety act of 1968 , as amended , fda is responsible for establishing and carrying out a program , designed to protect public health and safety , to control radiation from electronic products . these responsibilities include ( 1 ) developing and administering performance standards for electronic products ; ( 2 ) planning , conducting , coordinating , and supporting research , development , training , and operational activities to minimize the emissions of , and exposure of people to , unnecessary radiation from electronic products ; and ( 3 ) developing , testing , and evaluating the effectiveness of procedures and techniques for minimizing exposure to electronic product radiation . fda has the authority to set performance standards for electronic products if it determines that such standards are necessary for the public health and safety . in carrying out its responsibilities , fda reviews and comments on industry research and also works with electronic product manufacturers when it receives complaints or has some concerns about a product but lacks sufficient scientific evidence to determine if a performance standard is necessary . consistent with the principle of keeping exposure “as low as reasonably achievable,” fda has worked with a variety of manufacturers to reduce radiation emissions . for example , fda has worked with manufacturers of video display terminals and police radar devices to address concerns about excessive exposure to radiation and with manufacturers of electric blankets to redesign the blankets to reduce electric and magnetic fields . under the federal radiation council authority , transferred to epa by reorganization plan no . 3 of 1970 , epa is responsible for , among other things , advising the president on radiation matters , including providing guidance for all federal agencies on formulating protective standards on radiation exposure . upon presidential approval of epa's recommendation on formulating standards , the pertinent federal agencies would be responsible for implementing the guidance .