additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we agree and make this point in the report . 2 on may 14 , 1997 , and forwarded it to the senate . as of august 1 , 1997 , h.r . 2 was pending before the senate committee on banking , housing and urban affairs . in february 1997 , the prohibition of incentives for relocation act ( s. 300 ) was introduced specifically to prohibit the use of cdbg funds to relocate businesses . ( 2 ) what restrictions exist for using program funds to relocate existing businesses and jobs ? ( 3 ) for those programs with restrictions , what procedures have federal agencies established to ensure compliance with the restrictions ? ( 4 ) what types of incentives have states and communities used to attract businesses and what role may incentives play in a business' decision to relocate ? as agreed with your offices , we examined the following eight programs: the economic development administration's ( eda ) public works and development facilities program , within the department of commerce ; the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program , within the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) ; the employment and training assistance for dislocated workers program , within the department of labor ; the community services block grant ( csbg ) program , within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) ; the clean water state revolving fund program , within the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; the water and waste disposal program , within the department of agriculture ; the surface transportation program , within the department of transportation ; and the empowerment zone and enterprise community ( ez / ec ) program , administered by agriculture and hud and funded primarily by hhs' social services block grant ( ssbg ) program . we selected these eight programs because they are large - dollar programs , states and communities are the primary recipients of the programs' assistance , and the assistance provided by these programs is generally accessible to all states . business incentives are inducements that state and local governments can offer to attract or retain businesses and jobs . incentives offered by state and local governments may be in the form of a direct payment to a business to locate or remain in a certain area . or incentives may be less direct ; for example , they can be in the form of exemptions from state and local taxes ; loans on favorable terms , through industrial revenue bonds , or direct loans from state and local agencies ; or state - subsidized job training . over the past two decades , the variety of incentives offered by states and local governments has grown . one estimate by the state of ohio shows that state and local governments annually spend billions of dollars to motivate businesses to relocate within their jurisdiction or to keep businesses from moving out .