additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . what are the significant factors that complicate and make costly the provision of housing assistance to native americans in or near tribal areas ? what could be the initial impact of the recently enacted native american housing assistance and self - determination act of 1996 on hud's oversight of housing assistance to native americans living in or near tribal areas ? to what extent does gaming occur in tribal areas , what is its profitability , and does hud take revenues from gaming into account when allocating funding to indian housing authorities ? the united states housing act of 1937 established the public housing program to provide decent , safe , and sanitary housing for low - income families . for many years , this act was interpreted to exclude native americans living in or near tribal areas . in 1961 , however , hud and the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) determined that native americans could legally participate in the rental assistance for low - income families authorized by the 1937 act and issued regulations to implement this determination . in 1988 , the indian housing act established an indian housing program separate from public housing under the housing act of 1937 and prompted hud to issue regulations specific to this program . with the recently enacted native american housing assistance and self - determination act of 1996 ( regulations are scheduled to take effect on october 1 , 1997 ) , the congress completed the process of separating indian housing from public housing . according to the may 1996 report by the urban institute , the housing needs of native americans are growing . their population rose sixfold over the past four decades to over 2 million in 1990 , 60 percent of whom live in tribal areas or in the surrounding counties . compared to non - indians , native americans are more family - oriented — 37 percent of native american households are married couples with children versus 28 percent of non - indian households . compared to non - indians , native americans have a higher unemployment rate ( 14 percent versus 6 percent ) , a smaller number of workers in “for - profit” firms per thousand people ( 255 versus 362 ) , and a higher share of households with very low incomes ( 33 percent versus 24 percent ) . moreover , indian housing conditions are much worse than housing conditions in other areas of the country: 40 percent of native americans in tribal areas live in overcrowded or physically inadequate housing , compared to 6 percent of the u.s. population .