for example , the u.s . ( see app . i for a brief description of these and related laws. ) as discussed earlier in this chapter , fws special agents work very closely with the wildife inspectors to enforce and administer federal laws and treaties governing the importation and exportation of wildlife and wildlife parts and products . in 1991 , we reported on law enforcement activities conducted in six fws regions by special agents . our report stated that because the division of law enforcement did not have reliable information on the effectiveness of its special agents' enforcement efforts or the magnitude of suspected crimes against wildlife that were not being investigated , it had not fared well in the allocation of substantial increases in fws' overall staffing and funding . as a result , the division's special agents , who are responsible for investigating cases involving ( 1 ) large - scale selling or commercialization of wildlife and wildlife parts , ( 2 ) crimes against threatened or endangered species , ( 3 ) illegal importation of wildlife for commercial purposes , and ( 4 ) illegal taking of migratory birds , were unable — because of a lack of sufficient resources — to perform their basic responsibilities . to be better able to periodically assess the extent of crime against wildlife and justify its funding and staffing needs and ensure that its special agents are able to perform their basic responsibilities , we recommended that fws record ( 1 ) all instances of suspected violations coming to its attention , including those that may not be investigated ; ( 2 ) the agency's handling of suspected violations ; and ( 3 ) the outcomes of the investigations . we also recommended that fws then use this information to ( 1 ) periodically assess the extent of suspected crimes against wildlife , ( 2 ) provide realistic estimates of staff and funds needed to adequately address the problem , and ( 3 ) include the estimates in annual budget requests . although the agency agreed that it needed to improve its documentation of crimes against wildlife , fws disagreed that better documentation of reported violations would provide meaningful data to justify increased funding or staffing for law enforcement . because of the documented growth of illegal commercial trade in wildlife and wildlife parts and products and the similarities in the work locations of fws and customs service inspectors , the chairman of the house committee on merchant marine and fisheries and representative richard h. lehman requested that we determine the ( 1 ) effectiveness of fws' wildlife inspection program , ( 2 ) potential impact of the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) on wildlife trade and the inspection of wildlife shipments , and ( 3 ) advantages and disadvantages of moving the wildlife inspection program from fws to the customs service . we visited the designated ports of entry of los angeles , california , and miami , florida , and the nondesignated ports of entry of san diego , california , and el paso , texas .