( see app . from world war ii to the end of the cold war , doe and its predecessor agencies conducted nuclear research , produced plutonium , and manufactured and tested nuclear weapons at sites throughout the united states . no plutonium has been produced for weapons since 1988 . the 99.5 metric tons of plutonium that remain in the u.s. government's inventory today is in the custody of the department of defense ( dod ) and doe . although doe no longer produces plutonium for weapons , some of the plutonium it produced in the past continues to present environmental , safety , and health hazards , as well as concerns about proliferation , and therefore requires careful management . the hazards and concerns associated with plutonium include the following: plutonium is extremely toxic and can be fatal , especially when inhaled . several kilograms of plutonium are sufficient to make a nuclear bomb . although attempts are made to control access to nuclear materials , thefts have occurred in the former soviet union since the end of the cold war , raising concerns about nuclear proliferation and international terrorism . today , land , buildings , and equipment used in making nuclear weapons , remain contaminated and present environmental hazards . to address these hazards , doe expects to spend nearly $229 billion over the next 75 years . although doe does not track cleanup costs specifically for plutonium , a major portion of these costs can likely be attributed to plutonium or related activities . additional information on the dangers of plutonium is provided in appendix i . even though the united states no longer manufactures new nuclear weapons , some plutonium is still used in nuclear weapons and for research , development , and testing programs . dod establishes nuclear weapons requirements , and doe subsequently determines how much plutonium is necessary to support these requirements . the nuclear weapons council ( nwc ) coordinates nuclear program activities between dod and doe and submits documents containing weapons requirements to the national security council and the president for approval . the nation's 99.5-metric - ton inventory of plutonium is divided into two categories — that which is allocated for national security ( 46.8 metric tons ) and that which is designated as excess ( 52.7 metric tons ) . the national security plutonium is further allocated among several subcategories . although doe could justify most of these allocations , we found that it had no technical basis for the amounts of plutonium allocated for reliability replacement warheads and for the strategic reserve . in 1995 , for the first time in the history of the u.s. nuclear weapons program , the united states declared that 38.2 metric tons of weapons - grade plutonium was no longer needed for national security and was , therefore , excess . ( in addition , doe designated 14.5 metric tons of non - weapons - grade plutonium as excess. ) according to doe , this declaration was an important step in implementing the nonproliferation and export control policy , which was issued by the president in september 1993 .