we have revised our report accordingly . doe also commented that our draft report did not include the wide range of additional benefit categories offered by other organizations . based on doe's comments we revised table 2 that compared doe benefits with other public and private sector severance packages offered from fiscal years 1993 through 1998 . met overall eda eligibility ? our comments on doe's two main assertions are summarized in the body of the report . in its comments , doe asserted the following: the report draft did not accurately portray the department's worker and community transition program and contained numerous factual errors that , along with inappropriate comparisons , raises basic questions about the validity of the recommendation and major findings . the department's criteria are consistent with statutory direction and department of commerce regulations , and the benefits provided to separated employees were consistent with the practices of other private and public organizations . in this appendix , we address each of the comments made in the attachment to doe's letter . in addition , doe provided us with additional detailed comments that elaborated on the points made in the attachment to its formal response . we used this supplemental material where appropriate to revise our report . doe challenges our recommendation for four reasons . first , the department commented that its criteria for awarding community financial assistance are consistent with the congressionally mandated criteria of the economic development administration reform act of 1998 and ensure that aid is focused on economic need . the act makes communities affected by doe's defense - related reductions eligible for the economic development administration's ( eda ) assistance , regardless of the local unemployment rate , or the per capita income in the affected communities . the department commented that its criteria are consistent with the act , but it appears that doe's claim to consistency is based on a provision of the act that allows communities affected by doe's defense - related funding reductions to qualify for assistance . however , the act was not effective until february 11 , 1999 . furthermore , doe's guidance does not have any economic threshold criteria for determining affected communities' need . most other communities that suffer economic hardships not caused by defense - related funding reductions are required to meet economic threshold criteria , such as an unemployment rate above the national average . second , doe commented that eda must approve each community proposal before funding is provided and that economic need criteria are a key factor in its approval process . while eda assesses the economic condition of the doe community applying for assistance , the degree of , or relative , economic need is not a criteria in determining funding levels . we noted in our draft report that doe submits the community plans to eda for independent review and approval . however , eda reviews the community plans using doe's criteria for reviewing projects and programs , set out in doe's policy and planning guidance for community transition activities .