ii ) . to select the basic issues associated with developing a credit for early action program , we identified organizations that have been involved with the development of such a program and who have prepared informational papers on their views . we reviewed these documents and interviewed available representatives from these groups . we supplemented this information with information contained in the program's public database . the first issue is how should greenhouse gas emissions reductions be estimated . a large investor - owned utility located in the midwest produces electric power from several fossil - based plants and one nuclear plant . it compared its 1991 , 1992 , and 1993 emissions to those that had occurred in 1990 to calculate its emissions reductions . however , in 1994 its nuclear plant was shut down because of an equipment failure . to compensate for the lost electricity that had been generated from its nuclear power plant , it increased generation from its fossil plants , reduced sales , and purchased electricity from another company . as a result , in 1994 , its emissions rose for the first time beyond its 1990 baseline and it reported an emissions increase . this example meets the “restricted” reporting criterion shown in table 1 on determining reductions from a historical baseline . however , the utility would not have received credit in 1994 because its emissions increased above its 1990 level . the second basic issue is how should emissions reductions ownership be determined . a large investor - owned utility took several specific actions to improve the reliability and performance of its two nuclear power generators ( one unit is 100 percent owned by the utility and the other unit is 41 percent owned ) . one action increased the time between refueling from 18 months to 24 months . another action decreased the number of days for each refueling outage . how should companies having no historical data be treated ? the following examples of actual claims of greenhouse gas emissions reductions that companies have reported to the voluntary reporting program serve to ( 1 ) further illustrate the four basic issues that will likely need to be addressed in designing a credit for early action program and ( 2 ) show how such claims may be evaluated if more restrictive reporting criteria were established . we used examples contained in the doe's energy information administration publications that summarize the results of the program's first and second years . a third action improved maintenance procedures , which reduced forced outages and automatic shutdowns . as a result of these actions , the utility claimed total cumulative reductions in carbon dioxide emissions from 1991 to 1994 compared with its 1990 baseline of more than 11 million metric tons . the utility reported only 41 percent ( its ownership share ) of the emissions reductions for the second unit . should there be restrictions on who is eligible to receive emissions credits ? should a credit for early action program be focused on the entire u.s. economy or selected segments that represent the majority of greenhouse gas emitters ? how should a historical base for measuring reductions be adjusted for corporate mergers and acquisitions ?