this fee is still in effect . pto now has the authority to raise trademark processing fees and service fees annually within the cpi increase of the previous year . the examination process can be lengthy . during fiscal year 1995 , for example , the average “patent pendency” — the period from the date an application is filed until the date it is abandoned by the applicant or a patent is issued by pto — was 19.8 months . while not required , most inventors use the services of an attorney to help prepare the application and to assist them throughout the examination process , according to pto . a trademark is a word , name , symbol , or design used to distinguish or identify the goods or services of a particular merchant or manufacturer from those of others . as with patents , the federal authority for registering trademarks in the united states is pto , and the trademark process is funded through user fees . in fiscal year 1995 , pto issued 65,662 certificates of registration . federal registration does not create a trademark because a trademark can only be acquired by actually using it in association with particular goods or services . however , federal registration does offer the registrant substantial procedural advantages should the trademark owner be faced with an infringement . once registration has been obtained , the trademark must remain in substantially continuous use in order to be preserved . trademark registrations have a term of 10 years but can be renewed indefinitely for additional 10-year terms . an applicant seeking to register a trademark must file an application accompanied by a fee , specimens of the trademark as it is actually used , a drawing of the mark , and various statements describing when the mark was first used and the types of goods and services on which it is used . trademarks are categorized into various classes , such as toys or clothing , and , if registration for more than one class is sought , the applicant must pay an additional fee for each class . once filed , the application is examined by an examining attorney within the trademark office of pto . the attorney verifies that the trademark for which registration is sought is not “confusingly similar” to trademarks for other goods or services . if there is no such similarity and there are no other statutory bars to registration , pto publishes the trademark and gives members of the public the right to oppose registration if they feel it is confusingly similar to another trademark , even if this other trademark is not already registered . if no problems are identified at this stage , the trademark is registered . even then , however , it can be challenged at some later date if it is not used properly or if a prior user comes forward . the trademark process can also be lengthy . in fiscal year 1995 , for example , pto reported that the time between the filing of an application and the registration of the trademark averaged 16.4 to 16.7 months .