the current version is mobile5a . both epa and the states rely on this model to estimate future emissions after various control strategies are employed . consequently , to the extent that the model erroneously estimates emissions , epa could approve control strategies that may not be sufficient to attain the air quality standards , or , conversely , epa could require that the states implement additional , often expensive control measures that may go beyond what is needed . in view of the pivotal role that the mobile model plays in the states' efforts to improve air quality , you asked us to describe the major limitations in epa's mobile model and epa's process for improving the current and future versions of the model . the current mobile model , mobile5a , also known as the epa mobile source emissions factor model , is a computer program that estimates the emissions of carbon monoxide , hydrocarbons , and nitrogen oxides for eight different types of gasoline - fueled and diesel highway motor vehicles . the model consists of an integrated collection of mathematical equations and assumptions about the emissions from vehicles manufactured from 1960 to 2020 ; generally , the cars produced in the 25 most recent model years are assumed to be in operation in any given calendar year . the first mobile model was made available for use in 1978 ; since that time , major updates and improvements to the model have been made as more has become known about the complexity of the factors affecting vehicle emissions , as measurement devices have improved , and as more data have been collected . according to agency officials , these improvements have resulted in the refinement of emissions estimates for evaporative emissions ( such as occur when the fuel tank and fuel system heat up on a hot summer day ) ; for the uncorrected in - use deterioration ( wear and tear ) that results from poor vehicle maintenance or tampering ; and for other factors . in its simplest form , epa's mobile model allows the model user to produce a number — an estimated quantity of emissions for the three pollutants of concern — by multiplying the estimated emissions per mile for an average urban trip times the estimated number of trip miles traveled in an area . over the years , however , researchers have learned that vehicle emissions are highly complex . for example , epa and others have indications today that as much as half of all hydrocarbon emissions from motor vehicles are evaporative emissions , under certain conditions . to compensate for the complexities of these and other emissions - producing activities , epa has periodically adjusted its basic formula — through the use of revised “correction factors” — to approximate vehicle exhaust emissions in a range of situations . in essence , the correction factor is a multiplier added to the basic formula ( miles traveled times emissions rate per mile ) to adjust the model's output to more closely reflect actual emissions .