iii. ) also , morgan's analysis does not consider the value of usec's excess inventory , which we estimate could be worth about $303 million . morgan assumed that the price of russian enriched uranium will remain constant ; however , the price may change . under the terms of its contract with russia , usec has agreed to purchase the low enriched uranium derived from 500 metric tons of highly enriched uranium over the next 20 years . ( this liability would also extend to any other contracts , agreements , and leases transferred under the act. ) this provision is to assure potential investors that the obligations and benefits of the parties are not changed by privatization . the corporation would be responsible for reimbursing claims paid by the government under the transferred contracts . both corporation and doe officials consider it unlikely that the corporation would be unable to fulfill the terms of these contracts . under the act and in accordance with the lease , doe must indemnify the corporation for any public liability that may arise out of the operation of the plants under section 170d of the atomic energy act , as amended ( price - anderson ) . according to doe , the public liability limit under price - anderson is currently approximately $8.9 billion . similarly , activities connected with the research and development of the avlis technology that were performed by doe's management and operating contractor at the lawrence livermore national laboratory would be covered under doe's price - anderson indemnification responsibilities . however , under the atomic energy act , as amended , a new uranium enrichment facility , including an avlis facility , would not be eligible for price - anderson coverage . under section 168 of the atomic energy act , as amended , doe was granted discretionary payment authority for payments in lieu of taxes and special burdens to eligible taxing jurisdictions . under the act , doe retained ownership of the property at the portsmouth and paducah enrichment plants . in the recent past , doe's annual payments to the appropriate taxing jurisdictions for these enrichment plants have been based on the value of the property at the time the government acquired it and have been relatively small ( $20,000 to $30,000 annually per site ) . in fiscal year 1994 , the secretary of energy established a task force to review the department's treatment of the discretionary payment authority . deliveries would begin in 1998 . a number of solutions have been suggested . for example , the administration announced in early july 1995 that usec had agreed , in a joint protocol with its russian counterpart , to pursue steps that would eventually allow russia to receive full and simultaneous payment for both natural uranium and enrichment services under the contract . these steps include pursuing administrative and legislative actions that would allow the introduction into the u.s. market of uranium purchased under the russian contract . another approach is proposed in senate legislation , s. 755 , which provides for a delayed and restricted entry of the uranium into the u.s. market . ( for more information on the russian contract , see app .