clinic locations . about 5 percent of local wic agencies selected a location for one or more of their clinics because it is at or near a work site . for example , one texas agency operates a clinic twice a month at a poultry farm in an area where several such farms employ women who are wic participants . in california , two local wic agencies we visited have clinics at nearby military bases . one has a clinic at an air force base , and the other has six clinics at various installations — two at marine bases and four at navy locations . similarly , about 5 percent of local wic agencies selected clinic locations because they are day care sites for participants . for example , according to a director of a local wic agency in texas , she operates a clinic once a month at a day care site used by 71 women who participate in wic . operating a clinic at this location is a convenience for the participants . about 76 percent of the directors of local wic agencies believed that accessibility to their clinics is at least moderately easy for working women , as measured by such factors as convenient hours of operation and reasonable waiting time at the clinics . however , about 9 percent of the directors believed that accessibility is still a problem for working women . figure 2 shows the directors' rating of their clinics for accessibility . despite the widespread use of strategies to increase accessibility , some directors reported that accessibility is still problematic for working women . in our discussions with these directors , the most frequently cited reason for rating accessibility as moderately difficult or very difficult is the inability to operate during the evening or on saturday . as previously noted , directors provided several reasons for not offering extended hours , including the lack of staff , staff's resistance to working schedules beyond the routine workday , or the perceived lack of safety in the area around the clinic after dark . mailing vouchers . about 60 percent of the local wic agencies , under special circumstances , mail food vouchers to participants . mailing vouchers eliminates the need for a visit to the clinic . officials at all of the state agencies we visited allow vouchers to be mailed but are generally very cautious in using this strategy . both state and local agency directors told us that mailing vouchers eliminates the personal contact and nutrition information components of the program . one local agency director in pennsylvania told us that she mailed vouchers to rural participants during a snowstorm when the agency van could not get to scheduled locations . three of the four less frequently used strategies shown in figure 1 — saturday , early morning , and evening hours — increase clinic hours beyond the regular workday . the fourth strategy — selecting clinic locations because they are at participants' work sites or day care providers — is the strategy least frequently cited . more specifically: expanding clinic hours — saturday , early morning , and evening hours . offering extended hours of operation beyond the routine workday is an infrequently used strategy .