ii. ) hud agreed with our recommendations aimed at ensuring that information on the types of loans made is accurate , increasing the number of claims that are subject to an underwriting review , and using information collected during the claims examination process to monitor and target lenders for review . it also pointed out actions it has under way or planned to implement these recommendations . on our remaining recommendations , hud commented that its albany staff already documents claim files to justify payment decisions and who made them and requested a list of the 53 claims we reviewed to better understand and respond to our recommendation that all required documentation be obtained before a claim is paid . this requirement differs for dealer and direct loans . a completion certificate is always required for a dealer loan because under title i regulations , loan funds cannot be disbursed until the lender has obtained a signed certificate certifying that the work has been completed . for a direct loan , the program's regulations require that the borrower submit a signed completion certificate to the lender within 6 months after the loan proceeds are disbursed , with one 6-month extension if necessary . if a borrower fails to provide the completion certificate within the required 12-month period , lenders are required to conduct an on - site inspection of the completed work . thus , it is permissible under the program's regulations for a direct loan file not to contain a certificate of completion if the file instead contains an inspection report showing that the lender , after not receiving the certificate , conducted an inspection . for 33 loans for which the program's regulations required that inspections be conducted by the lenders , 19 loan files did not contain the inspection report . once work has been completed and loan funds have been disbursed , title i regulations require that the lender inspect the work paid for by any property improvement loan with a principal amount of $7,500 or more or by any direct loan for which the borrower failed to provide a completion certificate . the purpose of the inspection is to verify that the improvements are eligible for title i loan insurance and to confirm that the work has , in fact , been completed . if the borrower refuses to cooperate with the lender in permitting the inspection , the lender must promptly report this fact to hud . we also reviewed the 53 claim files to determine how well lenders were complying with underwriting standards . according to the program's regulations , a title i lender should exercise prudence and diligence in determining whether the borrower ( and any co - borrower ) is solvent and an acceptable credit risk , with a reasonable ability to make payments on the loan obligation . a sampling error indicates how closely we can reproduce from a sample the results that we would obtain if we were to take a complete count of the universe using the same measurement methods . by adding the sampling error to and subtracting it from the estimate , we can develop upper and lower bounds for each estimate . this range is called a confidence interval .