some of the rules had no associated proposed rule . others were not technically “mandates” — i.e. , “enforceable duties” unrelated to a voluntary program or federal financial assistance . some rules were “economically significant” in that they would have a $100 million effect on the economy , but did not require “expenditures” by state , local , or tribal governments or the private sector of $100 million in any 1 year . certain sections of umra permitted agencies to decide what actions to take . for example , subsection 202 ( a ) ( 3 ) says agencies' written statements must contain estimates of future compliance costs and any disproportionate budgetary effects “if and to the extent that the agency determines that accurate estimates are reasonably feasible.” umra also permitted agencies to prepare the written statement as part of any other statement or analysis . because the agencies' rules commonly contain the information required in the written statements ( eg , the provision of federal law under which the rule is being promulgated ) , the agencies only rarely prepared a separate umra written statement . development of regulatory proposals containing significant federal intergovernmental mandates . however , executive order 12875 required almost exactly the same sort of process when it was issued in 1993 . like umra , s. 981 contains some of the same requirements contained in executive orders 12866 and 12875 , and in previous legislation . however , the requirements in the bill are also different from existing requirements in many respects . for example , s. 981 appears to cover all of the economically significant rules that umra did not cover , as well as rules by many independent regulatory agencies that were not covered by the executive orders . s. 981 would also address a number of topics that are not addressed by either umra or the executive orders , including risk assessments and peer review . these requirements could have the effect of improving the quality of the cost - benefit analyses that agencies are currently required to perform under executive order 12866 . the new version of s. 981 contains one set of requirements that was not in the bill introduced last year — that agencies develop a plan for the periodic review of rules issued by the agency that have or will have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities . each agency is also required to publish in the federal register a list of rules that will be reviewed under the plan in the succeeding fiscal year . in one sense , these requirements are not really “new.” they are a refinement and underscoring of requirements originally put in place by section 610 of the regulatory flexibility act ( rfa ) of 1980 . our recent work related to the rfa suggests that at least some of the rfa's requirements are not being properly implemented . in 1997 , we reported that only three agencies identified regulations that they planned to review within the next year in the november 1996 edition of the unified agenda of federal regulatory and deregulatory action . of the 21 entries in that edition of the unified agenda that these 3 agencies listed , none met the requirements in the rfa .