( see app . i for examples of the deficiencies in doe's draft application that were observed by epa and new mexico's environmental evaluation group. ) other parties that are likely to provide comments to epa on doe's application for a certificate of compliance also expressed concern that doe's draft application was incomplete . the 1992 wipp land withdrawal act provided special status to new mexico , the environmental evaluation group , and the national academy of sciences . for this reason and because doe has not yet addressed the issue of human intrusion in accordance with epa's final criteria , the department's analyses of the mining and drilling issues in its final application are likely to receive close review by epa and other parties who may be commenting on the application . doe will have to resolve many issues over the next several months if it is to submit , by october 1996 , an application for a certificate of compliance that will withstand the scrutiny of epa , which will review , and other parties , which may comment on , the completeness and quality of the application . according to the assistant manager for regulatory compliance at doe's carlsbad area office , the department was making substantial progress toward completing an application for a certificate of compliance on schedule . in addition , the director of epa's radiation protection division said that doe is giving priority to issues the agency raised in its review of the draft application . whether doe can successfully resolve the outstanding issues in the next few months is uncertain because doe's final technical positions on wipp have been evolving since the submission to epa of the draft compliance certification application . we also visited doe's storage sites for transuranic waste in colorado , idaho , tennessee , and washington . finally , we also performed our review at the headquarters of doe and epa in washington , d.c. we conducted our review from june 1995 through may 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . ( see app . iv for details of our scope and methodology. ) as arranged with your offices , unless you publicly announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter . about 41 percent of the waste is expected to be too heavy for efficient transport in the existing type of container . doe plans to develop and procure new containers for this waste . doe has not yet decided how it will transport the remaining amount of contact - handled waste . how soon doe can bring these essential facilities and equipment on line and operate them depends upon the availability of funds at a time when doe faces significant competing priorities for limited funds . for fiscal years 1996 through 2000 , doe expects to reduce its overall budget by more than $14 billion when compared with earlier budget projections . this reduction includes $4.4 billion in its environmental management programs .