app . i summarizes these studies. ) table 1 compares the controls placed on methyl bromide by the montreal protocol and by epa's regulation . methyl bromide is a highly effective fumigant used to control a broad spectrum of pests — insects , nematodes ( parasitic worms ) , weeds , pathogens ( bacteria , fungi , and viruses ) , and rodents . the agricultural community today uses it for over 100 crops . during quarantine treatments , which are usually done at international borders , the commodities are fumigated to kill pests that could cross geographical barriers and infect susceptible crops or commodities . quarantine requirements are negotiated between the importing and exporting countries for individual commodities , and the treatments are governed by strict regulations that require very high efficacy levels . for example , usda's animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) requires efficacy levels of 99.9968 percent for most treatments . to meet these efficacy levels , aphis requires that certain imports be treated with methyl bromide because of its effectiveness , and some other countries , notably japan , likewise require this treatment for certain imports from the united states . aphis currently requires fumigation with methyl bromide or an alternative treatment as a condition of entry into the united states for 19 fruits , 14 vegetables , and 7 nuts , seeds , and miscellaneous foods coming from certain countries ( see app . iii ) . ( aphis also requires these treatments for various nonfood imports , including unprocessed seeds and nuts , hays and straw , cotton products , gums , bagging , and brassware. ) about 90 percent of some u.s. imports , including apricots , nectarines , grapes , peaches , plums , and yams , are affected by these requirements . according to aphis officials , acceptable alternatives are generally not available and the loss of methyl bromide will lead aphis to ban imports of many economically important commodities . an april 1993 usda study of nine imported fruits found that the loss of imports would reduce supplies and increase prices . according to the study , the higher prices would increase the revenues to u.s. producers by $3.0 billion to $3.3 billion over 5 years . however , the losses to u.s. consumers from paying the higher prices would range from $4.7 billion to $5.0 billion over 5 years . the study further found that many of the imported items fill an important niche in u.s. supplies . for example , the study said that apricots , grapes , nectarines , peaches , and plums from chile enter the united states during the winter when none or nearly none of these items are produced domestically . in addition , u.s. exports worth over $400 million were fumigated with methyl bromide in 1994 ( see app . iv ) . if the united states bans methyl bromide , an acceptable alternative treatment must be negotiated with the receiving countries . according to usda officials , these negotiations can take several years and may not be successful , especially if other producers can continue to use methyl bromide and meet the quarantine requirements .