( app . i provides additional information about the nff and its receipts and distributions for fiscal years 1990 through 1996 and the forest service's projections for fiscal year 1997. ) the forest service took two actions to remedy this problem . for fiscal years 1990 through 1996 , the key indicators of the timber program — harvested volumes , timber receipts , and amounts available for return to the treasury — decreased dramatically . for specific counties in california , oregon , and washington , the listing of the northern spotted owl as a threatened species accounted for a substantial drop in the size of timber harvests — and therefore a substantial drop in the receipts that the counties would have received . to reduce this fiscal impact , the congress included the “safety net” spotted owl guarantee legislation in the yearly appropriations for fiscal years 1991 , 1992 , and 1993 , and provided that the payments to the states be made out of the nff — an indefinite appropriation . the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 provided appropriations to make such payments to these states beginning in fiscal year 1994 through fiscal year 2003 and established the formulas for calculating the payments . the forest service did not use this authority in 1994 and 1995 ; rather , it elected to make the spotted owl guarantee payments from the nff as it made its normal payments to the states . the forest service chose this method of payment because ample receipts were available in the nff , which , if not used for the payment , would have been returned to the treasury . the forest service also told us that its decision not to use the spotted owl appropriation was articulated in its budget explanatory notes approved by omb and submitted to the house and senate committees on appropriations . the forest service should have used the spotted owl appropriation rather than the nff to make the spotted owl guarantee payment for fiscal years 1994 and 1995 . this specific appropriation was enacted in lieu of the congress's prior practice in fiscal years 1991 , 1992 , and 1993 of providing annual appropriations from the forest service's receipts for this purpose . using the specific appropriation is in keeping with 31 u.s.c . 1301 ( a ) , which provides that public funds may be used only for the purpose or purposes for which they were appropriated . 103-66 , as amended ) . the forest service's first analysis — performed in may 1996 — of the estimated receipts for fiscal year 1996 showed that the nff's anticipated receipts were dangerously low . the analysis , generally performed to estimate the payments to the states , resulted in the forest service's beginning a series of internal discussions to identify why the receipts were so low . while the forest service estimated that it would be able to cover the payments to the states , it also estimated that only $33.6 million would be available in the nff to cover all other needs .