( see app . fcs headquarters officials told us that the selection by state agencies of the foods available to participants is one of the states' most powerful cost containment tools . fcs encourages the states to approve wic foods that are low in price . however , the officials said that while cost efficiencies are important , the states must maintain the nutritional integrity of the program's food package . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . eighteen wic directors reported that their states use ratios of participants to vendors to restrict the number of vendors allowed to participate in the program . by limiting the number of vendors , the states can more frequently monitor stores and conduct compliance investigations , according to fcs and state wic officials . for example , delaware uses a ratio of 200 participants per store to determine the total number of vendors that can participate in the program in each wic service area . we found that some states also allow individuals to self - declare their income if they do not bring income documents to their certification meeting . these vendors have been selected by the state to participate in the program for a period of time . fcs requires the states to operate a rebate program for infant formula . by negotiating rebates with infant formula manufacturers for each can of formula purchased through wic , the states greatly reduce their average per person food costs so that more people can be served . in fiscal year 1996 , infant formula rebates to all states totaled about $1.2 billion . federal wic appropriations totaled $3.47 billion in fiscal year 1995 and $3.73 billion annually in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 . the program is primarily funded by federal appropriations ; some states supplement the federal grant with their own funds . in fiscal years 1995 and 1996 , the average monthly wic participation nationwide was about 6.9 million and 7.2 million , respectively , and in fiscal year 1997 , the average monthly participation was about 7.4 million through february 1997 . grants to the states are divided into food grants and nutrition services and administration grants . food grants cover the costs of supplemental foods and are allocated to the states through a formula that is based on the number of individuals in each state who are eligible for wic benefits because of their income . the nutrition services and administration grants are allocated to the states through a formula that is based on factors such as the state's number of projected program participants and wic salary costs . nutrition services and administration grants cover costs for program administration , start - up , monitoring , auditing , the development of and accountability for food delivery systems , nutrition education , breast - feeding promotion and support , outreach , certification , and developing and printing food vouchers .