ch . ii , part 273.3 ) specify that no individual may participate as a member in more than one food stamp household or in more than one area in any month . this regulation also applies to participation in more than one state . state agencies are responsible for imposing penalties for violations of program requirements , such as the receipt of multiple food stamp benefits , and for recovering food stamp overpayments . in the four states we examined , about $3.9 million in food stamp benefits were provided during calendar year 1996 to households in different states that may have simultaneously included the same individuals as members . table 1 summarizes the number of potential duplicate participants we identified in the six possible pairings of the four states we reviewed . the california and texas pairing produced the largest number of duplicate participants , while the new york and texas pairing produced the fewest . in total , we identified about 20,000 duplicate participants . the individuals we identified in our match were members of households of varying sizes , some with multiple members and some with a single member — the individual was the household . households with multiple members may have ( 1 ) fraudulently listed an individual as a member when applying or ( 2 ) neglected to report that the individual was no longer in the household , resulting in the continued issuance of benefits on the presumption that the individual was still present in the home . for single - member households , the individual or the individual's authorized representative ( or someone posing as the individual or representative ) ,may have applied for and obtained food stamp benefits in one or more states . for our match , we did not determine whether the duplicate participation was the result of inadvertent or intentional actions by the household , nor did we determine which state each individual actually resided in during the months of duplicate participation . we found that duplicate participation was generally concentrated in a relatively small number of counties in each state . ( see app . ii. ) such information may help states determine where to focus their efforts , such as intensifying the screening of applicants , to reduce duplicate participation . while counties with the most duplicate participation were generally also those with the greatest number of program participants in each state , we did find some exceptions . for example , new york city , which has about 65 percent of the state's food stamp participants , had the fifth highest number of duplicate participants , while monroe county , new york , which has only about 4 percent of the state's food stamp participants , had the most duplicate participants . while we focused our analysis on duplicate participation in the food stamp program , such participation may be indicative of similar problems in other public assistance programs administered by the states .