these investigations can be cost - effective . for example , texas conducted 3,000 front - end investigations in fiscal year 1994 and , as a result , did not issue $4.8 million in benefits that it otherwise would have . we also found that after certification , some counties in various states conduct home visits and telephone recipients to verify information as part of their error - reduction initiatives . for example , one texas region conducted over 5,500 home visits in fiscal year 1994 . as a result , about 900 households had their benefits denied and 640 had their benefits lowered . program officials told us that these efforts correct overpayments that may be occurring and deter client fraud in the area by establishing a presence in the community . according to food stamp program regulations , each state is to institute an automated system that helps caseworkers verify reported information by matching the data with other sources . this system is called the income and eligibility verification system ( ievs ) . recipients are given a form for reporting changes . the form outlines the civil and criminal penalties for hiding or providing false information . state and local government officials that we talked with said that recipients do not report changes in their households for a variety of reasons . for example , some recipients have difficulty in understanding the food stamp program requirements . furthermore , recipients receiving both food stamp and afdc benefits often confuse the different reporting requirements for each program . second , some recipients wait until their recertification interviews to report changes to caseworkers . copies are available to others on request . afdc calculates the equity value of a vehicle and excludes the first $1,500 from assets ; however , the food stamp program calculates the fair market value and excludes the first $4,550 . while both programs allow vehicles to be exempted from the eligibility and benefit determination process , the criterion for exempting vehicles is not the same for both programs . also , the definition of a food stamp beneficiary unit and an afdc beneficiary unit differ . the basic food stamp beneficiary unit is the household . a food stamp household can either be an individual living alone or several individuals living together who customarily purchase food and prepare meals together . individuals who are members of the same household must apply together , and the income , expenses , and assets of all members are counted in determining the household's eligibility and benefit allotment . conversely , the afdc beneficiary unit is defined as being made up of at least one dependent child , the child's parents and siblings ( by blood or adoption ) , and possibly other caretaker relatives living with the child and / or family . for example , a mother , her two children , and a nonfamily - related companion live and prepare meals together . for the food stamp program , all four people are included in the household , and the household's total expenses and income , including the companion's , are counted . the afdc assistance unit would be the mother and her two children . the companion's income would not be included in determining afdc benefits .