additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . agencies had not yet achieved eight of the action items . officials reported that agencies did not complete two items and did not realize they had made the commitments for two other items . for example , the partnership agenda stated that hud would fund a job training demonstration project in a low - income community , but brownfield managers stated that they did not meet the commitment because they were unaware that it had been made . agencies dropped the remaining four action items because they were not feasible or the agencies lacked adequate funding . for example , agriculture did not complete its studies of the economic impacts of revitalizing brownfields because it did not receive funding for this activity . also , epa did not issue guidance to its regions on the process to enter into memorandums of agreement with states regarding their voluntary cleanup programs because of negative comments regarding the guidance from key stakeholders , including the states . epa recently hired a contractor to take an accounting of the more than 100 action items in the partnership agenda for all 20 agencies involved . epa is asking the agencies to report which action items they achieved , which they did not achieve , why they did not achieve them , how the actions enhanced support for redeveloping brownfields , and what specific examples of this they could provide . epa expects a final report this summer . the partnership's expected economic outcomes of new jobs , more private investment , and protected greenfields were estimates of potential long - term benefits , generated from economic models , that might result from the federal support for redeveloping brownfields . they were not goals that the agencies could measure and achieve within the 2-year period of the partnership initiative . for example , hud brownfield managers noted that it would take 3 to 5 years after construction is complete at a site before all anticipated jobs are created . similarly , eda brownfield managers stated that it may take up to 10 years beyond the completion of a project funded under its grant programs for a community to realize the full economic benefits from the project .