( app . i lists other examples of actions that epa has taken using data on incidents involving nonagricultural pesticides. ) although epa has been able to take some actions using data on incidents of exposure , the data the agency receives may not always be sufficient and its ability to assess risk and take action based on such data may be limited . the reports on incidents that epa receives from registrants , as well as some of the voluntary reports such as those received from states , often vary in detail and lack key information needed to assess risk . while epa does not routinely receive complete data on incidents involving nonagricultural pesticides , it sometimes receives information on specific cases that is detailed enough to assist it in taking actions to protect public health . table i.1 lists examples of epa's use of such data to take actions between 1989 and 1994 . data collected , used , and / or analyzed by epa epa reviewed data from hospitals' emergency rooms , newspaper clippings generated by manufacturers , and field information from state agencies to identify the types and severity of poisonings that could result from the use of chlorine in swimming pools . epa believes the draft report did not clearly state the importance of its proposed 6 ( a ) ( 2 ) rule , which is to accomplish two significant objectives . first , the rule will explain to registrants exactly what facts epa wants them to report . secondly , the rule is intended to solve the perceived problem of underreporting by registrants due to lack of clear guidance in the form of an enforceable regulation . lawrence j. dyckman , associate director j. kevin donohue , assistant director raymond m. ridgeway , evaluator - in - charge jennifer w. clayborne , evaluator phyllis turner , communications analyst the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . the officials also said that they plan to ask these companies to consider electronically resubmitting reports they had previously submitted on paper . we also reviewed documents and records from epa's incident data system . to obtain views on incidents of pesticide exposure from others outside of epa , we discussed the adverse health effects of nonagricultural pesticides with representatives of industry and of environmental and other nonprofit organizations . in addition , we visited california , florida , and oregon , and collected and reviewed these states' data on incidents of exposure . we selected these states because they collect data on such incidents and because two of these states — california and florida — have climates in which a greater use of nonagricultural pesticides is likely to be required . we conducted our review between march 1994 and may 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . as arranged with your office , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days after the date of this letter unless you publicly announce its contents earlier . we will then send copies to the administrator of epa . we will also make copies available to others on request . please call me at ( 202 ) 512-4907 if you or your staff have any questions .