external sinking funds . these types of funds are established and maintained through the periodic setting aside of funds in an account segregated from the licensee's assets and outside the licensee's administrative control . an external sinking fund may be in the same forms permitted for prepayment . nrc recognized both the uncertainty over decommissioning costs and the authority of public utility commissions and ferc to regulate the economic affairs of utilities . therefore , nrc approached the regulation of the financial aspects of decommissioning by requiring utilities to provide “reasonable assurance” that sufficient funds would be available to decommission their nuclear power plants when the plants are permanently shut down . among other things , nrc required , by july 27 , 1990 , each holder of an operating license to ( 1 ) certify that the licensee would provide the required financial assurance for decommissioning ; ( 2 ) calculate , using a formula contained in nrc's regulations , the minimum amount ( expressed in current - year dollars ) that utilities would accumulate for decommissioning their plants by the time they expect to retire them ; and ( 3 ) provide a copy of the financial instrument ( s ) executed to provide the required financial assurance . essentially all utilities have elected the option of establishing external sinking funds to finance future decommissioning costs . a portion of the charge that utilities' customers pay for their electricity is earmarked for deposit in these funds , and the funds are invested to earn income . in its regulations , nrc deferred to utilities and their rate regulators the details of collecting the required decommissioning funds . nrc requires only that the amount actually accumulated by the end of a plant's operating life equals the projected cost to decommission the plant . about 5 years before the projected end of plant operations , nrc requires a utility to submit a preliminary decommissioning cost estimate that includes an up - to - date assessment of the major factors that could affect the cost to decommission its plant . also , if necessary , the cost estimate shall include plans for adjusting needed funds for decommissioning to demonstrate that a reasonable level of assurance will be provided so that funds will be available when needed to cover the cost of decommissioning . finally , not later than 2 years after a plant has been permanently shut down , the utility must submit to nrc a decommissioning report that includes , among other things , a site - specific decommissioning cost estimate . after about 10 years of experience with nrc's 1988 decommissioning regulations , the electricity industry has begun to change in ways that have prompted nrc to reassess the adequacy of its regulations governing nuclear power plants , including financial assurances for decommissioning retired plants . over the next 10 years or so , many states are expected to replace their traditional systems of economic regulation of monopolistic electric utilities with more - competitive , less - regulated environments mainly for the generation of electricity but , to a lesser degree , for the transmission and distribution of electricity as well .