( see app . i for a detailed description of our scope and methodology. ) we are providing copies of this report to other appropriate congressional committees ; the director , office of management and budget ; and the administrator , epa . we will also make copies available to others on request . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . epa has supported efforts to computerize the chemical inventory data . for example , in 1996 , epa's chemical emergency preparedness and prevention office provided $822,000 in computer software to local emergency planning committees and state emergency response commissions to increase their capabilities to computerize their data . a 1997 nationwide study performed for epa showed that 39 percent of the local emergency planning committees had computerized their data and an additional 42 percent planned to do so . because of the lack of computerized data , copies of the individual completed reporting forms have to be located and reviewed . the officials from the local emergency planning committees and from the state emergency response commissions that we interviewed generally believed that access to and use of the chemical inventory data would potentially improve if the data were made available through the internet . although certain options , such as epa's creating and maintaining a unique national database of epcra section 312 information , could be costly , the efforts of regions i and iv in integrating the various databases of the states in the regions indicate that low - cost options could be available . although not all states have computerized databases , epa , in recent years , has provided grant funds to assist the states in computerizing their data , and about two - thirds of the states have done so . we agree that stakeholders should be involved in any effort to make epcra section 312 data more accessible . in addition to the public , these stakeholders would include emergency planning and response personnel , who need to use the data , and industry , which must report the data . making more or less of this information available to meet the public's needs would be options to be considered in carrying out our recommendation . in calling for epa to adopt the most cost - effective option , we recognize that the public's desire for additional information would need to be weighed against the costs of reporting , compiling , and maintaining it . epa also provided some technical comments on our draft report . we have revised our report , as appropriate , in response to these comments . we performed our review from november 1997 through august 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . if you or your staff have any questions , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-6111 . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix ii .