faa adopted that recommendation . thus , an airport may impose a noise or access restriction on stage 2 aircraft , whatever its weight , if the airport operator publishes the proposed restriction and prepares and makes certain analyses available for public comment at least 180 days before the effective date of the restriction . unlike noise or access restrictions proposed for stage 3 aircraft , faa approval is not required . there are some statutory restrictions on eligibility . aip grants may not be approved for land purchases unless the airport provides written assurance that the following conditions will be met: the land will be sold at fair market value as soon as possible once it is no longer needed to help mitigate the effects of noise ; an airport will retain a legal interest in the land when it is sold in order to ensure that its use remains compatible ; and the government's share of the cost of purchasing the land will be reimbursed when the land is sold . in addition , federal appropriations law prohibits the use of aip funds for studies , maps , or environmental impact analyses needed to implement flight procedure changes made to reduce noise . how do major methods for measuring the impact of airport - related noise compare with each other , and what method has faa selected ? what aircraft noise standards apply to civil subsonic turbojets , and why are some civil subsonic jets not required to comply with these and earlier noise standards ? what actions has faa announced under its land use planning initiative , what is the status of their implementation , and what issues has the initiative raised ? to address the first set of questions — on the eligibility of noise - related projects for federally authorized funding — we ( 1 ) reviewed the statutory provisions and faa's regulations , policies , and procedures for funding projects under the aip and the pfc program to identify project eligibility ; ( 2 ) reviewed the statutory requirements for airport - related noise compatibility programs , as well as faa's regulations and processes for implementing those requirements ; ( 3 ) obtained faa's data on federal grants awarded for noise - related projects and passenger facility charges approved for noise - related projects to identify the types of projects and the total project funding by fiscal year for each type of noise - related project . we also interviewed officials from faa headquarters in washington , d.c. ; the airports council international - north america ; the air transport association ; and the national association of state aviation officials ; as well as other experts on these issues . in 1999 , we independently validated the pfc project database and found it to be very reliable ( a 0.3-percent error rate ) . we did not independently review the validity of the grant program database , but it is the only database for that information , and we have used data from it extensively during the conduct of several reviews that have looked at various aspects of the grant program .