bart has obtained approval from the u.s . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . fish and wildlife service ( the service ) and must complete two additional environmental reviews before fta can approve the project . the two issues must be resolved before construction can begin . bart must ( 1 ) resolve concerns expressed about the draft eis and complete the final eis and ( 2 ) obtain a wetlands permit from the u.s. army corps of engineers ( the corps ) . delays in finalizing the eis or obtaining the permit could delay the october 1996 startup . federal law required bart to obtain the service's approval of measures to mitigate the project's impacts on endangered species . the project will directly impact the habitat of the san francisco garter snake ( a federally listed endangered species ) and the california red legged frog ( a federally listed threatened species ) , both which live on the airport's property that will be used for part of the project's construction . since march 1995 , bart has been coordinating with the service to develop and finalize plans for mitigating impacts to the snakes' and frogs' habitat and in january 1996 submitted a mitigation proposal to the service . on may 20 , 1996 , the service issued an opinion of “no jeopardy” on the project's impact to both species . the service found that bart's mitigation plan , which included enhancing the snakes' and frogs' habitat at a location several miles from the construction area , was acceptable for ensuring the continued existence of the species . in september 1995 , bart issued a second supplemental draft eis . in the draft statement , bart changed the project's entry into the airport from a subway to an aerial approach , thereby responding to a congressional request to reduce the project's cost and the impacts that construction would have on the airport . in november 1995 , the boards of directors of bart and the san mateo county transit district ( samtrans ) adopted this approach as the locally preferred alternative . bart held public hearings on the new alternative and received 800 comments on the draft statement . most of the project's elements are segmented into components ( contracts ) that are separately bid and administered through the design , construction , testing , and startup phases by the agency . design - build procurement in the public sector refers to a process whereby a public agency awards a single master contract to a private firm for the final design , construction , and startup of a public works project . after certification that the project is complete , the contractor turns the keys over to the agency . according to bart officials , the reduced costs from using the design - build approach are obtained primarily by reducing the construction time and administrative costs . on the airport extension project , bart estimates that one - third less time will be needed to construct the project as a result of awarding only four design - build contracts rather than using multiple conventional contracts .