ii ) . from the formal inception of federal environmental cleanup programs through fiscal year 1996 , the group reported that federal agencies have budgeted nearly $54 billion for cleanups . according to the group , about two - thirds of the total budget has been targeted for energy facilities and includes amounts for ongoing waste management . for the purposes of this report , we have defined a “site” as a specific area of contamination and a “facility” as a geographically contiguous area under an agency's ownership or control within which a contaminated site or sites are located . defense also said that its relative risk model was a national system whose results were taken into account when priorities were set for funding . we have added this information to our report . energy emphasized that in comparison with other federal agencies , it has responsibility for addressing a greater variety of environmental problems , including radioactive waste , and that the risks posed by some of these problems are not easily comparable . we have expanded our description of energy's environmental responsibilities and agree that risk - based priorities can be set only for cleanup functions whose relative risks can be compared . energy also said that setting priorities requires considering factors other than risk . our report indicates that issues other than risk , such as cost and other program management considerations , can be considered in setting priorities . energy further said that setting priorities for cleanups is made more difficult because funding for energy and other agencies comes from different appropriations and congressional committees . we agree but think that consistency among federal agencies' evaluations of relative risk would facilitate a broader view of priorities . interior said that its cleanup program is much smaller than defense's or energy's and that although there may be 26,000 potentially contaminated sites on interior's lands , the majority , in the department's view , do not pose significant human health or safety concerns . we have revised our report to indicate that interior officials believe that only a small portion of these sites will require major cleanups . interior also said that the large number of its “sites” should not be compared with the smaller number of other agencies' “facilities,” which can include many sites . we have tried to make the distinction between sites and facilities clear in our report . while agreeing that a complete inventory of sites is required for the federal government to know whether its funds are being spent on the highest - priority projects , interior said that it would need additional funding to complete its inventory of hazardous waste sites and prioritize them for cleanup . as table 3 shows , 157 facilities have completed the early assessment phases and are awaiting the final evaluation for inclusion on the npl . our report indicates that it is appropriate to set priorities on the basis of risk and other considerations . epa also said that our report placed too much emphasis on the role of risk in setting priorities . we believe that the cost - effective reduction of health and environmental risks should be the predominant consideration in priority setting . the agencies also had some comments about our matter for congressional consideration .