( see fig . at a height of 22,300 miles and at a location above the earth's equator , a geostationary satellite orbits the earth at a rate that makes it appear stationary over the same location on the earth's surface ; this positioning allows a ground station antenna to remain pointed at one location in the sky , and the satellite can be tuned into the same earth stations all the time . current technology enables about 120 to 180 geostationary satellites to orbit the earth using the same radio frequency without being too close to one another to cause technical interference . satellites enjoy some important advantages in comparison to other means of communicating . because satellites do not rely on the use of land - based wire , cable , or microwave facilities , earth stations can be placed almost anywhere . furthermore , the cost of satellite communications is the same regardless of distance — whether the transmission covers 200 or 10,000 miles . another important characteristic of satellite communications is that one satellite can send signals to many different locations on earth at the same time ; one geostationary satellite , for example , can send signals to as much as a third of the earth's surface all at once . this is particularly useful in television / video service . however , satellites also have some disadvantages . for example , voice transmissions from a geostationary satellite are delayed about a half - second because of the distance the radio signals must travel . these delays may also produce an echo . furthermore , the orbital slots and the radio frequencies available for different kinds of satellite services are limited . international coordination of the use of these resources is required to prevent technical interference among different satellites operating in the same frequency band . finally , some risk is involved in achieving a successful launch and orbit . satellites can provide any kind of telecommunications service — from basic telephone service and mobile telephone service ; to am and fm radio and television broadcasts ; to computer networking . they have played a significant role in video conferencing and private communications networks for multinational companies . as shown by the broadcast of the moon landing in 1969 , satellites are a useful vehicle for transmitting special events and news stories , live and worldwide . the advent of small portable earth stations ( for example , satellite “dishes” ) less than 3 feet wide has enabled affordable television transmissions from satellites directly into the home . satellites have also fostered the development of planned mobile personal communications services . as with other satellite services , recent technological developments have reduced the size and cost of the mobile handsets and thereby increased their convenience and desirability . personal communications service , which is similar to cellular phone service but has a global service area , aims to provide an individual with a single telephone number for voice , data , and facsimile transmissions worldwide . while underwater cables have always competed against satellites in providing international telephone service , advances in the capacity and capabilities of fiber - optic cables in the 1980s have made this method of transmission increasingly more important .