again , under sffas no . 4 , we believe such costs would be classified as direct to the degree that the employees associated with the adp costs normally charge their time that way . adp costs . in the regions we reviewed , 71 percent of the adp costs charged to the five funds were classified as indirect — a total of almost $10 million in 5 years . as with the assignment of unemployment and disability costs , we would expect adp costs to mirror those of salaries and to be classified as direct whenever people to whom they are assigned charge their time directly . classifying these types of costs as indirect overstates indirect costs overall and understates direct costs . just as important as clarifying how costs should be classified , however , is ensuring that forest service offices apply these classifications consistently . if individual offices continue to vary in their decisions about how , when , and whether to implement accounting policies and definitions , the data produced will continue to have limited validity , and the forest service will have little reliable information upon which to judge whether indirect costs are truly rising or falling , let alone why . because centralization represents such a change in the forest service's approach of giving great latitude to local offices , oversight by forest service headquarters and regional officials will be crucial to this effort . over the 5-year period we reviewed , the forest service took many actions to reduce costs , but indirect expenditures charged to the five funds reviewed increased nonetheless . thus far , congressional attempts to affect indirect costs ( through appropriations committees' reducing the budget line item recommended for general administration ) also appear to provide little assurance that such costs will actually be reduced . instead , such costs have often been redefined into other indirect cost categories . however , incorporating the principles set forth in the statement of federal financial accounting standard no . 4 would go a long way towards producing cost data that are consistent and reliable . but even the best guidance will not produce consistent and reliable data if it is not uniformly implemented by all offices . we selected the southwestern region because it is similar in size to the rocky mountain region yet had much higher indirect costs . we selected the washington office because its indirect costs fluctuated widely and increased significantly in some funds . table ii.1 provides each region's location and the geographic area it covers . to obtain information on why indirect costs increased and what had been done to control them , we interviewed knowledgeable officials at each location visited . in addition , we reviewed pertinent files , financial records , studies , reports and manuals and asked follow - up questions as dictated by the document reviews . after gathering information on what had caused costs to rise and fluctuate , we reviewed various financial standards , laws , legislation , studies , and manuals to determine how the costs might be controlled in the future . we also interviewed forest service officials to obtain their suggestions .