( app . i provides information on selected recent outbreaks of foodborne illness related to imported foods. ) as the percentage of imported foods consumed in the united states increases , the importance of ensuring that these foods are safe increases as well . ensuring food safety therefore cannot be achieved by focusing on domestic products exclusively . for the united states , equivalency agreements will also mean that fda will be able to target the limited resources it has for imports towards products from countries that have not been determined to be equivalent . thus , fda will be able to use its resources more efficiently and effectively . in october 1997 , as part of the administration's food safety initiative , the president directed fda to seek new authority to require equivalency in food safety systems . in response , fda developed proposed legislation for new discretionary authority that would allow the agency to prohibit imports of some foods , unless the exporting country demonstrates that the food safety system and conditions in the exporting country achieve the same level of protection as food prepared and packed in the united states . legislation was introduced in the house of representatives in november 1997 and in the u.s. senate in march 1998 , and is under consideration.the legislation would allow fda to determine that an imported food is adulterated , and thus cannot be imported , if the foreign system , conditions , or measures for preparing or packing the food product are not equivalent to the level of protection required for similar foods produced in the united states . fsis uses its equivalency authority to shift the primary responsibility for food safety to the exporting country . rather than focusing on resource - intensive port - of - entry inspections , fsis emphasizes reviews of exporting countries' compliance with u.s. requirements . in contrast , fda relies on port - of - entry inspections to ensure that imported foods are safe . this approach does little to verify the safety of all imported foods because it does not account for the conditions under which the products were processed and packed . the efficacy of port - of - entry inspections therefore depends on inspecting an adequate sample of imports , an objective fda has not been able to meet , particularly as import volumes have increased . in addition , inspections of imported foods may be insufficient to determine whether contamination has occurred . for example , both visual inspections and laboratory tests are inadequate to detect cyclospora , according to cdc . by requiring exporting countries to assume responsibility for the safety of meat and poultry products sent to the united states , fsis can extend the coverage and enhance the effectiveness of its inspection resources . in 1997 , fsis had about 12 staff involved in reviewing the continuing eligibility of foreign countries to export their meat and poultry products to the united states , through document reviews and regular inspections in those countries .