app . iii contains a more detailed discussion of our methodology. ) in the 27 surveys that were returned to us , five factors were frequently identified as having helped , and six factors were frequently identified as having constrained , the program's implementation . five factors were identified by more than half of the survey respondents as having helped them plan and implement the ez program: community representation on the ez governance boards , assistance from hud's contractors ( called generalists ) , enhanced communication among stakeholders , support from the city's mayor , and support from white house and cabinet - level officials . having community representatives on the governance boards created a shared responsibility for the program's success and helped to break down barriers between the residents and other segments of the community that were represented on the board , such as the local government and businesses . the generalists hired by hud to work on a daily basis with the zones have been accessible and have provided important assistance to the zones . respondents said that the generalists' assistance included providing information , negotiating with elected and public officials , forging relationships with the private sector , and arranging meetings . one respondent said that the generalists are seen as people who can cut through bureaucratic red tape and get things done in the community . the ez program has brought community stakeholders together . people from the neighborhoods , the private sector , and the city and state governments who did not previously interact are now discussing community revitalization . these stakeholders have created partnerships that respondents believe have improved relationships between government officials and community leaders ; stimulated revitalization throughout the city , not just within the ez ; increased coordination across economic and human development activities , as well as among the public , private , and nonprofit sectors , thereby expanding the availability of funds ; and created a basis for ensuring sustainable results . strong mayoral support , shown by activities such as reviewing proposed benchmarks and providing needed resources , produced benefits that included obtaining a high level of involvement from the private sector , resolving issues of distrust , effectively conveying the city's concerns to federal officials , helping attract economic development to the ez , and increasing the coordination with city departments whose assistance was critical to the program's success . the participation of white house and cabinet - level officials enhanced the program's credibility at the community level . for example , one city official said that the involvement of white house officials gave the community hope that their issues would be heard and that federal regulations would be eliminated . six factors were frequently identified by survey respondents as having constrained their efforts to plan and implement the ez program: difficulty in selecting an appropriate governance board structure , the additional layer of bureaucracy created by the state government's involvement , preexisting relationships among ez stakeholders , pressure for quick results from the media , the lack of federal funding for initial administrative activities , and pressure for quick results from the public and private sectors .