( app . i provides information on doe's role in managing the consortium. ) 3m is teamed with hydro - quebec , a canadian utility that has worked extensively on lithium polymer technology . meanwhile , saft america , the only company with both a mid - term and long - term contract , is working on lithium iron disulfide ( or , more specifically , lithium - aluminum iron disulfide ) batteries . these batteries have very high energy potential but also present serious corrosion and life expectancy challenges because they operate at extremely high temperatures . usabc has entered into a series of cooperative research and development agreements with five of doe's national laboratories . in some cases , because the laboratories had experience in research and development of some of the technologies of interest to the consortium , it made sense to take advantage of their experience . in other cases , the laboratories had the equipment and expertise needed to conduct independent testing of battery hardware and give usabc consistent and objective test results on deliverables provided by a variety of battery developers . this testing capability has been useful in screening and selecting contractors for the program . it has also been valuable in assessing progress by the developers once they have been awarded contracts and have begun producing prototype hardware . table iv.3 summarizes usabc's cradas with the national laboratories . as the table shows , some laboratories do only testing or development work , but two ( argonne and sandia ) are involved in both types of activity . usabc established separate long - term and mid - term goals for advanced batteries , measured according to a variety of criteria that measure critical battery characteristics such as power , durability , and cost . while all of the criteria are important to achieve viable advanced batteries , this appendix discusses five key criteria that the automobile companies believe are essential to offering evs that will meet consumers' needs . table v.1 identifies the mid - term and long - term goals for each criterion . an explanation of the five criteria follows the table . specific power is a measure of the amount of power provided by a given battery mass . this goal is related to ev performance characteristics such as acceleration and hill - climbing ability . specific energy is a measure of the amount of total energy contained in a given battery mass . this goal is related to the crucial ev characteristic of driving range . in support of those two programs , yardney is working on ways to develop a low - cost nickel electrode . in 1993 , silent power received a contract to work on sodium sulfur batteries . this measure is important because a battery's performance can deteriorate over time because of factors other than use . therefore , they are free to use ovonic's technology in their experiments if they wish to do so . doe and usabc officials are aware of this potential problem , but they do not expect a real problem to develop because of the differences in the technological approaches being taken by the two firms .