( app . iv identifies the 20 states with food assistance programs that serve able - bodied adults without dependents and / or legal immigrants. ) ten states decided to purchase federal food stamps with their own funds for certain legal immigrants — primarily children and the elderly . according to fns and the states , 9 of the 10 states have estimated that about 241,000 legal immigrants are now receiving state - funded food stamps . foodbank serving metropolitan denver , northern colorado , and wyoming ( local affiliate of second harvest ) serves approximately 750 hunger - relief programs , including , for example , a program to pick up surplus prepared foods and a “kid's cafe” providing food for children in denver's inner city . ( continued ) manages a kosher food pantry that provides food for those who meet income requirements . serves approximately 250 people per month . provides a variety of services , including funding for approximately 13 emergency food assistance programs . provides advocacy on food assistance in colorado . a religious organization ( local member of catholic charities ) provides food through a network of emergency assistance centers in the denver metropolitan area ; a food bank , which pools together the resources of 22 food banks to buy food in bulk at lower cost ; the share program ; and meals at a temporary shelter for the homeless . the nonprofit organizations we contacted generally required their clients to meet some type of eligibility requirement in order to receive services . the organizations said that they serve many different groups of people besides legal immigrants and able - bodied adults without dependents , including the working poor , single mothers with children , and the elderly . the organizations use various resources to fund their operations , including federal government grants , foundation grants , individual contributions , and volunteer services . for example , one organization received approximately $264,000 in volunteer services and $1.4 million in in - kind food pantry donations during the last year . the greater hartford area had a population of approximately 835,000 in 1995 . the area consists of three jurisdictions — the city of hartford and the towns of east and west hartford . within the states , we chose the locality , usually a county , with the highest participation in the food stamp program . we visited these localities in the late summer of 1997 . we contacted several organizations that were significantly involved in providing the localities with food assistance . we also met with government officials responsible for food stamps and other officials involved in welfare reform . in several localities , we also met with officials affiliated with the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) because of their expertise in providing emergency food assistance after natural disasters . we also visited nonprofit organizations , such as community action agencies ; food banks ; church - affiliated food assistance providers , such as soup kitchens ; local advocacy groups ; local united way affiliates ; and food pantries . ( see apps . v - ix for individual reports on the food assistance provided in these localities. )