( app . i explains the assumptions and calculations for these estimates. ) under doe's decentralized approach , the department's contractors duplicate many of their efforts in both awarding and managing contracts , especially as a result of redundant quality assurance evaluations at the commercial laboratories . in addition , when contractors try to decide whether to have analyses performed at commercial laboratories or perform them in the doe laboratories they operate , they may not select the most efficient use of doe's resources because they do not know their true costs of doing the analysis in the doe laboratories . if such a plan is adopted , it could eliminate the duplicate evaluations that contractors are now conducting to qualify laboratories for contracts . second , in august 1994 doe's assistant secretary for environmental management issued a policy requiring the operations offices to collect summary information on local sampling and analysis and communicate the information to headquarters so that headquarters could monitor the program . doe program officials told us that while this effort appears limited , they hoped that it could eventually be expanded so that only one contractor at each of the agency's operations offices will procure laboratory analysis . third , doe has been drafting model procurement guidance for its contractors that could incorporate standard provisions on such issues as the time allowed to analyze a sample and reduced prices when the analysis is not timely . however , as a result of the contractors' continuing disagreements among themselves and with doe about the various provisions , this effort has stalled . fourth , doe is attempting to improve the ability of its contractors to choose between having the analyses done in commercial laboratories and in their own laboratories . among other things , doe is developing guidance on what types of costs the contractors should allocate to their laboratories and to commercial laboratories in making this decision . although such guidance can help , the costs that doe will ask the contractors to use will reflect the inefficiencies and higher costs of decentralized procurement . unlike epa , which consolidates its total requirements for commonly used analyses , doe dilutes its massive buying power by procuring its commonly used analyses on a piecemeal basis through its contractors . the results of doe's contracting approach are higher prices and unnecessary costs resulting from duplication of the contractors' efforts . without centralizing its laboratory analysis procurements , doe will not realize the cost benefits resulting from its massive buying power . to realize the cost savings inherent in centrally procured laboratory analysis and to eliminate other related inefficiencies resulting from decentralization , we recommend that the secretary of energy centralize the procurement of its commonly used laboratory analyses for environmental contaminants in the cleanup of its nuclear facilities . in doing so , the secretary should also identify and eliminate the contractor resources that will no longer be needed under a central procurement system . as requested , we did not obtain written agency comments on a draft of this report .