( see app . i for the complete text of hud's comments. ) to evaluate hud's instructions and compliance monitoring , we reviewed applicable laws , regulations , and procedures concerning the rent - restriction approach and analyzed information and data provided by hud on properties sold with rent restrictions through december 31 , 1994 . we discussed the implementation of the rent - restriction approach with officials from the office of preservation and disposition and the office of general counsel at hud headquarters in washington , d.c. , and with corresponding officials at field offices in denver , colorado ; jacksonville , florida ; atlanta , georgia ; kansas city , kansas ; st. louis , missouri ; greensboro , north carolina ; and fort worth and houston , texas . hud then becomes the new lender for the mortgage . hud's policy is to attempt to restore the financial soundness of the mortgage through a workout plan . if a workout plan is not feasible , hud may , as a last resort , initiate foreclosure in order to sell the property and recover all or part of the debt . if hud is unsuccessful in selling a property at a foreclosure sale , it may acquire ownership of the property . hud retains these properties in its “hud - owned inventory” until it can sell or otherwise dispose of them . the housing and community development amendments of 1978 ( 12 u.s.c . 1701z - 11 ) , as amended , required that in disposing of properties , hud preserve a certain number of units as affordable housing for low - income households . to accomplish this requirement and to ensure that units remain affordable to eligible households , hud normally uses a federal rental subsidy program called section 8 project - based assistance . under this program , households do not have to pay more than 30 percent of their adjusted income for rent . through contracts with hud , owners are then reimbursed the difference between a unit's rent and the portion paid by the renter . hud's ability to sell a large number of foreclosed properties while preserving affordable units for low - income households was significantly impeded by a shortage of federal funds needed to support section 8 project - based contracts . as a result , in some cases , hud assumed ownership of the properties rather than sell them to other purchasers at foreclosure sales . hud then operated these properties until funding for section 8 was available . to facilitate the sale of some properties , in 1991 hud started using alternatives to providing section 8 project - based assistance that were allowed by the property disposition legislation . these alternatives included getting the purchaser to agree to keep the required number of units available and affordable to lower - income persons for 15 years and to charge occupant households no more than 30 percent of their income for rent . under this procedure , hud required new owners , as well as any subsequent owners , to set aside the same number of units that they would have been required to allocate for the section 8 program .