some of the foreign visitors were from a sensitive country . vulnerabilities and problems associated with employees' failures to follow security requirements and controls were also identified in the laboratories' records . the following are several examples: in one case , a laboratory employee in a building to which foreign visitors had access failed to question the unauthorized removal , by members of a security assessment team during a test exercise , of a complete computer system from a controlled area . the employee did not challenge the team's activities despite the fact that its members were not wearing identification badges and were openly discussing plans to remove additional machines and equipment in an effort to appear suspicious . i for a list of these countries ) . data from doe and the laboratories show that almost 30 percent of the visitors to its weapons laboratories are from sensitive countries . doe is also concerned about visits involving subjects which , although unclassified , are considered sensitive because they have the potential to enhance nuclear weapons capability , lead to nuclear proliferation , divulge militarily critical technologies , or reveal other advanced technologies ( see app . ii for a list of these subjects ) as well as visits to areas located within the laboratories where special nuclear material and / or classified information and equipment are located . certain requirements must be met if a foreign visit or assignment involves a sensitive country , a sensitive subject , or a security facility where classified work is conducted . according to the foreign visits and assignments order , all assignments and visits involving sensitive subjects or security facilities where classified work is conducted must be reviewed and approved by doe . furthermore , before an assignment involving a visitor from a sensitive country begins , a national security background check must be completed to determine if appropriate u.s. government agencies have derogatory information , such as an intelligence affiliation , about that individual . doe also has security procedures that control the access of foreign visitors to the weapons laboratories . all foreign visitors — whether on a visit or an assignment — must wear an appropriate badge to obtain entry to various parts of a weapons laboratory . furthermore , depending upon the facility involved , the days of the week and the hours during which the foreign national can actually be on site are restricted . finally , guards and other security countermeasures are used to control access to those parts of the laboratories where classified work is conducted . security forces and other countermeasures are also used to monitor and control access to the less protected , controlled areas known as property protection areas — which are not open to the general public and which may contain unclassified sensitive information — to ensure that this information is not compromised . as an added line of defense , doe and its laboratories operate counterintelligence programs to identify and mitigate the risk that sensitive information could be divulged to foreign countries .