( see app . i for a detailed description of our data sources , methodology and the results of our analysis. ) we have incorporated these changes as appropriate . you asked us to ( 1 ) determine the financial impact of scab and vomitoxin on north dakota barley farmers , ( 2 ) assess the performance of vomitoxin test methods , and ( 3 ) identify short - and long - term actions that could help reduce the impact of scab and vomitoxin on north dakota barley farmers . to address the first question , we collected and developed historical data on north dakota barley prices and production for 1959 through 1992 — the period before the scab and vomitoxin epidemic — and on key weather factors affecting production for both that period and the blighted years . we used these data to estimate ( 1 ) what barley prices and production would have been in 1993 through 1997 in the absence of scab and vomitoxin and ( 2 ) what revenues would have been in the absence of scab and vomitoxin . we then compared this estimate of revenues with actual barley revenues to determine farmers' losses by year and by crop reporting district . we also developed information on how prices are transmitted from the maltsters and brewers down to the farmers , and collected data on canadian production and exports of malting barley to the united states during this time period . to conduct these tasks , we used data from the north dakota state university , gipsa , the north dakota department of agriculture , usda's national agricultural statistics service and its economic research service , the north dakota barley council , and agriculture canada . we also conducted interviews with officials from these organizations and with north dakota grain dealers . to address the second question , we reviewed gipsa , industry , and academic studies on the test methods ; interviewed testing experts ; and analyzed veratox test data on vomitoxin from gipsa's 1998 sampling variability study . using data from the study , we assessed the performance of vomitoxin test results on the basis of the variability of test results between testing facilities . testing experts we spoke with included officials at gipsa , fda , and major u.s. malting and brewing companies ; academic researchers ; and representatives of the association of official analytical chemists , the american society of brewing chemists , the american malting barley association , the north dakota barley council , and the north dakota grain dealers association . ( see app . ii for a detailed description of our methodology and the results of our analysis. ) to address the third question , we ( 1 ) obtained information on academic , public , and private research on actions to reduce the impact of scab and vomitoxin and on progress in developing more scab - resistant barley and ( 2 ) interviewed scientists at north dakota state university and the university of minnesota and officials at usda's economic research service and agricultural research service . finally , we had a draft of this report reviewed for accuracy and objectivity by several economists and agricultural experts from academia .