airlines. ) in april 1998 , 3 months after northwest and continental proposed their alliance and investment agreements , united and delta announced their plan to form a global alliance . this alliance would have linked the two largest domestic airlines through code - sharing and reciprocal frequent flyer programs . moreover , as envisioned , it would have produced a larger combined market share than either of the other alliances — almost 31 percent of domestic passengers . under authority provided by a new law , dot has imposed waiting periods for certain aspects of the northwest - continental alliance . although it does not have the authority to preapprove an alliance , dot can seek to stop specific anticompetitive practices . on october 23 , 1998 , doj filed a civil antitrust complaint to prevent northwest from acquiring or holding a majority of continental's voting stock . doj said in its complaint that northwest's gaining voting control would lessen competition in interstate trade and commerce and unreasonably restrain trade and that the transaction would also likely create “interlocking directors” on the boards of directors of both airlines , with certain individuals sitting on both boards . doj believed that the alliance would substantially diminish both airlines' incentives to compete against each other and would cause consumers to pay higher prices and receive lower - quality service in some markets . doj has specific authority to review mergers or stock acquisitions before they take place under the hart - scott - rodino act to see whether they violate antitrust laws , and it has general authority to review alliances under the sherman antitrust act and the clayton act . under the hart - scott - rodino act , an acquisition of voting securities above a set monetary amount must be reported to doj for prior review . doj has the authority to institute civil or criminal proceedings under the sherman act if a merger or acquisition may restrain competition or is an attempt to monopolize a particular market . in addition , doj may bring a civil action under the clayton act if a merger or acquisition may substantially lessen competition in a relevant market or tend to create a monopoly . if doj believes any agreement is anticompetitive in whole or in part , it may seek to block the agreement in federal court . doj has been reviewing the northwest - continental alliance since it was first announced in january 1998 , under the hart - scott - rodino process . under the hart - scott - rodino act , an acquisition of voting securities above a set monetary amount must be reported to doj for review prior to the merger . on october 23 , 1998 , doj filed a civil antitrust action to prevent northwest from acquiring or holding a majority of the continental's voting stock . doj alleged that the effects of the alliance might be to substantially lessen competition in interstate trade and commerce in violation of the clayton act and to unreasonably restrain trade in violation of the sherman act . according to the complaint filed by doj , northwest's acquisition of an equity stake and controlling interest in continental would reduce continental's incentive to compete aggressively against northwest .