it is now working on an updated strategic plan . the office of energy research officials told us that doe's departmental strategic plan is too broad to serve as a meaningful “road map” for the energy research programs . the energy research subprograms will be expected to develop subordinate plans linked to the energy research strategic plan . these plans will then be used to guide facilities that perform work for the program . additionally , according to an official , the office of fusion energy sciences has prepared strategic plans in response to congressional interest . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . noting that congressional and federal managers' decision - making was often hampered by the lack of good information on the results of federal programs , the congress passed the government performance and results act of 1993 . by passing the results act , the congress intended to change the focus of federal management and decision - making from the performance of tasks to the results of those tasks . to do this , the act established a system to set goals for programs' performance and to measure the results of that performance . in part to fulfill the requirements of the results act , the department of energy ( doe ) announced the development of its strategic management system in 1996 . the system is intended to be a managerial framework for doe's interrelated strategic planning , budgeting , performance - based contracting , and program evaluation processes for the department's varied missions and numerous organizations . the congress passed the results act to have federal agencies clarify their missions , set their program goals , and measure their performance toward achieving those goals . the congress had found , among other things , that • waste and inefficiency in federal programs undermined the confidence of the american people in their government and reduced the government's ability to address vital public needs adequately ; federal managers were seriously disadvantaged in their efforts to improve program efficiency and effectiveness because programs' goals had not been articulated sufficiently and information on programs' performance was inadequate ; and • congressional policy - making , spending decisions , and program oversight were seriously handicapped by insufficient attention to programs' performance and the results . the congress intended the results act to improve the effectiveness of federal programs by fundamentally shifting management and decision - making away from a preoccupation with staffing and activity levels to a wider focus on the results of federal programs . the framework the act established for such a shift requires executive agencies to prepare multiyear strategic plans , annual performance plans , and annual performance reports . the results act requires executive agencies to develop strategic plans that cover a period of at least 5 years and to update those plans at least every 3 years . agencies were required to submit their first strategic plans to the congress by september 30 , 1997 .