programs. ) information about the conditions at nuclear weapons facilities in the former soviet union is still emerging . with the exception of the plutonium production plants in operation , experts do not believe the other facilities present as broad a safety risk as soviet - designed civil nuclear power reactors . the most immediate problem posed by these facilities is the extensive radioactive pollution that is the by - product of almost 50 years of nuclear weapons production . nrc , while generally agreeing with our report , noted that we should have included the issue of safeguarding nuclear material in our discussion about nuclear safety and also indicated that russia's nuclear regulatory authority may have been diminished . regarding the first point , we recognize that safeguarding nuclear material is an important issue but our report focused primarily on the operational safety of nuclear facilities in the former soviet union . a forthcoming gao report will address u.s. assistance to improve methods of safeguarding nuclear material at facilities in the former soviet union . regarding the last point , in september 1995 the acting deputy chairman of gan , russia's nuclear regulatory body , informed us that some of its functions were limited by a recent presidential decree . he noted , however , that gan is responsible for inspecting plutonium production reactors and reprocessing facilities . ( see app . ix for nrc's comments and our response to them. ) we also discussed information presented in the draft of this report with tda's country manager , new independent states , who provided some clarifying information that we have incorporated , where appropriate . we also provided copies of the draft report to the european union and the iaea . the european union noted that the most urgent issue is to establish appropriate local organizations in the former soviet union to develop a complete inventory of all radiation sources . to address our objectives , we interviewed officials and reviewed documentation from the department of state , dod , doe and several of its national laboratories , nrc , and epa . we also met with russian officials who are knowledgeable about nuclear facilities in their country , as well as officials from international organizations , including the iaea . collectively , these experts have provided their insights concerning the safety of these facilities and the environmental impact from their operation . appendix viii explains our scope and methodology . we performed our work between september 1994 and august 1995 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . copies of this report are being sent to the secretaries of state , defense , and energy ; the chairman of nrc ; the administrator of epa ; the director of the office of management and budget ; the director of the trade and development agency ; and interested congressional committees . we will also make copies available to others on request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-3841 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix x .