contaminated soil . alternatively , under certain conditions , some states allow cleanups to be based on site - specific risk assessments . three of these states also said that they permitted less stringent cleanup levels than those based on their standards if meeting them was not technologically feasible or if naturally occurring levels of chemicals in the local environment were higher than the levels set by the standards . however , the use of such alternatives was the exception rather than the rule . some of the states also indicated that even if they do not provide much flexibility in applying their standards , they may permit flexibility in determining how to achieve the required level of protection . for example , instead of requiring costly incineration of contaminated soil to meet its standards , a state may allow the area to be covered with a clay cap so that people cannot come into contact with the contaminants . the states may also provide flexibility by establishing different standards for different projected uses of the land at a site . ten of the 13 states with soil standards told us they had set such standards . for example , michigan said that it had defined soil standards for three types of land uses: residential , industrial , and commercial ( with two subcategories ) . generally , the more stringent standards apply to residential property , since people are more likely to be exposed to contaminants for a longer period of time on residential property than on other types of property . while most states allowed flexibility in their cleanup levels for soil , the states were less flexible in setting cleanup levels for groundwater . the degree of flexibility largely depended on whether the groundwater was considered a potential source of drinking water . place a notice in deed records to inform future property owners of any contamination left on the property . cleanups under the third standard must also use federal mcls when available , but for contaminants without corresponding mcls , site - specific risk - based cleanup levels can be determined on the basis of the site's projected use . the third standard also requires deed notification . the remaining 16 states indicated that , in general , for groundwater used as drinking water or considered potentially usable as drinking water , their standards were fixed limits that must be achieved during cleanup . most of these states did say , though , that they allowed certain limited exceptions to their standards or the use of a site - specific risk assessment under some circumstances . for example , if the contaminated water came from an area where the contamination would not immediately threaten communities , a state might let the contamination be reduced naturally over time rather than require that it be cleaned up immediately . the states gave various reasons for the relative inflexibility of their groundwater standards for drinking water . first , some of the states said that they were mirroring the federal mcls for drinking water , which are also fixed limits .