no user fees were charged . states refer apparent infractions of the act to ams for verification and action . based on the results of tests and investigations , ams attempts to resolve each case administratively by issuing “warning notices” or assessing penalties . for cases that cannot be resolved administratively , ams will take appropriate legal action . in 1987 , ams proposed charging user fees to fund the cost associated with its seed program . ams proposed charging each of the approximately 3,000 interstate seed shippers a license fee . the fee would be based on the dollar value of seed sold . currently , 37 states charge user fees for their intrastate seed inspections . those in favor of user fees for the federal seed program argue that ams seed inspection activities benefit those involved in the interstate seed business by ensuring fair competition and increasing the confidence of buyers in the quality of the product . seed sellers also benefit from the increased confidence that buyers have that the seeds they purchase are properly labeled . those opposed to user fees for the program argue that seed inspections do not provide a special benefit to industry that would justify a user fee . the seed industry opposed the 1987 ams user fee proposal , saying that the public benefited from the program , not just the industry . the industry continues to oppose user fees for this program because it believes that user fees are not appropriate for a mandatory regulatory program . the congress has not approved any of these requests . in its fiscal year 1998 budget submission , fsis expanded its user fee proposal to charge for the salaries , benefits , and related costs associated with in - plant inspections of meat and poultry at all establishments inspected by the agency . fsis estimated that it could charge about $381 million in fees for its direct inspection services . the proposal does not include user fees for indirect costs such as the agency's administrative , supervisory , and other overhead costs . a variety of arguments have been raised in favor of charging user fees for mandated meat and poultry inspections . those in favor of charging user fees argue that these inspections benefit industry by ( 1 ) providing inspected firms an economic advantage , ( 2 ) helping ensure public confidence in the safety and wholesomeness of the product , ( 3 ) performing quality control activities that are generally thought of as a plant's responsibility , and ( 4 ) protecting against unfair competition from firms that might not otherwise perform adequate safety inspections in an attempt to lower their costs . meat and poultry firms are not charged for fsis' inspections but benefit economically in several ways . first , firms must be federally inspected before they can market their products in interstate and foreign commerce . second , firms marketing products that are not regulated by the meat and poultry acts , such as buffalo , venison , rabbit , emu , ostrich , and quail , must pay to receive an examination by fsis and inspection stamp from usda . ( in fiscal year 1995 , fsis charged $1.1 million for these requested inspections. )