the forest service is an agency in transition . over the past decade , the agency has shifted its emphasis from consumption ( primarily producing timber ) to conservation ( primarily sustaining wildlife and fish ) and has moved from managing specific resources to a broader , more comprehensive ecosystem - based approach to land management . however , notwithstanding the fiscal year 1995 budget reforms , the forest service's budget structure has not kept pace with the agency's transformation and , as a result , there is no clear link between the agency's ecosystem - based strategic goals and objectives and the national forest system's resource - specific line items . as the forest service has made clear in several documents during the past year , its overriding mission and funding priority , consistent with its existing legislative framework , is to maintain or restore the health of the lands entrusted to its care . these documents include the agency's september 30 , 1997 , strategic plan prepared under the government performance and results act of 1993 ( the results act ) , its fiscal year 1999 budget explanatory notes , its first annual performance plan developed under the results act , and the chief's march 1998 natural resource agenda for the twenty - first century . the agency intends to limit goods and services on national forests — including recreational experiences , commercial sawtimber and other forest products , and livestock and wildlife forage — to the types , levels , and mixes that the lands are capable of sustaining . the documents also make clear that the agency intends to fulfill this responsibility primarily by using an ecosystem - based approach to land management that emphasizes integrating resource - specific programs and activities to maintain and restore the health of forested , aquatic , and rangeland ecosystems . the fiscal year 1995 budget reforms created a new line item — ecosystem planning , inventory , and monitoring — to allow the forest service to plan more along the boundaries of natural systems . however , the forest service's budget structure remains highly fragmented along the lines of individual resource - specific programs and activities , such as managing timber sales , livestock grazing , wildlife habitat , and wildfires . this fragmentation works against an integrated approach to land management . for example , the forest service's fiscal year 1997 annual report cites the goal of restoring and protecting forested ecosystems as the agency's highest priority . however , rather than having one large pool of funds available to achieve this goal and greater discretion to spend funds , a forest or district office may have to use up to 24 different funding sources to implement a plan to restore or protect a forested ecosystem . these funding sources include four national forest system line items over which the forest and district offices have the most control . this trend is expected to continue and , by fiscal year 1999 , the forest service estimates that the proportion of total harvest volume removed solely for timber commodity purposes will have fallen to 46 percent while the proportion removed for forest stewardship purposes will have grown to 54 percent .