we agree . as a result of removing this amount from our analysis , the corrected overall budget decrease for the recreation area was about 26 percent over the 1993-97 period . ( had we included the funds , the decrease would have been 16 percent. ) in addition , the forest service raised questions about whether funds provided through cooperative projects with outside sources , such as state and private organizations , should be included in the total . in designing this study , we worked with forest service officials at the region , forest , and recreation area to determine the budget fund codes to include . it was agreed at that time that funds for cooperative projects should be included in the recreation area's total budget allocation for each year . we further discussed this subject with officials at the sawtooth national forest , and they recommended that we not make any revisions in the numbers included in the report . the forest service's letter is in appendix vii . we conducted our work at the forest service headquarters in washington , d.c. ; the forest service intermountain regional office in ogden , utah ; the sawtooth national forest office in twin falls , idaho ; and the sawtooth national recreation area and the surrounding communities of stanley and blaine county . to determine how much was allocated to the snra during fiscal years 1993 through 1997 , we reviewed the initial and final planning and budget advice documents for the forest service , the regional office , the sawtooth national forest , and the snra . we also reviewed an agency document prepared for our use by the intermountain region and the sawtooth national forest offices that included all the appropriate budget fund codes . this document was prepared to ensure that we had data that the participating forest service units agreed on and considered to be accurate and consistent . we interviewed forest service budget officials at the snra , the forest office , the region , and at headquarters ; the snra area ranger ; and the sawtooth national forest supervisor . to determine the trend in funding from 1993 through 1997 and to put the trend in its historical perspective , we also reviewed the snra's budgets for 1991 and 1992 and converted all numbers to constant 1997 dollars . to help explain the large allocation decreases , we identified and removed allocations for 1993 that made that year's budget unusually high and removed funds for construction and land acquisition because funds for these activities vary substantially from year to year depending on whether construction projects or land acquisitions are approved . to determine whether regional or forest funds had not been allocated to the snra or whether funds had been allocated and then taken back during fiscal years 1993 through 1997 and what was done with those funds , we obtained and compared final budget allocations with expenditures . we also reviewed the allocation change documents for the snra and interviewed forest service budget officials at the snra , the forest office , and the region . we did not independently verify the reliability of the financial data provided nor did we trace the data to the systems from which they came .