this is not currently the case . because none of faa's 23 field offices conduct regularly scheduled on - site visits to monitor general aviation airports' compliance with federal requirements , faa does not know the extent of noncompliance at these airports nationwide . nor does faa always effectively enforce federal requirements . not surprisingly , therefore , we found unauthorized land and revenue uses and increased risks to aviation safety . these problems are compounded by the lack of current policy guidance and current summary information on the nature of airports' federal requirements nationwide . overall , faa's failure to effectively implement its compliance program leaves the nation's federally assisted general aviation airports vulnerable to mismanagement , fraud , waste , and abuse . although our review focused on faa's land - use requirements for general aviation airports receiving federal assistance , faa's lack of an effective compliance and enforcement program leaves compliance with other federal requirements , such as the requirement to keep airports available for public use and to charge airport users comparable fees , vulnerable as well . addressing noncompliance after it occurs is often difficult . therefore , prevention is key to ensuring compliance with federal requirements . airports' self - certifications can also serve to educate airports about their requirements . however , self - certifications alone are not a sufficient internal control because , in some instances , noncompliance may be deliberate , suggesting the need for a more hands - on monitoring approach than that provided by self - certifications . consequently , on - site monitoring and enforcement action are also essential elements of any preventative compliance strategy . in instances in which negotiations with an airport are unsuccessful , faa has not used its available enforcement actions effectively to deter violations or recoup losses to the federal government . it has not withheld transportation grants , taken back the title to airport land , or taken action through the courts . when such actions are not taken , even in cases of long - standing noncompliance , the lack of action becomes a de facto policy of permissiveness . no injuries occurred . in addition , during the stadium's construction , land survey spikes were driven into the airport runways and left for an unknown period of time while the airport was still open . in 1997 , in defiance of faa's explicit instructions that faa's approval was required to build the stadium on the airport land , the mayor of atlantic city informed faa that construction of the baseball stadium would proceed . faa subsequently signed a memorandum of agreement that allowed the stadium to be built , hoping that through cooperation , the city would make needed safety improvements and not close the airport . the agreement required the city to reimburse the airport for the fair market value of the baseball stadium land but did not resolve the city's unauthorized use of and lack of compensation for airport buildings and the land for the high school football stadium . figures 2 and 3 show the unauthorized minor league baseball stadium , police annex , and aircraft operations area at bader field in atlantic city , new jersey .