hood . we also met with , and reviewed documents provided by , managers and staff in blm's oregon state office and in two districts — salem and eugene . in addition , we spoke with officials from the ( 1 ) u.s. army corps of engineers concerning issues pertaining to dams in the willamette river valley and ( 2 ) environmental protection agency ( epa ) concerning issues pertaining to protecting water quality . we also spoke with and obtained information from officials and individuals from ( 1 ) the six cities included in our review , ( 2 ) the mckenzie watershed council , ( 3 ) environmental groups , ( 4 ) scientific and academic communities , ( 5 ) private industry and its representative organizations , and ( 6 ) the state of oregon . we also collected and reviewed published scientific studies of forestry practices and reports on water quality issues in oregon and washington as well as other documents provided by federal , state , and local officials ; environmental and industry groups ; and concerned individuals . ( see the bibliography for the scientific studies that we reviewed. ) we attended several conferences that addressed issues relating to the february 1996 storm and visited several of the municipal watersheds . we performed our work from july 1997 through june 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we provided pertinent information from a draft of this report to officials in each of the cities included in our review and made changes in response to their comments . we also obtained comments on a draft of the report from the forest service and blm . these agencies' comments are presented in appendixes i and ii , respectively . our review of scientific studies and other documents showed that human activities — timber harvests and related roads as well as agricultural , industrial , urban , and residential development — can contribute to elevated sediment levels during large storms . these activities result in soil that is compacted , paved , covered , or cleared of most vegetation . rain falling on such soil and surfaces can run off into streams , carrying with it eroded topsoil . this sediment from human activities in a municipal watershed , combined with the accelerated erosion that naturally occurs during storms , can shut down a municipality's water treatment system , as occurred in salem in february 1996 . ( see fig . all five of the cities included in our review have experienced timber harvesting and related road construction in their municipal watersheds . these activities can contribute to erosion . our review of scientific studies and other documents showed that past timber - harvesting practices were often not designed to protect water quality and resulted in cleared and compacted areas that exposed soil to the erosive impact of rain and contributed sediment to streams , especially during large storms . in addition , older forest roads along streams and on hillsides were designed in ways that made them subject to erosion and failure . these roads have been found to be a major contributor of sediment to streams .