anacapa is . santa rosa is . santa barbara is . san nicolas is . santa catalina is . san clemente is . in march 1995 , a federal court of appeals overturned a second $42.2 million settlement between the trustees and the los angeles county sanitation district and municipalities and sent the settlement back to the federal district court for reconsideration . as of december 1995 , this decision was still under litigation . in the meantime , according to interior officials , the trustees are proceeding with the preliminary restoration plan . they anticipate modifying the plan as remediation actions are completed or more settlements are obtained . according to justice officials , these future settlements may be substantial . for the case that has been settled for $12 million , $8.1 million has been collected , $1.4 million of which has been disbursed . the money was used to reimburse some of the trustees' past damage assessment costs . the new bedford harbor case was one of the first natural resource damage cases filed under the comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability act ( cercla ) . located on the achushnet river , near buzzards bay , massachusetts , the harbor has long been used by the fishing , shipping , and manufacturing industries . ( see fig . after studies during the 1970s found high levels of pcbs and heavy metals in the harbor's fish and shellfish , several fishing areas were closed . by the end of 1992 , the federal and state trustees had reached a $20.2 million settlement with five companies to cover the costs of the natural resource damage assessment and restoration . the companies had also agreed to an $88 million superfund cleanup settlement with the environmental protection agency ( epa ) and the state . the nature of the natural resource restoration work is contingent upon the scope of the cleanup remedy that epa selects for the outer harbor . restoration projects under consideration by the trustees include , but are not limited to , improving anadromous fish runs , reestablishing seagrass beds , creating wetlands , and constructing artificial reefs . as of july 1995 , all of the $20.2 million settlement had been collected and $0.5 million had been disbursed for restoration planning . according to noaa officials , restoration planning has been delayed because of the uncertainty over epa's cleanup plans . epa's record of decision for the cleanup and disposal of the most contaminated sediments had to be renegotiated when the community opposed the incineration of contaminated sediments . the community's challenge led to a delay in planning and cleaning the remaining contaminated sediments . nevertheless , the trustees are going forward with the restoration plan , which they say can be modified if epa's actions interfere with the trustees' restoration activities . as of december 1995 , the trustees had asked the public to suggest ideas for restoration . these ideas are expected to be rank - ordered and included as alternatives in the restoration plan , which the trustees expect to release for public comment by the summer of 1996 . commencement bay is an estuarine bay located in the southern part of puget sound in tacoma , washington . ( see fig .