they are paraphrased below . is the project acceptable to the government of the host country ? does it involve specific measures to reduce or sequester greenhouse gas emissions initiated as a result of the u.s. initiative on joint implementation or in reasonable anticipation of the initiative ? does it provide data and methodological information sufficient to establish a baseline of current and future greenhouse gas emissions , both with and without the project ? does it contain adequate provisions for tracking the greenhouse gas emissions reduced or sequestered as a result of the project and , on a periodic basis , for modifying such estimates and comparing actual results with original projections ? does it contain adequate provisions for external verification of the greenhouse gas emissions reduced or sequestered by the project ? does it identify any associated non - greenhouse - gas environmental impacts and benefits ? does it provide adequate assurance that the greenhouse gas emissions reduced or sequestered will not be lost or reversed over time ? does it provide for annual reports to the evaluation panel on the emissions reduced or sequestered and on the share of such emissions attributed to each domestic and foreign participant , pursuant to the terms of the voluntary agreement among the project's participants ? does the project have a potential to lead to changes in greenhouse gas emissions outside the project's boundaries ? apart from the project's effect on greenhouse gas emissions , does the project have any potential positive and negative effects on factors such as local employment and public health ? are u.s. participants who are emitting greenhouse gases within the united states taking measures to reduce or sequester those emissions ? does the host country have efforts under way to ( 1 ) ratify the united nations framework convention on climate change , ( 2 ) develop a national inventory and / or baseline of greenhouse gas emissions and sinks , and ( 3 ) reduce its emissions and enhance its sinks of greenhouse gases ? the awarding of credit for joint implementation projects' results is a basic distinction between the current pilot program and a fully developed program . under a fully developed program , investors in an approved project could receive credit for that project's results — greenhouse gas emissions reduced or sequestered — and thus offset their own greenhouse gas emissions . to help ensure that credits are awarded only when warranted , standard methods are being developed for estimating a project's emissions reduction benefits and for measuring greenhouse gas emissions . tracking a project's side effects ( eg , its impact on the local economy ) is also important . in support of the pilot program , the environmental protection agency's ( epa ) office of policy is sponsoring studies of these issues , and it currently has a contract and an interagency agreement for further studies . epa officials said that they expect these studies to help ensure that emissions reductions are properly identified and reported ; to gain international approval of the joint implementation concept , including the clean development mechanism provisions of the kyoto protocol ; and to move the joint implementation concept from its current pilot phase into full implementation .