they also are shown for an analysis component . the individual analysis elements support and could have been included under one or more of the other components . they have been segregated and are shown together to emphasize and highlight their importance to the effectiveness of the system . objective: to establish direction and priorities for epa by clarifying its mission ; setting measurable , outcome - oriented goals and objectives ; and determining how these goals and objectives will be met and how performance / results will be measured . these plans are to be prepared for each of the objectives in the strategic plan . opaa is currently developing guidance for the program offices on how these plans are to be prepared . according to epa officials , the agency plans to organize its budget , starting with the one for fiscal year 1999 , on the basis of its strategic goals and objectives . under gpra , this change has to be negotiated with the office of management and budget and the agency's appropriations subcommittees . epa officials told us that they are currently deciding how best to restructure the budget and have discussed their views with office of management and budget officials . agency officials said that more than one budgeting cycle may be needed to determine the best structure for the budget . gpra requires federal agencies to use the program activities appearing in the president's budget as the basis for performance planning and measurement . this requirement aims at ensuring a simple , straightforward link among plans , budgets , and performance information and the related congressional oversight and resource allocation processes . however , program activity structures and their suitability for planning and measurement purposes under gpra vary from agency to agency . under gpra , agencies can consolidate , aggregate , or disaggregate program activity structures for performance planning purposes , where needed . ( using this approach requires subsequent crosswalks between performance plans and the program activities appearing in the budget request. ) agencies may also attempt to renegotiate program activities with their appropriations subcommittees and the office of management and budget . according to epa officials , the ongoing strategic and annual performance planning will influence budget decisions for fiscal year 1999 . the office of management and budget will review epa's and other agencies' fiscal year 1999 annual performance plans when it considers their budget requests for that year . epa's two major activities to develop this component are the implementation of accountability pilot projects and the development of an agencywide reporting system . epa is implementing 46 accountability pilot projects across the agency's programs , offices , and regions . according to agency officials , these projects are being conducted to provide organizational units with experience in using performance measures and to obtain input into the development of an agencywide accountability system . under the pilot projects , the responsible units are to prepare performance plans , identify performance measures , and use the measures to assess performance in achieving the goals set out in the plans . the final results of the pilot projects are due to opaa in september 1997 .