( fig . 1.1 shows the location of these three bridges. ) the joint resolution also established relationships between the commission and the u.s. federal , new york state , and canadian governments . the resolution has no counterpart in canadian or new york state legislation . the resolution's provisions are to be enforced by either the new york state attorney general , the appropriate u.s. district attorney , or the solicitor general of canada . the resolution also provides for the eventual conveyance of the bridges under the commission's control to the state of new york and canada . the congress provided authority for the commission to operate and finance bridge operations . the commission is administered by a board of eight commissioners . under the terms of the joint resolution , the state of new york has authority to appoint four commissioners , and canada — through its designee , the premier of the province of ontario — appoints the other four . the commission employs about 110 staff , of which 86 are toll collectors and maintenance staff , while the remainder are administrative staff , including the general manager . in addition to the commission's employees , canadian and u.s. customs and immigration officials also work on commission properties . the commission derives its revenues from bridge operations . the resolution gives the commission the authority to fix and charge tolls for transit over the bridges and to use these funds to maintain , repair , and operate the bridges . the commission's audited financial statements for the fiscal year ending october 31 , 1993 , show revenues of $24.3 million , consisting of tolls ( $10.6 million ) , interest ( $7.2 million ) , rent from leasing space in its buildings ( $5.5 million ) , and other sources . expenses were $17.6 million , including $7.4 million in interest , $5.7 million in salary and fringe benefits , and $4.5 million in other expenses . the commission does not receive any revenue or appropriations from u.s. federal , state , or local governments or from the canadian provincial government . the commission does , however , receive rent for space used by the u.s. customs service and the immigration and naturalization service for inspecting people and goods entering the united states . the commission has said on several occasions that it considers itself a federal entity and has requested that federal legislation be passed to give gao permanent authority for overseeing the commission . however , there are numerous links between the commission and new york state , including the fact that the governor of new york appoints the u.s. commissioners , and the state has a long - term ownership interest in the bridges . governmental oversight might also give the commission access to advice on the planning , coordination , and financing of major capital projects , thereby helping it to avoid the kinds of problems the commission has encountered . as part of our work , we ascertained what external reviews of the commission's operations are required and have been performed . new york state , for example , provides such advice on projects and their financing to similar state authorities and municipalities .