( app . i provides state - by - state data on the percentage of municipal waste recycled , incinerated , and sent to landfills. ) the resource conservation and recovery act of 1976 ( rcra ) , as amended , establishes a cooperative framework for federal , state , and local authorities to manage solid waste in an environmentally sound manner and to maximize the use of limited resources . the act requires epa to establish minimum criteria for facilities that may receive hazardous waste from households or from generators of small quantities , in order to ensure that there is no reasonable probability that human health or the environment will be adversely affected . it also requires states to adopt a permit program or other means of prior approval to ensure that landfills meet epa's minimum criteria . furthermore , epa must establish guidelines and may provide technical and financial assistance to state and local authorities for the development and implementation of state plans for managing waste . between fiscal year 1978 and fiscal year 1981 , epa provided funds to states to develop and implement waste management plans . beginning in 1982 , epa eliminated financial assistance for state and local planning . both rcra and the pollution prevention act of 1990 ( p.l . 101-508 ) address alternatives to land disposal of waste . rcra advocates the use of resource recovery , either through facilities that convert waste to energy or through recycling . to promote recycling , rcra requires federal agencies that procure goods to purchase products , such as paper , that contain recovered material . the act requires epa to develop guidelines that identify products that are or can be produced with recovered materials and to recommend practices for agencies to follow when purchasing the products . rcra also requires the department of commerce to encourage more commercialization of resource recovery technologies through ( 1 ) promoting proven technologies , ( 2 ) providing a forum for the exchange of technical and economic data on resource recovery facilities , ( 3 ) providing accurate specifications for recovered materials , and ( 4 ) stimulating the development of markets for recovered material . the pollution prevention act also promotes reducing the amount of material generated and thus reducing the amount of waste requiring recycling , treatment , or disposal . the act requires epa to develop and implement a strategy to promote source reduction . as part of that strategy , epa is directed to , among other things , ( 1 ) establish standard methods for measuring source reduction ; ( 2 ) coordinate source reduction activities in each office within epa ; ( 3 ) facilitate the adoption of source reduction techniques by businesses ; and ( 4 ) identify , where appropriate , measurable goals , tasks necessary to achieve the goals , dates for achieving these goals , and organizational responsibilities . in 1979 , epa issued minimum criteria for solid waste landfills . under these criteria , waste had to be covered and protected against floodwater , and open burning of waste was prohibited .