calif . the requirement to prepare an eis accelerated the scheduled completion of the research studies in phase ii of the glen canyon environmental studies to provide more timely data for the eis . this acceleration was accomplished by designing special “research flows,” a series of carefully designed discharges of water and data collection programs conducted in june 1990 through july 1991 . each research flow lasted 14 days and included 3 days of steady 5,000 cfs flows and 11 days of either steady or fluctuating flows . the research flows provided a means to evaluate the short - term responses of certain resources to a variety of discharge parameters , including minimum and maximum flows , the rate of change in flow , and the range of daily fluctuations . to protect downstream resources until the completion of the eis and the formal adoption of new operating criteria for the glen canyon dam , reclamation implemented the interim dam operations on november 1 , 1991 . the interim operating criteria were purposely designed to be conservative for the protection of natural and cultural resources . specifically , the interim criteria reduced peak water releases from the approved maximum of 31,500 cfs to 20,000 cfs ; restricted daily fluctuations in releases to between 5,000 cfs and 8,000 cfs ; and restricted the rate of change in releases ( ramp rates ) to 2,500 cfs per hour when increasing and to 1,500 cfs per hour when decreasing . while these limitations were imposed , the interim criteria met the minimum annual release of 8.23 million acre - feet in accordance with the 1970 long - range operating criteria . although the interim operating criteria could be modified on the basis of new information , they were to remain in effect until the eis and the secretary's record of decision for new operating criteria for the dam were completed . subsequent to reclamation's initiation of the eis process , on october 30 , 1992 , the congress enacted the grand canyon protection act of 1992 ( title xviii of p.l . the act addresses the protection of the grand canyon national park , the glen canyon national recreational area , the interim operating criteria for the dam until the eis is completed , long - term monitoring and research , and the replacement of lost power from any changes to the dam's operation . the act requires that the glen canyon dam be operated to protect , mitigate adverse impacts to , and improve the downstream resources of the grand canyon national park and the glen canyon national recreational area . the act also required the secretary of the interior to complete a final environmental impact statement for the glen canyon dam's operations by october 30 , 1994 . furthermore , the act required gao to audit the costs and benefits of the various operating alternatives identified in the final environmental impact statement . on the basis of the findings , conclusions , and recommendations made in the eis , other relevant information , and our audit report , the secretary is to issue a record of decision adopting future operating criteria and operating plans for the glen canyon dam . the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa ) ( 42 u.s.c .