these actions are encouraging . however , the plans are not comprehensive because they exclude schedule and cost estimates for implementing augmentation systems and information on the likelihood of achieving these estimates . faa recently took several management actions to better position itself for augmenting gps . first , faa integrated pertinent gps research , development , and acquisition activities that had been fragmented across the agency . in october 1993 , faa named a director of gps / communications , navigation , and surveillance ( cns ) systems , and in may 1994 , it created the gps / cns development and implementation service . in november 1994 , faa consolidated the service with units responsible for current ground - based navigation aids , such as instrument landing systems . this new organization , headed by the former director of the gps / cns service , is called the integrated product team for gps and navigation and is under the jurisdiction of the associate administrator for research and acquisitions . according to the head of this organization , the consolidation was intended to improve the integration and coordination of the agency's efforts to augment gps . second , after deciding to accelerate the implementation of the wide area system , faa obtained $82.8 million for fiscal year 1995 , an increase of $61.9 million over its appropriation for fiscal year 1994 . this funding includes $67.9 million to develop and implement the wide area system . in fiscal year 1996 , the administration is requesting $86.9 million to fund the system . third , in mid - 1994 , faa released plans for guiding the development , acquisition , and implementation of gps' augmentations and drafted an agencywide plan for directing the transition to gps . although these actions are encouraging , they may not address potential problems that may affect the development of the wide area system . some of these problems are beyond faa's control , such as the difficulties that may be experienced during the launching of commercial communication satellites . among other things , the gps development and implementation plans and the draft of the transition plan ( 1 ) present information on faa's planned efforts to augment gps , including schedule information on the wide area system and related milestones for using gps as a primary means of navigation ; ( 2 ) identify requirements that gps must satisfy ; and ( 3 ) highlight benefits that gps will provide the agency and aviation users . also , after the wide and local area systems are implemented , the transition plan proposes tentative schedules for transitioning to gps and for decommissioning navigation aids in current use . however , these plans provide insufficient information to decisionmakers in the administration and the congress on the systems needed for augmenting gps . the plans issued in 1994 do not provide a timetable for implementing local area systems that will be needed to support precision approaches . faa recently canceled its microwave landing system project because it is confident that the local area systems will be able to support all types of precision approaches .