vi. ) in addition , the department of housing and urban development's acting deputy assistant secretary for native american programs provided us with two changes that clarified information contained in the report , which we incorporated . washington , d.c.: may 1996 . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . what are the major barriers to conventional home purchase lending to native americans on trust lands ? what efforts are under way to facilitate conventional home purchase lending to native americans on trust lands ? will the implementation of the native american housing assistance and self - determination act of 1996 ( p.l . 104-330 ) result in more conventional home purchase loans being made to native americans on trust lands ? in addition , you asked us to determine whether the backlog at the department of the interior's bureau of indian affairs of requests for certifying documents affecting the legal status of trust lands has been a deterrent to conventional home purchase lending to native americans . appendix i provides information on the impact of the bureau's backlog . the federal government holds in trust about 55 million acres of land for tribes and individual native americans , most of it on or near reservations . sixty percent of the 2 million native americans live on trust lands or in the surrounding counties . reservations range in size from the navajo reservation , the largest , with about 17 million acres , to california's small reservations , called rancherias , which comprise just a few acres . for a map showing the locations of some of the indian reservations on which trust lands are located , see appendix ii . there are two major ownership categories for land held in trust by the federal government for native americans: ( 1 ) tribal trust and ( 2 ) individual trust . tribal trust lands are areas set aside and held in trust by the federal government for the use and benefit of tribes . individual trust lands are areas set aside by tribes or , in some cases , by the federal government that are held in trust by the federal government for the use and benefit of individual native americans . of the approximately 55 million acres of trust lands , about 45 million are tribal trust lands , and 10 million are individual trust lands . all trust lands are subject to federal restrictions against alienation and encumbrance . in general , land is privately held without restrictions and can be used as collateral for the repayment of a mortgage loan . however , native american trust lands generally cannot be transferred to non - native americans , which prevents native americans from using trust lands as collateral for mortgage loans . only individual trust lands can be transferred to non - native americans and then only with the consent of the native american landowner and approval by the secretary of the interior or an authorized representative . with these approvals , individual native american trust lands can be used as collateral for mortgage loans . pervasive joblessness and low wages have led to high poverty rates among native americans living on reservations . half of these native americans have incomes below the poverty line .