( see fig . however , premiums for the principal single - family fund — the mutual mortgage insurance ( mmi ) fund — have more than offset the losses incurred for properties financed by loans insured by this fund . section 1 losses and costs associated with hud's acquisition , management , and sale of single - family properties the data supporting this figure appear in app . most of the acquisitions and sales occurred in a few states . ( see sec . 2 for more information. ) • on a median basis , single - family properties remained in hud's inventory about 5 months before being sold . however , 38 percent of the properties remained in inventory from 5 months to 1 year , and 8 percent remained more than 1 year before being sold . to determine when and how long a property was in hud's inventory , we used the date that the property was acquired and the date when hud reconciled the settlement statement with the funds received by the u.s. treasury . we also excluded from analysis certain properties , such as those that hud sold on behalf of the department of defense and those for which hud's acquisition date was not recorded or was obviously incorrect . consequently , the data on the inventory and costs reported here may not match those published by hud . we performed our work from june 1994 through july 1995 . we provided a draft of this report to hud officials to obtain their comments . in a meeting with the director of the single - family property disposition division , the director of the single - family post - insurance division , and the acting director of hud's office of evaluation , we obtained hud's comments . hud generally agreed with the facts as presented . we incorporated , where appropriate , technical and editorial changes suggested by hud to further clarify certain information presented . as arranged with your office , unless you announce its contents earlier , we plan no further distribution of this report until 10 days after the date of this letter . at that time , we will send copies to interested congressional committees , the secretary of hud , and other interested parties . we will also make copies available to others on request . please contact me at ( 202 ) 512-7631 if you or your staff have any questions . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iv . the department of housing and urban development's ( hud ) single - family mortgage insurance programs are intended to protect lenders from financial losses resulting from defaults on mortgage loans to home buyers . as part of this insurance protection , hud acquires foreclosed properties from lenders and manages these properties until they can be sold from its inventory . this section describes the costs and revenues associated with hud's acquisition and disposition activities as well as the losses to the federal housing administration's ( fha ) insurance funds incurred through these activities . during fiscal years 1992 through 1994 , hud sold about 200,000 single - family properties .