vi. ) in view of these concerns , as well as similar concerns expressed in epa's letter , we eliminated the discussion of this particular example . however , we did not change the report's overall observation concerning the food safety initiative's failure to address fundamental fragmentation problems . we revised the draft report to reflect epa's most recent funding and staffing estimates . these initiatives have improved some food safety activities . however , the initiatives do not address the fundamental problem of the system — its fragmented structure . in fact , for certain food safety activities , the initiatives intensified the need for coordination among the loosely networked group of federal food safety agencies . for fiscal year 1998 , the administration's initiative received $43 million for specific food safety activities to improve the nation's food safety system . prior to the initiative , these activities had competed with other agency priorities for funding . the $43 million in funding was aimed at , among other things , ( 1 ) improving a nationwide early - warning system for foodborne illnesses , ( 2 ) increasing seafood safety inspections , and ( 3 ) expanding research , training , and education in food safety . under the initiative for fiscal year 1999 , the administration has requested $101 million to build upon the food safety efforts in the 1998 initiative and to enhance the safety of imported and domestic fruits and vegetables , among other things . cdc used initiatives funding to improve its monitoring of foodborne illnesses and will expand its surveillance locations throughout the country to eight . ftc's food safety objective is to prevent consumer deception through the misrepresentation of food . u.s. customs service , within the department of the treasury , is responsible for collecting revenues and enforcing various customs and related laws . customs assists fda and fsis in carrying out their regulatory roles in food safety . bureau of alcohol , tobacco , and firearms ( atf ) , within the department of the treasury , is responsible for administering and enforcing laws covering the production ( including safety ) , use , and distribution of alcoholic beverages under the federal alcohol administration act and the internal revenue code . fda's data include funding and staffing for various programs across fda that are involved with food safety activities , including the center for food safety and applied nutrition , the center for veterinary medicine , the field components for these centers , and overall agencywide support . the agency did not specify its food safety resources . agencies' funding and staffing levels are for both safety and quality inspection activities . ams' funding and staffing totals for fiscal year 1989 reflect egg inspection activities , which were transferred to fsis in 1994 . totals for fiscal years 1994 and 1998 include data for the pesticide data program , which began in 1991 . numbers for epa are from the following sources: fiscal year 1991 president's budget , 1989 actuals ; fiscal year 1996 president's budget , 1994 actuals ; and fiscal year 1999 president's budget , 1998 enacted , and includes the total office of pesticides programs .