( see app . i for details on faa's benefit - cost analyses for the waas project in 1994 , 1996 , 1997 , and 1998. ) the agency noted that dot's guidance directs departmental staff to include all increments — large and small . we did not intend to suggest that faa should not follow dot's guidance , and we have added language to the report to clarify this . however , our review of the economic literature found a lack of consensus among experts on the validity of using small increments of passenger time savings and our sensitivity analysis found that the inclusion of small increments was significant for waas' benefit - cost ratio and net benefits . taken together , these findings argue for informing decisionmakers about the effects of including small increments of passenger time savings when future benefit - cost analyses are conducted for the waas project . to obtain information for this report , we interviewed ( 1 ) officials at faa headquarters and dod , including dod's national reconnaissance office ; ( 2 ) representatives from raytheon ( previously hughes aircraft ) , the prime contractor on waas ; and ( 3 ) officials from the mitre corporation who provide technical advice to faa . we reviewed agency documentation on the current schedule , life - cycle costs , and performance goals for waas . we also reviewed technical reports from the waas contractor and outside experts that discussed the risks and challenges facing the project . to identify the potential impact of differing assumptions on the benefit - cost ratio for waas , we asked faa to run alternative analyses . we performed our review from october 1997 through april 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we did not assess the reliability of all cost information . however , with regard to satellite costs — the major cost item contributing to increased life - cycle costs — we did satisfy ourselves that the information being used by faa is in general agreement with those estimates provided by outside sources , such as dod . also , while we did not perform an extensive review of the model used to calculate benefit - cost ratios , the model used by faa is widely recognized as an appropriate economic analysis tool for providing risk - adjusted benefit - cost ratios . we are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees , the secretaries of transportation and defense , and the administrator of faa . we will also make copies available to others on request . if you or your staff have any questions or need additional information , please call me at ( 202 ) 512-3650 or send email to dillinghamg.rced@gao.gov . major contributors to this report are listed in appendix iii . the results of the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) benefit - cost analyses of the wide area augmentation system ( waas ) project in 1994 , 1996 , 1997 , and 1998 are summarized in table i.1 . on the benefit side , benefits to the government accrue from the reduced maintenance of the existing , ground - based network of navigation aids and the avoidance of capital expenditures for replacing these aids .