problems can occur during this process . for example , at one field office , the staff could not produce any of the reports we had requested for 3 days because the idis software for producing reports was not functioning . in another field office , the staff could create reports for only one grantee — the first on the list of choices — and it took 24 hours to correct the problem . some of these loans had been delinquent for over 8 years . the inspector general reported that this audit was initiated by the grantee , not cpd , following up on an audit conducted by an independent accounting firm . hud's inspector general has also specifically faulted cpd's monitoring of grantees . for example , in its audit of hud's fiscal year 1997 financial statement , the inspector general focused on whether the grants management system had been implemented and whether the system was providing adequate oversight of grantees . for some of the grantees , the inspector general could not determine the extent of cpd's monitoring of grantees' performance because it could not find documentation of monitoring in cpd's files . it also found that cpd had not done annual community assessments for some grantees . though these required assessments are needed in order to reach an opinion on the grantees' performance for the year , cpd officials explained that staff shortages resulting from hud's downsizing during fiscal year 1997 had prevented them from conducting the assessments . the inspector general concluded that cpd could not ensure that all grantees were expending funds only on eligible activities and individuals . in addition , the independent accounting firm assigned to the verification review of cpd's actions to correct material weaknesses in the community development block grant program faulted cpd's practices for monitoring grantees . its report indicated that four of the six field offices visited had not conducted significant on - site monitoring visits for fiscal years 1996 and 1997 . “cpd had conducted field office reviews in the past , however these reviews have been discontinued . we were unable to identify any procedures being performed by headquarters that would be adequate for evaluating the quality and sufficiency of procedures being applied by the field offices.” in addition , the representatives of the accounting firm said that the lack of headquarters oversight represents a material weakness in internal controls . the report recommended that cpd headquarters design a methodology for determining the adequacy of field offices' compliance - monitoring procedures . hud is still reviewing the report to determine how it will respond to the recommendations . headquarters staff infrequently visit the 42 field offices — making fewer than five visits in the last 2 years — according to the director of the field management division . when they do visit , headquarters staff do not have to formally report their findings . these limited visits to field offices reflect a change in headquarters' oversight in recent years . one desk officer told us that headquarters had moved away from field office monitoring in an attempt to improve relationships with the field offices — headquarters believed that these visits antagonized the field offices .