we do not agree with dla's rationale . in our view and as shown by the agency's organizational chart , the principal deputy director is the agency's second - in - command . in addition , the existing reporting arrangement at dla could potentially impair the achievement of the act's objectives . as the house committee on small business observed in a 1987 report , having the osdbu director report to an individual who has responsibility for the functions that the director is intended to monitor ( procurement ) could lessen the director's effectiveness . dla officials neither agreed nor disagreed with our position that the osdbu's reporting level was not in compliance with public law 95-507 . however , in march 1995 , on the basis of questions raised during our review , dla's deputy general counsel ( acquisition ) said that dla will take steps to reorganize so that the osdbu director reports to either the agency head or the agency's deputy . as shown in figure 2 , the head of energy's osdbu , whose title is deputy director , reports to the director of the office of economic impact and diversity . the director reports directly to the secretary of energy but is neither the agency head nor the agency's second - in - command . figure 2 reflects doe's january 1995 reorganization . prior to the reorganization , the title of the head of the osdbu was director , and that official reported to the director of economic impact and diversity . in response to our inquiry concerning the rationale for that arrangement , doe said that the department of energy organization act ( 42 u.s.c . 7253 ) gives the secretary broad authority to organize the department and that public law 95-507 was not intended to supersede or amend the organization act . in response to a congressional request , in 1993 omb surveyed federal agencies to determine the organizational reporting levels of their osdbu directors . the omb survey included four of the agencies we reviewed: dod , doe , gsa , and nasa . according to the ofpp deputy administrator for procurement law and legislation , doe was not in compliance with the statute because the osdbu director did not report to the agency head or the agency's deputy . in a june 9 , 1994 , memorandum , omb's director emphasized that federal agencies must comply with the law and policy regarding the osdbu's organizational reporting level . furthermore , in a 1987 report , we stated that doe's rationale based on the organization act does not give the secretary the authority to alter or abridge the requirements of the small business act . we recommended that the secretary of energy require the head of the osdbu to be responsible only to , and report directly to , the secretary or deputy secretary of energy . doe officials neither agreed nor disagreed with our position that the osdbu's reporting level was not in compliance with public law 95-507 .