( fig . 2 contains photographs of the neighborhoods we visited. ) these meetings served as a way to get neighborhood providers to better understand each other's services , activities , and program procedures . local providers are also leading efforts to build coalitions with area schools as a strategy to deliver coordinated programs to the right age groups . in all the neighborhoods we visited , junior high or middle schools have emerged as major “catchments” for programs serving at - risk teen girls . for example , west oakland's lowell middle school and washington , d.c.'s evans junior high school are working with nonprofit agencies to deliver case management - style programs in the schools to serve their teen populations . oakland's lowell middle school provided on - site case management and support services for students and their families . these services included individual and family counseling , home visits , crisis intervention , and community service referrals . also , a west oakland middle school principal is planning a program to include students , parents , and the community at large . the program would operate between 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. and would provide a fitness lab , computer / job skills training , medical information , mental health services , and parenting courses . evans junior high school's turning points program provided individual counseling and group activities to students as well as attempted to include parents by developing adult activities and hiring parents as turning points staff . the collaborative school - based efforts we observed in detroit and west oakland were achieving positive outcomes . a preliminary evaluation by the university of california of school - based projects in west oakland identified successes in the start - up of the school - based programs . these programs were seeing positive responses from teachers and school officials as well as increased involvement from teens and their families . west oakland found that these efforts reduced the number of discipline hearing procedures and the number of suspensions for students in schools receiving the services , when these students were compared with students in schools not receiving the services . in detroit , the community , along with the kellogg foundation and henry ford hospital , created a teen health clinic within hutchins middle school . the project reported a reduction in teen pregnancies from 14 in 1991 to 1 in 1993 , immunization for all children in the school , and improved standardized achievement test scores over 2 years in both reading and math . the following individuals also made important contributions to this report: valerie rogers , evaluator ; john vocino , senior evaluator ; lisa shibata , evaluator ; pamela brown , evaluator ; and margie shields , senior evaluator . community development: comprehensive approaches address multiple needs but are challenging to implement ( gao / rced / hehs - 95-69 , feb. 8 , 1995 ) . families on welfare: teenage mothers least likely to become self - sufficient ( gao / hehs - 94-115 , may 31 , 1994 ) . families on welfare: focus on teenage mothers could enhance welfare reform efforts ( gao / hehs - 94-112 , may 31 , 1994 ) .