( see app . these suggested changes would allow access to jobs grant recipients to ( 1 ) use program funds for planning and coordination purposes and ( 2 ) apply “soft expenditures” ( such as the value of staff reassigned to the program ) to fund their required local match . in addition , hud suggested that it be included among the federal agencies with which dot must coordinate program implementation . hud's first two suggestions may be important for the congress to consider as it completes programmatic and funding decisions for the access to jobs program through its reauthorization of surface transportation programs . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . ten projects are completed and six are ongoing . while the projects' objectives are to help people obtain jobs or attend employment training , the projects' results have differed . for example , a joblinks project in louisville , kentucky , was designed to increase by 25 percent the number of inner - city residents hired at an industrial park . the joblinks project established an express bus from the inner city to the industrial park , thereby reducing a 2-hour commute for inner - city residents to 45 minutes . although an april 1997 evaluation of the project did not indicate if the project had met the 25-percent new - hire goal , it stated that 10 percent of the businesses in the industrial park were able to hire inner - city employees as a result of the express service . another joblinks project — in fresno , california — was established to provide transportation services to employment training centers and thereby reduce dropout rates and increase the number of individuals who found jobs . the april 1997 evaluation of the project found that of the 269 participants in a job training program , 20 had completed the program and 3 had found jobs . fta has also helped state and local transportation agencies develop plans for addressing the transportation needs of their welfare recipients . in 1997 , fta and the federal highway administration provided the national governors' association ( nga ) with $330,000 to develop plans that identify the issues , costs , and benefits associated with bringing together the transportation components of various social service programs . in january 1997 , nga solicited grant applications and 24 states and one territory applied for grants . all 25 applicants received grants and are participating in the demonstration project ; final plans are expected by september 1998 . fta has also sponsored regional seminars that focus on the transportation issues involved in welfare reform and the actions that states and local agencies need to take to address these issues . the seminars are intended to encourage the states to develop transportation strategies to support their welfare reform programs and to facilitate transportation and human services agencies working together to develop plans that link transportation , jobs , and support services .