inventory only . system limited to setting priorities for bridge replacement / rehabilitation projects . once the nhs act made the systems optional , officials in the seven states we reviewed told us that they had reassessed their needs and decided whether to ( 1 ) proceed with the systems as originally planned , ( 2 ) reduce the scope of the systems , and / or ( 3 ) discontinue certain systems . among our case - study states , michigan was the only one that decided to implement the six management systems with no change in scope to the plans it had developed on the basis of dot's interim rule . michigan transportation officials viewed the management systems as an opportunity to improve decision - making and as a way to address other departmental objectives . the other six states scaled back their coverage of certain systems . for example , istea required the states to incorporate all federal - aid highways , which included some roads under local jurisdiction , in their pavement management systems . after the nhs act made the systems optional , five of the states we reviewed — maryland , montana , new york , oregon , and texas — decided to include only state - maintained roads and the national highway system in their pavement management system , at least initially . new york intends to include all federal - aid highways by 1998 . north carolina scaled back the coverage of its pavement management system to include state - maintained roads and only those portions of the national highway system maintained by the state . our case - study states also scaled back the coverage of other systems , to varying degrees , after the passage of the nhs act . for example , north carolina and texas decided that their congestion management systems would cover only their transportation management areas . in earlier plans for their congestion management systems , both states had intended to have statewide coverage . finally , maryland , north carolina , and texas decided to discontinue certain management systems once they were no longer mandatory . north carolina decided not to develop the intermodal management system ; texas and maryland decided not to implement the public transportation and intermodal management systems . in each case , state transportation officials determined that the state's needs were being met sufficiently by existing programs and / or activities . ( see apps . i through vi for examples of systems being implemented by our case - study states. ) five states we reviewed — montana , new york , maryland , oregon , and texas — used the flexibility they gained from the passage of the nhs act to extend the time frames for implementing some systems beyond those established in initial work plans . officials in these five states found istea's and dot's initial time frames unrealistic and replaced them with more accurate estimates for completing the initial work on the management systems . this work has often entailed hiring staff or consultants to develop new systems or enhance the existing ones . additional copies are $2 each .