we agree . since section 15 does not provide a time frame for posting summaries of closed meetings , we noted instances in which data were untimely by the academy's own guidelines and instances in which the information provided had some errors . the full text of the academy's comments appears in appendix i. gsa had no comments on the report . to determine why the academy sought relief from the act , we interviewed academy officials and reviewed their statements to the congress . we also talked with several committee members to obtain their views on the act — the academy selected the committee members , with input from us . each academy study unit and the presidents of the national academy of sciences , the national academy of engineering , and the institute of medicine selected members to respond to our questions . the academy narrowed this sample , and each candidate was asked whether he or she would participate in the survey . the sample included past and current committee members and chairs of committees from across the country and from private industry , academia , and not - for - profit institutions . to identify the academy's procedures for providing advice to the federal government , we interviewed academy officials . we also reviewed the academy's internal documents outlining the procedures , the treasurer's reports , and annual reports . to determine whether the academy had implemented section 15 , we interviewed academy officials and reviewed official documents . we also reviewed the academy's web site information , including committee meeting agendas for both open and closed portions of meetings and the content of the closed meetings as described in summary minutes , for academy projects that were active as of june 17 , 1998 . to make this determination , we calculated the hours of open and closed meetings , calculated the time in which summary minutes were posted for closed meetings , and categorized the reasons for closed meetings . each step was verified for accuracy and completeness . only meetings that occurred in the 6-month period from december 17 , 1997 , to june 17 , 1998 , were analyzed . of the 331 current academy projects , 69 had no meetings within the stated 6-month time frame , and 24 had no meetings whatsoever . thirty - six projects were standing committees that were not subject to section 15 and were therefore excluded from our analyses . none of the current project information from the web site was independently verified against the academy's original records . for the analysis of open versus closed hours , we considered only the 139 meetings with both open and closed hours . for the closed meetings , we looked only at those meetings with summary minutes or with posted agendas . of the 300 possible meetings with some closed sessions , 294 were analyzed to determine the reasons for the closed sessions .