russia's a . a. bochvar all - russia scientific research institute is expected to fabricate another 8 to 10 fuel rods to combine with the u.s. fuel rods . as originally conceived in 1995 , a total of 92 fuel rods — 46 manufactured in the united states by los alamos national laboratory and 46 fabricated in russia — would be made for assembly in four fuel bundles . the test irradiations and post - irradiation examinations will be conducted at the chalk river laboratory in canada . this trilateral effort will permit evaluation of such technical issues as possible differences between u.s. and russian mox fuel performance . doe had planned to facilitate the signing of a contract between atomic energy of canada limited , the designer of the candu reactor , and the bochvar institute in july 1996 . as part of that effort , doe would pay for manufacturing the russian fuel , transporting it to a russian port , and for licensing oversight in russia . the contract , however , was not signed then because of disagreements about the amount of money that would be provided to the bochvar institute to fabricate the mox fuel , the intellectual ownership of the fabrication rights , the legal implications of transporting plutonium outside of russia , and the possible imposition of russian taxes on u.s. - funded assistance . the u.s. fuel has not been delivered to canada because the united states was awaiting resolution of the disagreements concerning the russian contract . in july 1997 , bochvar institute officials indicated their agreement to the proposed contract . the signing occurred in september 1997 , and the shipment is expected to be made sometime in calendar year 1998 . doe reported expenditures totaling $402,000 for this project as of july 31 , 1997 , and has planned $455,000 for continued work in fiscal year 1998 . the purpose of this demonstration project is to assist and encourage russia to ( 1 ) develop a mox fuel fabrication process that is compatible with surplus weapons - grade plutonium , ( 2 ) test the resulting fuel , and ( 3 ) qualify it for use in a vver - 1000 reactor . the data and information collected in this task will be provided to gosatomnadzor , russia's nuclear regulatory authority , and rosenergoatom , the russian utility that operates the nuclear power reactors , to facilitate the eventual licensing of mox fuel in russia . oak ridge national laboratory is responsible for performing the work on behalf of doe . in january 1997 , a contract was signed by the university of texas at austin and the a.a. bochvar all - russia research institute , which established the statement of work , budget , schedule , and list of deliverables for the initial phase of work . under the terms of this contract , the bochvar institute will receive $210,000 for various technical reports and for manufacturing a limited amount of test fuel related to the use of mox fuel in vver - 1000 reactors . according to laboratory officials , the program to develop and test mox fuel will be continued under separate contracts that will be signed with the appropriate russian organizations .