ou have to . look at what has occurred.” another added , “i think the intent of the committee . was to suggest that if you come out with a policy statement that you would . take some action to put some teeth into it.” several panelists were also concerned that faa did not believe that a policy on separating aircraft from hazardous weather was necessary , as the advisory committee had recommended . ___ possibly no 4 . ___ possibly yes 5 . ___ definitely yes the panelists' responses are shown in table v.2 . finally , after reviewing the ratings assigned to the recommendations , the panel was asked to rate faa on its general progress in addressing all eight recommendations . mindi g. weisenbloom the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . ___ definitely no 2 . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . ___ good 5 . ___ excellent the panelists answers are presented in table v.1 . according to one panelist , the responsibility for controllers to provide weather information to pilots is implicit and ambiguous , “but if that was articulated , then [it would] provide a basis for saying that controllers need better weather information to actually provide that service.” we asked the panelists to rate faa's overall progress on a 5-point scale . in rating the recommendations dealing with policy and leadership , most panelists saw faa's progress in treating weather as a safety issue as fair . however , most panelists also thought that faa had made poor progress in establishing a weather policy that addresses the role of controllers in providing weather information and in seeing weather as an important part of its operations . in addition , most of the panelists indicated that faa's actions on these three recommendations were neither timely nor sufficient . nrc and faa's re&d advisory committee raised concerns about faa's coordination with other federal agencies involved in aviation weather , especially in the area of research . faa stated that it has increased its coordination with nws as well as with multiagency working groups .