i for more details. ) the sponsor told us that in 1992 and 1993 , locations were not ranked numerically from a national perspective . furthermore , there was no documentation of what factors — including benefit - cost analysis — were considered in deciding which terminal locations received the new ils . for fiscal year 1994 , the ils program sponsor decided to institute a numerical ranking system in which each eligible ils location that the regions submitted in response to the call for estimates would be prioritized . a new runway is currently under construction which will increase the airport capacity . the air conditioning and heating systems are inadequate and personnel must use a public access elevator to reach the tower cab.” “ is an old air force tower that was constructed in 1947 and transferred to the faa in 1954 . the tower cab is limited in size and not adequate to handle the current and projected staffing levels for a safe and efficient air traffic operation . the support facilities are limited in area and very poorly arranged for a functional office environment . support systems , such as the cab heating and air conditioning system , the power supply system , and the basic utility system , have either outlived their normal useful lives or are in need of extensive refurbishing and maintenance.” had faa documented the factors it considered in arriving at its list of tower replacements to be funded and prioritized those locations , its ability to show why certain locations were selected over others would be enhanced . the d - brite system is an extension of an airport surveillance radar system . d - brite provides additional radar display positions at busy air traffic control towers and establishes positions at remote towers that do not currently have a radar display . the new equipment also reduces the need for verbal coordination and increases safety at both hub and remote towers . additionally , the equipment assists the air traffic controller in identifying and sequencing aircraft traffic and provides traffic advisories to aircraft in visual flight rules conditions . regional offices screened and ranked eligible locations for the d - brite project on the basis of traffic activity levels and the operational needs of the towers associated with a surveillance radar . locations with the highest traffic activity were given the highest regional priorities . the program sponsor — faa's air traffic plans and requirements service — grouped the regional priorities into a national delivery schedule . according to the sponsor , this schedule takes into consideration the regional offices' ranking of locations , funding levels , and the ability of the offices' work force to install systems . the individual currently acting as the program sponsor was not involved with d - brite funding decisions for fiscal years 1992 to 1994 . however , this individual believed that , in those years , each regional office generally received funding for its top - priority locations . the program sponsor said that d - brite locations were not ranked numerically from a national perspective .