we disagree . we believe that the most appropriate benchmark for evaluating yearly performance is the plan approved at the beginning of the fiscal year . revising a plan 6 months into a fiscal year significantly reduces the uncertainty inherent in preparing an initial estimate of performance . in addition , the march 1998 plan was an exception — amtrak typically produces a plan in september or october of each year . finally , while we agree that the enactment of the two laws and amtrak's change in leadership were significant events for amtrak , the primary financial revisions contained in the march 1998 plan were reductions in revenues associated with amtrak's mail and express service initiatives . these reductions were primarily due to revised assumptions about the market for express service , rather than a direct result of the above mentioned events . amtrak also objected to our characterization of how it derived estimates for the expected financial benefits associated with the initiatives to ( 1 ) implement service standards and ( 2 ) align its route network to meet customer demand . amtrak stated that the estimates were based on extensive analyses completed by senior management officials and included benchmarking with other service providers . we believe that the characterization in our draft report was wholly consistent with the information that we obtained from top financial officials and others within amtrak . in commenting on our draft report , amtrak officials supplied us with a rationale for how they derived the estimate for financial benefits associated with implementing service standards . we have added this material to our report . the officials did not supply any additional information on how they derived the estimate for the expected financial benefits associated with aligning amtrak's route network to meet customer demand . based on the additional information received , we revised our report to characterize how amtrak developed its expected financial benefits as using “professional judgment” rather than making “best guesses.” finally , amtrak officials offered a number of technical and clarifying comments that we incorporated throughout the report , where appropriate . in commenting on our draft report , the department of transportation stated that when the goal of achieving operational self - sufficiency was established , the administration understood that meeting the goal would not be easy . ( see app . it believes that amtrak's strategic business plan provides a credible path for achieving operational self - sufficiency . the department also stated that it believes amtrak is moving in the right direction and is currently ahead of its financial targets identified in the corporation's strategic business plan . it stated that our report should recognize amtrak's increased investment in traditional capital projects . as discussed above , we have added this information to our report . the department also commented that the taxpayer relief act of 1997 authorizes amtrak to use taxpayer relief act funds for some maintenance activities . although the draft report provided to the department included this fact , we have added to our report a further reference to this allowed use of taxpayer relief act funds .