iv. ) blm provided us with technical clarifications , which we have incorporated as appropriate , and also suggested that we include information on the states' mining regulatory agencies . however , we did not include this information because we focused on activities comparable to the federal leasable minerals program ( for which net receipts sharing is computed ) , which does not include all mining - related activities . the forest service had no comments on the draft . other differences are state - specific . for example , federal land in wyoming contains over twice as many producing coal leases than does state land . by law , blm must perform an economic evaluation of coal for leasing but not for oil and gas leasing . the scope of the regulatory agencies' responsibilities also differs from that of the federal program , as these agencies regulate mineral development on state , private , and in some cases , federal and other land . in their response to a draft of this report , officials in california's division of oil , gas , and geothermal resources commented that its regulatory scope is unique among the states , as about 95 percent of its workload involves administering laws and regulations on private and granted lands . we provided the department of the interior , the forest service , blm , and mms with a draft of this report . wyoming's state land and farm loan office and oil and gas conservation commission , new mexico's state land office and oil conservation division , and california's state lands commission and conservation department's division of oil , gas , and geothermal resources were also provided with a draft of this report . in written comments , the department of the interior and mms generally agreed with the contents of the report . ( see app . in written comments , wyoming's office of the governor acknowledged that the federal and state mineral leasing programs are different , but disagreed with our position that the costs cannot be meaningfully compared . 181 et seq. , as amended ) ( mla ) , revenues for federal onshore minerals , which include bonuses , rents , and royalties , are distributed as follows: 50 percent to the state in which the production occurred , 10 percent to the general treasury , and 40 percent to the reclamation fund . lands leased under other laws have different distribution requirements . in fiscal year 1996 , 41 states received a total of about $481 million in revenues from the development of federal onshore minerals . wyoming , new mexico , and california received about $206 million , $124 million , and $28 million , respectively . wyoming , new mexico , and california also manage mineral development on private and state - owned lands . in these states , revenues from state - owned land are used to fund public educational institutions . wyoming's bonus , rental , and royalty revenues from minerals on state - owned land in fiscal year 1996 were $29 million . in new mexico , these revenues from minerals on state land were $115 million . california's revenues from state - owned minerals onshore were $3 million .