sec . 924.11 ( c ) ) , such as crossbucks , flashing lights , or flashing lights and gates . as shown in figure 3.1 , the states obligated 69 percent of federal railroad crossing funds to install warning devices in fiscal year 1991 . active warning devices ( $108.2 ) other crossing improvements ( $38.4 ) funds obligated for warning devices ( 69% ) other funds ( 31% ) funds for active warning devices , such as flashing lights and gates , accounted for 71 percent of the funds obligated for these devices . fhwa's and the industry's analyses have shown that active warning devices are more effective than passive warning devices , such as crossbucks . for example , fhwa reported in 1989 that active warning devices reduced accident rates by at least 64 percent , and in some cases by as much as 97 percent . in addition , fhwa's 1994 annual report on highway safety improvement programs found that since 1974 , installing active warning devices had reduced rates for railroad crossing accidents that result in injuries or fatalities by 69 percent and fatal railroad crossing accident rates by 89 percent . grade separations accounted for nearly one - fifth of state obligations in fiscal year 1991 . the construction of these overpasses and underpasses effectively eliminates the risk of accidents . however , grade separations are more expensive than active warning devices , and accordingly their use is often limited . for example , in 1991 the states obligated $108 million in federal funds to install active warning devices , such as flashing lights or lights and gates , at 2,400 crossings . in that same year , the states obligated $42 million in federal funds to partially pay for grade separations at 75 crossings . because grade separations are costly , states often pay for them through federal - aid highway programs other than the section 130 program . the states' actions to close crossings reduce railroad crossing fatalities and accidents . although crossing closures eliminate the safety problem , this approach has raised intensive opposition at the local level . in 1992 , the federal railroad administrator recommended the closure of 25 percent of the nation's railroad crossings because the crossings were either redundant or unnecessary . reducing the number of railroad crossings is a goal also endorsed by dot , aar , aashto , the national association of regulatory and utility commissioners , and operation lifesaver . in 1994 , aashto found that the nation had two railroad crossings for every mile of track and that in heavily congested areas , the average approached 10 crossings every mile . aashto noted that many of these crossings were unnecessary and could be consolidated with little or no adverse impact on the traveling public . a closed crossing effectively eliminates the risk of motor vehicle accidents and fatalities . it also eliminates the future costs of maintaining the crossing or upgrading the crossing's protection when increased traffic volume necessitates greater protection . however , closing crossings often becomes a matter of considerable local debate . for example , in 1994 fra found that in 11 states , local opposition was the greatest impediment to closing crossings .