( see fig . as the figure shows , the share of superfund expenditures used for contractor cleanup work decreased between fiscal year 1996 and fiscal year 1997 , and again in fiscal year 1998 . epa officials could not explain these changes in detail because they had not analyzed superfund costs in this manner and were unaware of this decline until we presented the results of our analysis . similarly , epa officials were unaware of , and therefore did not have an explanation for , the changes in the other cost categories shown in figure 1 above . as shown in figure 3 , this breakdown varies substantially between regional personnel spending and headquarters personnel spending . over the 3-year period of our analysis , superfund personnel spending totaled about $722 million . of this , about $547 million was for regional personnel spending , and the remaining $175 million was for headquarters personnel spending . over this period , the breakdown between site - specific and non - site - specific personnel spending within the individual units ( headquarters and each of the regions ) remained relatively constant from year to year . however , we found that there was variation among the regions . for example , site - specific personnel spending for the 3-year period ranged from a low of 22 percent in one region to a high of about 33 percent in another region — a 50-percent difference between the lowest and highest regions . because epa headquarters does not analyze superfund personnel costs in terms of the amount of site - specific and non - site - specific spending , the meaning of these differences is unclear . in 1996 , epa implemented improvements to its superfund accounting system to better track superfund expenditures . this change has the effect of reducing the percentage of contractor cleanup work by about 1 percent from the level we had previously reported . to determine what activities were carried out with epa's cleanup support spending , particularly its non - site - specific spending , we used the ifms information . we categorized the spending by epa's budget action codes , which provided general activity descriptions for superfund spending under the more than 100 action codes . to obtain more specific information for epa's non - site - specific spending , we selected three regional offices — philadelphia , chicago , and kansas city — for sampling . among epa's regions , the first two had the highest non - site - specific spending and the third had the lowest , based on fiscal year 1997 data , which was the most recent information for which we had a breakdown of total support spending at the time we made our selection . we also selected the three epa headquarters units — the office of solid waste and emergency response , the office of administration and resources management , and the office of enforcement and compliance assurance — with the highest levels of superfund spending . we interviewed cognizant officials from the three regional offices and three headquarters units about the particular activities conducted under the various budget action codes for the non - site - specific spending , and obtained greater detail on the uses of this spending .