( see app . i for an overview of the mark - to - market process. ) behind original schedule . the interim regulations were published september 11 , 1998 , and became effective 30 days later . hud had originally expected to issue the interim regulations by august 1998 so that the final regulations could be issued in october 1998 . according to mark - to - market officials , now the final regulations are not expected to be published until 3 months after the appointment of the omhar director . to allow hud to work with paes , which will actually restructure the mortgages and rental assistance payments of eligible multifamily projects ( ยง513 ( a ) ( 1 ) ) . behind original schedule . hud published the request for qualifications ( rfq ) to solicit paes on august 17 , 1998 . hud had originally planned to publish the rfq in june 1998 in order to have the paes selected by august 1998 . hud will select the paes in two phases and , as of september 8 , 1998 , expected to complete the selection process by october 29 , 1998 . to familiarize the paes with the restructuring process and their responsibilities , which include determining owners' eligibility , determining rent levels , restructuring loans , underwriting new or modified loans , managing the closing process , distributing documents after closing , and servicing the loans . behind original schedule . the briefing sessions for paes will begin in october 1998 . as of september 8 , 1998 , the operating procedures manual was in draft form , but sections of the draft were expected to be ready for departmental clearance by september 11 , 1998 . ( continued ) to establish the obligations and requirements of the paes in developing mortgage restructuring and rental assistance sufficiency plans in accordance with the act ( ยง513 ( a ) ( 1 ) ) . also , to identify the eligible multifamily housing projects for which a pae is responsible and to clarify the duties that a pae will typically perform . hud will enter into portfolio restructuring agreements with the paes as soon as possible after they are selected . however , the time period for completing this process will depend on the length of time involved in negotiating the agreements . to instruct the field offices on their responsibilities , which include coordinating the flow of cases to paes and section 8 contract administrators , determining projects with section 516 violations that require enforcement action , and monitoring the performance of the paes . as of september 8 , 1998 , hud expected the briefing manuals to be completed by the end of september , so that the briefing sessions could commence in october 1998 , after the paes are selected . to obtain a favorable tax ruling regarding potential tax consequences for project owners whose mortgages are restructured .