app . ii describes the organization , roles , and missions of each of the five federal agencies and provides an overview of the activities they perform in relation to the international environmental agreements that were covered by our review. ) while the u.s. government's spending to address international environmental issues and concerns has increased significantly in recent decades , it is not a simple matter to precisely quantify this spending or to identify that portion of the spending attributable to or in some way related to the international agreements to which the united states has become a party . in large part , this is due to the fact that the united states has long been a leader in identifying and attempting to deal with environmental problems that have national , regional , and global significance . often the united states has taken action in the absence of international accords , while at the same time seeking to mobilize other members of the world community to address such problems in a concerted manner . as a result , many federal agencies established and administer environmental programs under legislative mandates and presidential directives that predate or have no direct connection with particular international agreements . because spending on these programs would likely occur even in the absence of international environmental accords , agency officials and others tend to view these programs as being related to and supporting these international agreements only indirectly and incidentally . one result of this view is that there is generally no mechanism within these agencies or elsewhere in the federal government for systematically tracking agencies' spending — other than voluntary or assessed contributions — that relates to and supports the objectives of particular international environmental agreements . consequently , there is no body of readily available statistical information concerning such spending , either on an agency - by - agency or on a governmentwide basis . such statistics must be generated , instead , on an ad hoc basis , relying on historical program spending data and the judgment of officials with knowledge of the ways in which their agencies' program activities relate to and support the objectives of particular international environmental accords . the total spending , exclusive of salaries and overhead , for the five agencies and 12 international environmental agreements covered by our survey amounted to $975.2 million during fiscal years 1993-95 . the largest share of the funding support for the 12 agreements covered was related directly or indirectly to the objectives and concerns of the united nations ( u.n. ) framework convention on climate change ( the framework convention ) . this share accounted for approximately 71 percent of the total spending . the framework convention was followed by the convention on biological diversity , which represented approximately 20 percent of the total spending , and by the international tropical timber agreement , which represented approximately 5 percent of the total . the remaining nine agreements together accounted for only about 4 percent of the total spending . ( app . iii shows the spending on the 12 agreements covered by our review and describes the general problem addressed by each agreement. )