additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . we noted that contractors have had some success in this area . they are negotiating discounts directly with the airlines and have been successful in getting reductions from full - fare rates . nevertheless , contractors could take additional actions to reduce the airfare costs they are incurring . the most significant action is obtaining nonrefundable tickets . a nonrefundable ticket is a ticket for which the purchase price will not be returned if the trip is canceled . however , the ticket can be exchanged for another for a small additional charge . nonrefundable tickets are generally less expensive and although the savings will depend on the individual circumstances — such as destination , ticket availability , ticket class , and the number of days the ticket is purchased in advance — they can be substantial . an internal audit report at pacific northwest national laboratory found that the savings on nonrefundable tickets were typically around 50 percent . specific examples that we identified had also shown significant savings . for example , at livermore one employee purchased a $1,602 refundable airline ticket to attend a conference while another employee purchased a $414 nonrefundable ticket the next day to the same conference . in another instance , an employee purchased a $473 refundable ticket , also to attend a conference , while another employee purchased a nonrefundable ticket a week later to go to the conference for $255 . however , the usage of nonrefundable tickets varied greatly among contractors . for example , livermore's travel data showed that about 75 percent of the tickets purchased by travelers were nonrefundable and sandia estimated that about 65 percent of its tickets were purchased on a nonrefundable basis . however , the percentage for los alamos was significantly lower . los alamos estimated that its nonrefundable ticket usage at less than 5 percent . the contractors' travel management staff said that contractor employees are responsible for selecting the flights and tickets that they want to use and that the contractor encourages , but does not require , the use of nonrefundable tickets . they added that employees often do not like to use nonrefundable tickets because their travel plans frequently change or are canceled . controlling other allowable travel costs that contractor employees incur could further reduce travel expenses . more frequent trips to russia have significantly contributed to this increase . the number of trips to russia increased 107 percent from fiscal year 1996 to fiscal year 1998 , and the cost of these trips has more than tripled . costs increased from about $2.2 million in fiscal year 1996 to about $6.7 million in fiscal year 1998 . according to contractor officials , one reason for the increase in foreign travel , particularly to russia , was that there is a greater emphasis on nuclear nonproliferation work abroad . doe contractors reported that most travel to domestic and foreign locations was for business purposes , that is , travel for purposes related to the mission of the facilities .