bu . 2,320 mil . bu . 10,103 mil . bu . 398 mil . bu . ( 2 ) what effect would lower loan rates have on the relationship between u.s. and world prices ? ( 3 ) how would a lower loan rate affect step 2 payments for cotton exports and what impact have recent changes in the timing of payments had on the program's effectiveness ? ( 4 ) what steps could be taken to make the peanut and sugar programs more market - oriented ? nonrecourse loans have long been the government's major price - support instrument and provide operating capital to producers of commodities , including cotton , rice , wheat , feedgrains , and oilseeds . producers store their commodities under loan until later in the marketing year , when prices are usually higher than they are at harvest . producers have the option either to repay their loans with interest at any time or , at the end of the loan period , to forfeit their commodities to the government and have their interest payments forgiven . the government has “no recourse” but to accept the commodities as payment . in the past , when market conditions would have led to u.s. prices falling below the loan rates , the loan rates supported u.s. prices . this happened because producers preferred to forfeit their commodities to the government rather than sell them at lower market prices that would have given them less than the face value of the loans . under these market conditions , u.s. prices were supported and the government accumulated large and costly stocks . for cotton , rice , wheat , feedgrains , and oilseeds , the congress added marketing loan provisions to nonrecourse loans to eliminate the price floors created by the loan rates while protecting producers' income from the effects of low market prices . the intent was to minimize loan forfeitures and the accumulation of government stocks and to lower u.s. prices to levels closer to world prices . the marketing loan provisions allow producers to pay back nonrecourse loans at alternative repayment rates when these rates are lower than the loan rates . to establish alternative repayments rates , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) first determines a proxy for the world price for each commodity . these proxies for world prices are based on price data obtained from international markets for cotton and rice and from major u.s. terminal markets for wheat , feedgrains , and oilseeds . next , usda adjusts the proxies for world prices ( these proxies are hereafter referred to as world prices ) for quality differences and for transportation costs to arrive at the relevant alternative repayment rates . for minor oilseeds , ( such as flaxseed , sunflower seed , and canola ) these rates are set weekly and are known as regionally calculated prices . when alternative repayment rates are below the loan rates , producers can repay their nonrecourse loans at these lower rates .