( app . ii provides statistics on the number and percent of nonfederal sites accepted and rejected for further consideration after site inspection. ) epa officials do not expect to find in the future very large , heavily contaminated sites equivalent to love canal , which entered the superfund program early in its history . however , the officials believe that contamination at newly discovered sites is generally not less severe than at previously reported sites — just less obvious . the revision was effective in march 1991 . during the transition to the revised system , sites were evaluated through the site inspection stage using the original evaluation system . however , epa decided to use the new system to make final decisions about placing these sites on the priorities list . in october 1991 , epa began to reevaluate these 6,467 sites , which it referred to as its evaluation backlog . reevaluation could include collecting additional site information as well as limited sampling . as of the close of fiscal year 1993 , epa had completed this process for about 1,600 of the 6,467 sites . fewer sites are being reported to epa for evaluation , but site inspection results indicate that new sites reaching the site inspection stage are as likely to have contamination requiring a superfund cleanup as those inspected in the past . the number of sites reported annually has been declining since fiscal year 1985 . ( see fig . in fiscal year 1993 , 1,159 sites were added to the inventory — 29 percent less than the prior year and 68 percent less than in fiscal year 1985 . epa attributed the decline since 1985 to the fact that many states now have their own superfund programs . according to epa site assessment officials , states are reluctant to report new sites , preferring instead to manage the cleanup themselves . epa region i site assessment officials suggested that states generally report sites that present challenging enforcement or cleanup problems . the percentage of sites that epa believes warrant further consideration after completing the site inspection has been fairly steady for the last 10 years . ( see fig . from program inception through fiscal year 1993 , 43 percent of the 17,556 sites inspected were considered hazardous enough to need further consideration for the priorities list . in fiscal year 1993 , 43 percent of the 725 sites inspected were also considered for further action . earlier site discoveries more often included sites where the hazards were visible , such as barrels of hazardous waste above ground . sites that are being discovered and reported now , according to epa officials , are those with less obvious — but equally serious — problems , such as groundwater or drinking water contamination . recent estimates of the future size of the superfund workload have differed . in congressional testimony in february 1994 , epa forecast the smallest increase — 1,700 new sites . in a report dated january 1994 , cbo predicted 3,300 new sites through 2027 , although it said that a wide range of additions was possible .