as shown in fig . 2.3 , about two - thirds ( 67 percent ) of western's preference customers are small utilities . about 6 percent of western's preference customers are in the medium category and another 6 percent are large . about half ( 47 percent ) of southwestern's preference customers are small utilities . in this regard , federal hydropower assets could be grouped in several different ways . first , a pma itself could be sold , including any transmission assets and / or the right to sell the hydropower generated at the bureau's or the corps' hydropower plants . in a second alternative , a pma , including its transmission assets and its right to sell power , as well as the bureau's or the corps' powerplants could be divested . in a third , more complicated alternative , a pma and all of the aforementioned items as well as the remaining assets related to the water projects ( eg , the dams and the reservoirs ) could be divested . an alternative to selling an entire pma and any related hydropower assets could be to package the assets of a specific project for sale . for instance , bureau officials in sacramento , california , opined that the central valley project could be sold to the state of california because the project is contained fully in that state and complements the existing water project that is managed by the state . another option could be to sell all the federal hydropower plants on a river system together to preserve operating efficiencies because the releases of water from upstream facilities to downstream ones could be more easily coordinated under one - party ownership — an important consideration for flood control and other water management purposes . along with defining the specific assets to be divested , policymakers would have to consider the explicit and implicit liabilities borne by the government and which of those liabilities to transfer to a buyer . as a policy matter , the government may want to retain certain liabilities associated with the assets being divested or place specific restrictions on their postdivestiture use of these assets . however , policymakers would need to consider that assets that are sold with many or relatively onerous restrictions ( from the viewpoint of a prospective purchaser ) or assets that are in poor condition are correspondingly less attractive and would likely result in lower sales proceeds than otherwise . while the government may still choose to place restrictions or to assign or retain certain liabilities , the financial consequences in terms of the sale price should be assessed . many combinations of assets and liabilities could be grouped for sale . both defining and valuing the specific liabilities that the federal government could retain are important because the government may be in a better position to bear certain risks . in general , the government could receive larger sales proceeds by retaining certain liabilities because a purchaser could substantially discount its bid if the purchaser would assume the financial risks associated with those liabilities .