additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . this estimate includes many vacant industrial sites . our visits to the four states confirmed the existence of numerous former industrial sites that were once productive but now sit abandoned and probably contaminated: the state of illinois has estimated that 5,000 abandoned or inactive industrial / commercial sites exist throughout the state . in chicago alone , an estimated 18 percent of the industrial acreage is unused . this estimate includes 1,500 acres spread among 2,000 sites . one boston neighborhood , located around dudley street , covers just 1-1 / 2 square miles but has within its boundaries 54 state - identified hazardous waste sites . a regional planning group study of union county , new jersey , identified 185 separate sites containing more than 2,500 acres of reusable land in the county , all zoned for commercial or industrial development . towns throughout the monongahela valley in pennsylvania , once a major steel - making center , contain hundreds of acres of land filled with vacant steel mills and other manufacturing facilities . as states and localities attempt to redevelop their abandoned industrial sites , they have faced several obstacles , including the possibility of contamination and the associated liability for cleanup . this situation is caused largely by federal and state environmental laws and court decisions that impose or imply potentially far - reaching liability . the uncertain liability has encouraged businesses to build in previously undeveloped nonurban areas — called “greenfields” — where they feel more confident that no previous industrial use has occurred . lenders , environmental attorneys , local officials , and community development officials in the areas we visited and the documents we reviewed reported that the general uncertainty about the costs of environmental cleanup and who will pay those costs has delayed the redevelopment of industrial properties . a lending official with a large pittsburgh - based bank , for example , stated that little redevelopment has occurred on the former steel mill sites because of environmental concerns . in some cases , the bank has chosen not to foreclose on properties because it does not want to assume cleanup and associated liabilities . furthermore , some owners have preferred to keep properties idle rather than sell them and take the risk that the environmental assessments required upon sale will detect contamination that they will have to clean up .