vi . cerclis contains information on the phase of cleanup reached by each operable unit at each npl site . these cleanup phases include , in chronological order , the start and completion of a site study , the selection of a remedy , the start and completion of a remedial design , and the start and completion of a remedial action . cerclis also indicates whether all remedies have been constructed at sites . to test the reliability of cerclis data regarding the cleanup phase reached at npl sites , we selected a random sample of 98 npl sites that had not reached the “construction complete” stage as of september 30 , 1997 , and sought confirmation from epa's regional offices of the most recent remedial activity reported by cerclis for each operable unit at the sites . we excluded sites at which construction was complete at all operable units because epa's inspector general had recently confirmed that the status of these sites has been accurately reported by epa . we selected from cerclis the most recent remedial action for 270 operable units at the 98 sampled sites . we requested that the regions provide us with documentation to support these actions . we considered the documentation provided to be adequate to confirm actions at 95 percent ( 93 ) of the sites . regions reported that at five sites cerclis incorrectly recorded the status of cleanup work . at two of these sites , one or more operable units had not reached the cleanup stage recorded in cerclis ; at two other sites , an operable unit had progressed beyond the stage indicated by cerclis ; and at the fifth site , an action that was recorded as a remedial action in cerclis was actually a removal action . regional information management personnel attributed these errors to data entry problems and agreed to correct the database . on the basis of our sample results , we estimate that the cleanup status of npl sites reported by cerclis , as of september 30 , 1997 , was accurate for 95 percent ( plus or minus 4.4 percent ) of these sites . our estimate of accuracy is limited to the cerclis data showing the status of cleanup work . more sites are expected to be ready to begin cleanup actions requiring expenditures from the superfund in fiscal year 1998 than can be started with the funds allocated for new actions . as of june 5 , 1998 , epa had approved about $33 million in funding for new cleanup actions at 8 sites and had identified 38 other sites that could begin cleanup actions in fiscal year 1998 at an estimated cost of $230 million . epa officials expect that about $100 million will be available to fund new cleanup actions by the end of the fiscal year , leaving a shortfall of about $163 million . epa officials believe that $100 million will fund cleanup actions at up to 20 sites ; the exact number will be determined by the cost of the individual projects selected . according to our analysis of epa's data , there could be at least 26 sites where new cleanup actions cannot be started in fiscal year 1998 because funds will not be available .