we clarified this in our report . doe said that it was important to mention that the revised project schedule actually accelerated by 2 to 3 years the milestone for beginning to treat high - level waste as set forth in the tri - party agreement . we modified the report to clarify that some milestones would be delayed while one milestone , the date to start high - level waste processing , would be advanced . regarding the changes in cost estimates , doe said that the two approaches involved processing plants of substantially different useful lives and , therefore , capacity , which would ultimately bring down the unit cost of operation . we presented processing quantities and costs only for phase i because the current contract is only for phase i and bnfl intends to recover all of its costs during phase i operations . costs related to phase ii operations are not known . doe also said the cost estimates for phase i should be compared on a present - value basis because the two time frames are quite different . our analysis does compare the two costs on a present - value basis , in constant fiscal year 1997 dollars . doe disagreed with our statement that direct federal funding of the project may not significantly increase the government's level of risk . doe said that direct federal funding would be accompanied by a significant increase in the government's level of risk . however , it is not clear how much of an increase in risk there is between private debt which is in effect guaranteed by the government and direct federal funding of the project . doe has had difficulty managing other large projects . our point was that doe needs to conduct such an analysis in order to ensure that it has a cost - effective approach to funding the project . doe said that this analysis will be accomplished during the next phase of the project . doe said that our reference to a 1993 study by independent project analysis , inc. , was incomplete because we did not mention the reason why cost growth on fixed - price contracts averaged 75 percent . the study found that fixed - price contracts were used on poorly defined projects , which led to changes during construction contributing to increased costs and schedules . doe asserted that a similar condition does not exist on the hanford tank waste contract . we added to our report the causes for cost growth identified in the study . however , we disagree with doe's assertion that similar conditions do not exist on the hanford project . instead , the project risks and uncertainties we discuss in this report increase the chances that the hanford tank waste project could also experience cost and schedule increases . rough estimates are presented as precise numbers . cost projections for two of the contract alternatives doe considered in its analysis are based on what are called “rough order of magnitude” estimates . the margin of error for these estimates is plus or minus 40 percent , meaning that the actual cost could be up to 40 percent less than or greater than the estimate presented .