iii. ) to respond to your request , we met with officials from the park service's headquarters office and the philadelphia and denver park service regional offices and from acadia national park , colonial national historical park , delaware water gap national recreation area , and rocky mountain national park . we also obtained and reviewed pertinent documentation from these officials . although the particular park units that were selected may not be representative of the entire national park system , the selection covers the various types , sizes , and geographical locations of park units to show problems relating to the maintenance backlog issues . the national park system has 376 units . these units have , among other things , over 16,000 permanent structures , 8,000 miles of roads , 1,500 bridges and tunnels , 5,000 housing units , about 1,500 water and waste systems , 200 radio systems , and over 400 dams . according to the park service , these facilities are valued at over $35 billion . the proper care and maintenance of the national parks and their supporting infrastructure are essential to the continued use and enjoyment of our great national treasures by this and future generations . however , for years park service officials have highlighted the agency's inability to keep up with its maintenance needs . in this connection , park service officials and others have often cited a continuing buildup of unmet maintenance needs as evidence of deteriorating conditions throughout the national park system . the accumulation of these unmet needs has become commonly referred to by the park service as its “maintenance backlog.” the reported maintenance backlog has increased significantly over the past 10 years — from $1.9 billion in 1987 to about $6.1 billion in 1997 . recently , concerns about the maintenance backlog within the national park service , as well as other federal land management agencies , have led the congress to provide significant new sources of funding . these additional sources of funding are , in part , aimed at helping the agencies address their maintenance problems . for example , it is anticipated that new revenues from the 3-year recreational fee demonstration program will provide the park service over $100 million annually . we also interviewed headquarters officials to identify actions currently underway by the department of the interior and the park service to better manage the maintenance and construction program . we performed our work from may 1997 through march 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . william temmler the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .