( see figs . at both of these parks , the managers also cited damage to natural resources , including damage to vegetation and highly fragile desert soil from visitors venturing off established trails and damage to native plants from the illegal use of off - road vehicles . at gettysburg national military park , the damage included the deterioration of historic structures and cultural landscapes , looting of civil war era archeological sites , destruction of native plants , and deterioration of park documents estimated to be about 100 years old , which contain information on the early administrative history of the park . figure 8 shows these documents , which are improperly stored in the park historian's office . conditions in the national parks are deteriorating . in our 1995 report on the future of the park system , we documented the declining state of services for visitors to the parks , as well as the degradation of many natural , cultural , and historic resources in the park system . overall , national park service officials estimate that the agency needs more than $4 billion to perform needed maintenance and properly develop the national park system . among the challenges facing the national park system are threats that have damaged or have the potential to damage the parks' natural or cultural resources . these threats can originate either outside of or within park boundaries . threats that originate outside of a park are termed external threats and include such things as the sound of airplanes flying overhead or the sight of urban encroachment , both of which can disrupt the solitude of remote parks . threats that originate within a park are termed internal threats and include such activities as heavy visitation , vandalism , looting , or the growth of nonnative plant or animal species that degrade a park's resources . preventing or mitigating these threats and their impact is at the core of the agency's mission to preserve and protect the parks' resources . the park service has long been concerned about the threats to the resources under its jurisdiction . most of these threats fell into one of five broad categories: the impact of private inholdings or commercial development within the parks , the results of encroachment by nonnative wildlife or plants , the damage caused by illegal activities , the adverse effects of normal visits to the parks , and the unintended adverse effects of the agency's or park managers' actions ( see fig . the majority of the threats affected natural resources , such as plants and wildlife , while the remainder threatened cultural resources , such as artifacts , historic sites , or historic buildings . ( see app . i for a summary of the threats in each category at each of the eight parks. ) overall , the park managers we visited said that the most serious threats facing the parks were shortages in staffing , funding , and resource knowledge . the managers identified 48 additional threats in these categories . we classified these as indirect threats to cultural and natural resources because , according to the managers , the shortages in these areas were responsible for many of the conditions that directly threaten park resources . ( see app .