( app . i lists some of the initiatives that are in progress or planned. ) coast guard officials told us that before the agency can centrally manage its inventory , they must complete the following long - term initiatives in the logistics master plan: develop a fully integrated , real - time computer system to track and consolidate inventory and maintenance information for the cutters . create a single organization to integrate the maintenance guidance , technical , and supply functions now performed by headquarters and the two inventory supply centers . this appendix provides ( 1 ) a brief description of the major initiatives related to central management of the coast guard's inventories and ( 2 ) the status of the initiatives that were scheduled for completion in fiscal years 1993 and 1994 . the coast guard relocated the brooklyn , new york , supply center to baltimore in 1993 , as planned . first , does the coast guard have the systems needed to effectively manage its inventory of spare and repair parts and supplies ? second , if not , what initiatives does the coast guard have under way to improve its inventory management ? to establish and manage its inventories , the coast guard must comply with the criteria contained in federal property management regulations and with the department of transportation's ( dot ) policy . federal property management regulations state that each agency shall establish and maintain control of inventories to ensure that total costs will be kept to a minimum consistent with the needs of the agency's programs . dot's policy states that inventories will be established and maintained only when it is more costly to purchase items on a case - by - case basis or when the items are so critical that a delay in delivery would negatively affect an agency's mission . the policy also states that inventories must be managed in an effective manner to ensure that timely and adequate support is rendered and that optimum inventory levels are maintained . within the coast guard , supply centers located at curtis bay and baltimore , maryland , stock about 18,000 different parts , including mechanical , electrical , radar , communication , computer , and hull items ; these parts are valued at about $140 million . in addition , the coast guard authorizes each cutter to maintain a parts and supplies inventory that ranges in value from a few thousand dollars to over a million dollars , depending on the cutter's size , missions , and operating area . however , individual purchases are restricted to established price thresholds that vary , depending on the cutter's class ; the thresholds range up to $5,000 for large cutters . ( table ii.1 lists the 41 different classes of coast guard cutters. ) according to coast guard officials , this system will be the cornerstone of its centralized fleet logistics system . the coast guard implemented the system on 1 of its 210-foot cutters ( a class of 16 vessels ) , 1 of its 270-foot cutters ( a class of 13 vessels ) , and 1 of its 378-foot cutters ( a class of 12 vessels ) in 1994 .