omb circular no . a - 129 describes management direction for federal debt collection . during fiscal year 1993 through fiscal year 1998 , fns' assessments and court actions resulted in $72.7 million in financial penalties and $5.0 million in interest against storeowners for violating the food stamp program's regulations . furthermore , fns and the courts collected $11.5 million from storeowners , and fns waived , adjusted , or wrote off $49 million . ( see table 1. ) table 1 shows the following for the 6-year period , fiscal year 1993 through fiscal year 1998: fns and the courts collected only a small percentage of the financial penalties assessed against storeowners . during the 6-year period , the total penalties were $88.7 million , but they collected only $11.5 million , or about 13 percent . fns reduced storeowners' penalty debt through adjustments , waivers , or write - offs by several times the dollar amount of debt that it collected annually . for example , debt reductions averaged $8.2 million each year , while collections averaged $1.9 million . according to fns , adjustments are changes in the amount of the original debt that should have been charged ; waivers are relief from some or all of the debt ; and write - offs occur when an agency determines that a debt is uncollectible after all appropriate debt collection tools have been used . fns had large debt reductions because it was unable to collect most of the financial penalties assessed against storeowners . the dollar amount of penalty debt outstanding more than doubled from the end of year fiscal year 1993 to the end of fiscal year 1998 ( from $12.3 million to $28.2 million ) , while the amount of collections increased slightly , from $1.8 million to $2.0 million . as table 1 shows , during fiscal year 1993 through fiscal year 1998 , fns reduced financial penalty debts for storeowners by $49 million . omb circular no . a - 129 instructs federal agencies to establish effective write - off and closeout procedures for uncollectible accounts in order to permit agencies to focus their efforts on delinquent accounts with the greatest potential for collection . as discussed in greater detail later in this report , fns has an opportunity to improve its debt collection , which , in turn , could potentially reduce the amount of debt that is written off as uncollectible . fns' accounts receivable records classify financial penalties against storeowners into the following seven types: retailer / wholesaler fine — unauthorized use . a storeowner not authorized to participate in the program accepts and / or redeems food stamp benefits . civil money penalty — transfer of ownership . a storeowner transfers ownership of a store during a period when the storeowner was disqualified from the program . court - ordered restitution . a storeowner misused food stamps , and federal , state , or local court actions imposed a financial penalty . retailer / wholesaler fiscal claim . a storeowner misused food stamps by , for example , selling nonfood items to program recipients . civil money penalty — hardship .