arizona and michigan do not . for indian gaming , nevada's enforcement authority varies according to the compact . of the five states , only michigan , which does not certify or license gaming employees or establishments , cannot suspend or revoke any employee's license . all five states can ultimately suspend or shut down a gaming operation , either directly or through an injunction directing closure . in outlining their views on the elements critical to regulating gaming , the heads of the gaming agencies in all five states stressed the importance of ensuring the integrity of gaming . from their perspective , two critical elements emerge . all agree on the importance of accounting , administrative , and internal controls , such as audits of the financial statements , to assist the regulators and casinos in monitoring gaming operations . four of the five view the licensing or certification process , which includes background investigations of individuals and companies , as critical . they noted that this process helps to identify individuals and companies having criminal records or involvement with organized crime in order to keep such elements out of the states' gaming operations . state officials provided a variety of other critical elements . for example , nevada and arizona noted the importance of having the regulatory body independent from the industry regulated . washington and michigan cited the importance of a cooperative relationship between the tribe and state . new jersey pointed out that it is important to have a laboratory to evaluate and approve the sophisticated electronic equipment and devices used in the gaming industry and to monitor changes and advances in technology . we provided a draft of this report to the commission and the gaming agencies in the five states we visited as well as to the tribes whose gaming operations we visited . the commission's director of contracts and audits provided several technical comments , which we incorporated into this report . he also pointed out that we did not mention the role of the tribal gaming commissions , whose role the commission views as significant . we recognize that the tribes have a regulatory role that is based on what is negotiated in their compacts , as stated in the background section of our report . however , the major objectives of our review were to provide information on the commission's organization , staffing , funding , and responsibilities from 1991 to 1997 and similar information for five states' gaming agencies . we obtained comments from each of the five states' gaming agencies . the arizona department of gaming ( see app . viii ) , the deputy director of the michigan gaming control board , and the chairman of the nevada gaming control board provided technical comments , which we incorporated , as appropriate , into our report . new jersey's division of gaming enforcement ( see app . ix ) , new jersey's casino control commission , and the washington state gambling commission indicated that the report was accurate .