additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . all other rias compared two or more alternatives to the baseline . figure 1 shows the results of our examination of the number of alternatives that epa considered in the 23 rias . a major goal of rias is to develop and organize information on benefits and costs to clarify trade - offs among alternatives . epa's guidance states that rias should provide decisionmakers with a comprehensive assessment of the implications of alternatives . epa officials acknowledged that it is not always clear in the rias which alternatives were actually analyzed . they stated that some alternatives are excluded before the benefit - cost analyses are performed because of noneconomic reasons , such as statutory language that precludes epa from using certain approaches . in our 1984 report , we recommended that future rias prominently include executive summaries that ( 1 ) clearly recognize all benefits and costs , even those that cannot be quantified ; ( 2 ) identify a range of values for benefits and costs subject to uncertainty , as well as the sources of uncertainty ; and ( 3 ) compare all feasible alternatives . while 13 of the 23 rias that we examined included executive summaries , some of these rias only briefly discussed the types of information that we recommended they contain . for example , the executive summary for the ria on the regulation for national emissions standards for coke ovens contained a limited discussion of the uncertainties underlying the analysis , and the executive summary for the ria on the operating permits program's regulation included only two sentences on the three alternatives that epa considered . in contrast , the executive summary for the ria supporting the regulation on phasing out ozone - depleting chemicals presented a relatively thorough discussion of the results of the benefit - cost analysis . for example , it included a range of cost estimates , qualitative and quantitative benefit estimates , discussions of scientific and economic uncertainties , and estimated benefits and costs for baseline conditions and three alternatives . the council is chaired by epa's deputy administrator . although epa's other program offices are also responsible for preparing rias , we limited our review to the rias prepared by the office of air and radiation because this office is primarily responsible for implementing the requirements of the 1990 amendments . we reviewed executive orders 12866 and 12291 and epa's and the office of management and budget's guidance on the preparation of rias under these executive orders . from those documents , we identified the key components of rias and reviewed the 23 selected rias for their handling of these components . we also discussed issues affecting the clarity of rias with officials of the office of air and radiation and office of policy , planning , and evaluation .