each reviewer was to independently review the proposals . the nasa technical manager at the field center was required to resolve differences and obtain a consensus on the merit of the proposal . in a further document providing “guidelines for evaluators,” nasa stated that a scoring range of 90 to 100 percent should be interpreted as equivalent in quality to the top 10 percent of all nasa proposals for comparable r&d . a score between 80 and 89 percent signified an above average proposal . of the 21 winning proposals , 11 were considered above average , and 8 were judged as being among the top 10 percent of all nasa proposals for comparable r&d . nsf identified five criteria to which approximately equal consideration was given . these criteria included ( 1 ) the scientific / engineering quality and ( 2 ) the potential for commercial applications and the success of past commercialization efforts . if a high percentage of the ideas are originating with small businesses rather than with research institutions , this finding would raise questions about the need for the program . on the other hand , if a high percentage of ideas are originating with research institutions , this finding would suggest that the program was achieving the first step in moving ideas from research institutions to small businesses . if the program is effective in moving ideas from research institutions to small businesses , then the next logical question concerns whether their collaboration is effective in moving them to the market place . this question can be approached from two directions: ( 1 ) short - term views of how well the collaboration is working in general and ( 2 ) long - term data on actual commercialization . information on how well the collaboration is working can be obtained in the near future . in particular , it would be useful to know how the small businesses rated the contribution made by their research partners to the research effort . since most of the companies had not completed even the first phase of their sttr award at the time of this report , such information was not available , but it will be obtainable in the next year or two . information on actual commercial outcomes will require a greater amount of time before it can be obtained . the relative roles of the research institution and the small business as the source of the technology bear directly on the need for the sttr program . generally , 5 to 9 years are needed to turn an initial concept into a marketable product . because one important difference between the two programs is that sttr makes a small business / research institution collaboration mandatory , the question arises whether the sbir program could accomplish the objective of transferring technology from research institutions to the private sector without the mandatory collaboration . the rationale for the sttr program tends to assume that such collaborations were relatively rare in the sbir program . however , as noted above , nih's program manager told us that , in an sbir survey undertaken by nih several years ago , collaboration between small businesses and universities was already evident in well over half of nih's sbir projects .