we disagree . we took several actions to help ensure that our model was methodologically sound . initially , we contracted with a well - known expert in modeling the international trade of agricultural commodities and with a prominent agricultural economist to work with us in developing the model . then , in december 1999 , we sent our proposed model to four outside academicians who specialize in agricultural economics and international trade economics and revised the model in response to their comments . we also sent the proposed model to the department at that time , but the department did not provide comments . finally , our process for obtaining agency comments on draft reports served as a last check of our methodology . in response to these comments , we adjusted our model to more fully account for certain transportation costs in our final estimates . second , the department stated that documentation of the economic model was inadequate . we disagree . we included two appendixes in the draft report that provided detailed information about the model . while we believe that our model was adequately documented , the department suggested some useful clarifications that we incorporated . third , the department stated that in numerous places the model's results are inconsistent with our description of the model or alternative data sources . for example , the department disagrees with our model's finding that hfcs producers would experience few economic losses if the sugar program were eliminated . we continue to believe that this finding is accurate . recent price data show that while hfcs producers benefited from the sugar program in the 1980s and early 1990s , the domestic hfcs and sugar markets have since been decoupled because of domestic price , cost , and market conditions . after thoroughly examining this and each of the department's other concerns about our model's results and discussing them with experts outside gao , we continue to believe that the model's results are reasonable . see appendix vi for the department's written comments and our responses . the american sugar alliance also disagreed with the draft report's analysis . its concerns also fell into three general areas . first , the alliance stated that our methodology for estimating the sugar program's cost to users was flawed because our model used world prices of raw sugar that did not reflect each country's cost of production — the alliance asserted that our model's world prices were distorted by , among other things , subsidies provided by other countries and differences in labor and environmental standards . this is consistent with the fact that these countries are large producers of sugarcane and exporters of sugar and can harvest several annual crops , called ratoons , from one planting of sugarcane . therefore , there is limited acreage adjustment to price fluctuations in the short run . these low elasticities are largely the result of the historical policy of acreage allotment . the own - price supply elasticities for sugar beet production are generally not as inelastic as they are for sugarcane , except for the former soviet union ( 0.002 ) .