all projects ( i.e. , proposed projects , projects under development , operational systems , infrastructure , and management and technical support activities ) were not included in a single systems investment portfolio . the following are examples of these steps . irs created an executive - level investment review board , chaired by the associate commissioner for modernization , for selecting , controlling and evaluating all of irs' information technology investments . irs developed initial and revised sets of decision criteria used in the summer and fall of 1995 , as part of its resource allocation and investment review to make additional changes in information technology resource allocations for remaining fiscal year 1996 funds and planned 1997 spending . this review included only tsm projects under development . it did not address operational systems , infrastructure , or management and technical support activities . the treasury department created a modernization management board to review and validate high - risk , high - cost tsm investments and to set policy and strategy for irs modernization effort . irs is considering the use of a “project readiness review” as an additional investment review board control mechanism for gauging project readiness to proceed with spending . irs has developed an investment evaluation review handbook designed to assess projected costs and benefits against actual results . the handbook has been used on four tsm projects and five additional reviews are scheduled to be completed within the next year . the completed reviews contain explicit descriptions of problems encountered in developing these systems . the reviews make specific recommendations for management and technical process changes to improve future results . specific recommendations pertain to strengthening project direction and decision - making . many reflect concerns that we have raised in past reviews . irs has adopted an accepted industry standard for configuration management . it developed and distributed its configuration management plan template , which identifies the elements needed when constructing a configuration management plan . in april 1996 , enterprisewide configuration management policies and procedures were established . irs also plans to obtain contractor support to develop , implement , and maintain a vigorous configuration management program . irs has prepared a security concept of operations and a disaster recovery and contingency plan . irs has developed a test and evaluation master plan for tsm . irs plans to develop implementation and enforcement policies for the plan . irs developed a business case handbook that includes decision criteria on costs , benefits , and risks . it is reassessing the business cases , which were developed on the tsm projects , using the handbook . results are planned to be used by the investment review board to assist in making funding decisions for fiscal year 1997 . the investment evaluation reviews were presented to the investment review board and disseminated to other irs managers . irs is defining roles , responsibilities , and processes for incorporating investment evaluation review recommendations at the project and process levels . these are positive steps and indicate a willingness to address many of the weaknesses raised in our past reports and testimonies . but , as noted in treasury's report on tsm , the investment process is not yet complete .