but time is short . should the pace at which faa addresses its year 2000 issues not quicken , and critical faa systems not be year 2000 compliant and therefore not be ready for reliable operation on january 1 of that year , the agency's capability in several essential areas — including the monitoring and controlling of air traffic — could be severely compromised . this could result in the temporary grounding of flights until safe aircraft control can be assured . avoiding such emergency measures will require stronger , more active oversight than faa has demonstrated in the past . our report being released today makes a number of specific recommendations to increase the likelihood that faa systems will be year 2000 compliant on january 1 of that year . in summary , we recommend that the secretary of transportation direct that the administrator , faa , take whatever action is necessary to expedite overdue awareness and assessment activities . at a minimum , this would include issuing a final faa year 2000 plan providing the year 2000 program manager with the authority to enforce year 2000 policies and outlining faa's strategy for addressing the date change ; assessing how its major business lines and the aviation industry would be affected if the year 2000 problem were not corrected in time and using these results to help rank the agency's year 2000 activities ; completing inventories of all information systems and their components , completing assessments of all inventoried systems to determine criticality and whether the system will be converted , replaced , or retired ; determining priorities for system conversion and replacement based on establishing plans for addressing identified date dependencies ; developing plans for validating and testing all converted or replaced crafting realistic contingency plans for all business lines to ensure the continuity of critical operations ; and developing a reliable cost estimate based on a comprehensive inventory and completed assessments of the various systems' criticality , and how their needs for modification will be addressed . officials of both faa and the department of transportation generally agreed with our findings , conclusions , and recommendations . faa's cio stated that faa recognizes the importance of addressing the year 2000 problem and plans to implement our recommendations . this concludes my statement , and i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittees may have at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . these are at least fourfold . first , lockheed martin , currently the host software support contractor , will be responsible for porting the existing host operating system and application software to the new hardware . this software conversion requires extensive testing to ensure that air traffic control operations are not affected . unexpected problems in testing and certifying the new system for use in real - time operations may also become apparent . second , the interim host will have to be deployed concurrently with faa's new display system replacement ( dsr ) , compounding the risk of delays and problems .