this concludes my statement . i would be glad to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary , visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . effective it investment management is predicated on answering one basic question: is the organization doing the “right thing” by investing specified time and resources in a given project or system ? the clinger - cohen act and omb guidance together provide an effective it investment management framework for answering this question . among other things , they set requirements for 1. identifying and analyzing alternative system solutions , 2. developing reliable estimates of the alternatives' respective costs and benefits and investing in the most cost beneficial alternative , and 3. to the maximum extent practical , structuring major projects into a series of increments to ensure that each increment constitutes a wise investment . customs did not satisfy any of these requirements for ace . first , customs did not identify and evaluate a full range of alternatives to its defined ace solution before commencing development activities . for example , customs did not consider how ace would relate to another treasury - proposed system for processing import trade data , known as the international trade data system ( itds ) , including considering the extent to which itds should be used to satisfy needed import processing functionality . initiated in 1995 as a project to develop a coordinated , governmentwide system for the collection , use , and dissemination of trade data , the itds project is headed by the treasury deputy assistant secretary for regulatory , tariff and trade enforcement . the system is expected to reduce the burden federal agencies place on organizations by requiring that they respond to duplicative data requests . treasury intends for the system to serve as the single point for collecting , editing , and validating trade data as well as collecting and accounting for trade revenue . at the time of our review of ace , these functions were also planned for ace . similarly , customs did not evaluate different ace architectural designs , such as the use of a mainframe - based versus client / server - based hardware architecture . also , customs did not evaluate alternative development approaches , such as acquisition versus in - house development . in short , customs committed to and began building ace without knowing whether it had chosen the most cost - effective alternative and approach . second , customs did not develop a reliable life cycle cost estimate for the approach it selected . sei has developed a method for project managers to use to determine the reliability of project cost estimates .