what can be done to minimize such risks ? first , noaa and nws management need to be vigilant to identify new problems with awips software development . new software and wfo - advanced must be fully tested to ensure that they are up to production quality and will not cause complications when integrated with other awips software . second , we believe that noaa needs to renegotiate as quickly as possible the contract for awips builds 4 through 6 . while noaa officials expect no major cost or schedule changes , this is not a guarantee ; noaa must exercise close oversight of this process . another important element of the weather service modernization is the acquisition of geostationary operational environmental satellites ( goes ) . these satellites are uniquely positioned to be able to observe the development of severe weather , such as hurricanes and thunderstorms , and provide information allowing forecasters to issue timely warnings . satellites in the current series will , however , begin to reach the end of their useful lives within 5 years ; noaa is now planning to procure replacements , which will be very similar to the current satellites . at issue , mr. chairman , is the type of satellite system to build for the longer term , especially in light of noaa's budget , which is likely to remain constrained in the immediate years ahead . our report on both short - and long - term satellite replacements was released last month . in brief , we found noaa's approach for the near term reasonable , although we recommended that the agency clarify its policy for replacing partially failed satellites and backing up planned launches . for the longer term , we concluded that changing the goes system design offers many potential benefits: improved performance , lower costs , and more closely meeting the needs of forecasters . several new approaches have been suggested in recent years , by government , academic , and industry experts ; many include technologies unavailable when the present series of satellites was designed . these approaches have pros and cons ; all options would require careful engineering analysis before an informed decision about the future of the goes program can be made . our concern centers on noaa's delay in conducting such analyses and developing specific proposals . at present , noaa anticipates beginning its follow - up program in 2003 at the earliest . given that developing a new satellite takes up to 10 years , deferring a start until 2003 likely means that noaa will have to rely on its current , early - 1980s - design satellites until about 2013 . mr. chairman , given the range of options that exist for a significantly improved goes system , the congress may wish to evaluate the costs and benefits of different approaches to the timing , funding , and scope of the follow - up program . this could include a potential role for the national aeronautics and space administration's advanced spacecraft technology programs . in summary , we see clear benefits in the national weather service modernization — improved forecasts and warnings .