the chair agreed . in addition , in march 1998 , omb clarified its contingency plan instructions , stating that such plans should be developed for all core business functions . moreover , omb and the cio council adopted our draft guide providing information on business continuity and contingency planning issues common to most large enterprises as a model for federal agencies . further , in its april 28 , 1998 , instructions , omb asked agencies to describe their processes and activities for developing such contingency plans . although these are positive steps , much work on contingency planning remains to be completed . in their may 1998 quarterly reports to omb , only four agencies reported that they had drafted contingency plans for their core business processes . omb's assessment of the current status of federal year 2000 progress is predominantly based on agency reports — reports that have not been consistently reviewed or independently verified . without such independent reviews , omb and the conversion council have little assurance that they are receiving accurate information . we have , in fact , found cases in which agencies' systems conversion status as reported to omb has been inaccurate . for example , the department of agriculture reported 15 systems as compliant , even though they were still under development or merely planned . ( the department plans to delete these systems from its list of compliant systems in its next quarterly report. ) in another example , the defense finance and accounting service had not performed adequate testing to assert that certain systems it had reported as compliant were capable of transitioning into the year 2000 . specifically , managers of three systems reported as compliant indicated that they had performed some tests on the transfer and storage of dates , but had not completed all necessary year 2000 compliance testing . agencies' may 1998 quarterly reports describe current or planned verification activities , which include internal management processes , reviews by agency inspectors general , and contracts with vendors for independent verification and validation . while this has helped provide assurance that some verification is taking place , the full scope of verification activities required by omb has not been articulated . accordingly , we recommended that the chair require agencies to develop an independent verification strategy to involve inspectors general or other independent organizations in reviewing agency year 2000 progress . the chair agreed that independent assessments of agencies' year 2000 programs and their testing and planning approaches are important , and stated that he and omb will consider issuing more explicit directions to agencies on independent verification , especially with regard to establishing standards for the type of verification and evaluation desired . we are not aware that any such directions have yet been issued . obtaining and retaining adequate and skilled staff for the year 2000 challenge has been an increasing concern . in their current quarterly reports , 10 of the 24 agencies and departments describe problems that they or their contractors have encountered in obtaining and / or retaining information technology personnel . however , no governmentwide strategy has existed to address recruiting and retaining information technology personnel with the appropriate skills for year 2000-related work .