although h.r . 4401 is explicit in that the proposed system would cover the medicare part b program and fehbp , it is unclear whether other federal health programs would also be included in this system . 4401 calls for the establishment of an advanced informational infrastructure for “ederal health benefits programs which consists of an immediate claim , administration , payment resolution , and data collection system . that is initially for use by carriers to process claims submitted by providers and suppliers under part b of the edicare program . .” ( in a later section , the bill requires that this system be applied to fehbp. ) the bill does not define “federal health benefits programs,” and provides for inclusion of only medicare part b and fehbp in the system . however , if in the future the proposed system is intended to include other federal health benefits programs such as medicare part a , medicaid , veterans' health services , the department of defense's health services , and indian health services , development and implementation of the system envisioned by the bill would be different and much more challenging . these other federal health programs are markedly different . in some cases , the federal government acts like other large employers that contract with insurance companies and health plans to offer health benefits to employees and their dependents . in other cases , it acts like a large insurance company that pays directly for health care services . in still other instances , it acts like a large staff - model health maintenance organizationthat operates a network of hospitals and employs health care professionals . accordingly , if the proposed real - time claims processing system were to later be intended to address the claims processing requirements of any of these programs , it would have a significant impact on the system's design and complexity . administered by hhs' health care financing administration ( hcfa ) , medicare is the nation's largest health insurer , covering almost 40 million beneficiaries at a cost of over $200 billion annually . medicare operates through a complicated administrative structure . its authorizing legislation — title xviii of the social security act — required hcfa to contract with the private sector for claims processing and payment functions . this requirement has led to a large contractor network comprised of insurance companies responsible for processing medicare claims in given states . these medicare contractors are responsible for claims processing and administration , including ( 1 ) receiving claims ; ( 2 ) judging their appropriateness ; ( 3 ) paying appropriate ones promptly ; ( 4 ) identifying potentially fraudulent claims or providers , and withholding payment , if necessary ; and ( 5 ) recovering overpayments or inappropriate payments . contractors develop a set of criteria to determine which claims to pay , guided by laws , regulations , the medicare policy manuals , and periodic agency directives . for the medicare part b program , hcfa uses 22 companies doing business as carriers to process claims . each carrier relies on one of four standard systems to process its claims , adding its own front - end and back - end processing systems .