dod disbursements . dod recognizes that it has a serious problem of not being able to properly match disbursements with obligations . in attempting to correct this problem , dod is taking steps to implement the legislative mandate limiting the funds that may be disbursed before the proposed payments are prematched to the obligation data in the official accounting systems . this initiative should help ensure that the ( 1 ) disbursements are properly matched to the corresponding obligations and ( 2 ) obligations and disbursements data are recorded accurately in the accounting records . we recently started an assessment of the software process improvement efforts of the financial systems organization — the information technology arm of dfas — and plan to develop detailed recommendations to assist in these efforts . we also plan to evaluate the software engineering capability of other dod organizations providing software support to dfas . for our evaluations , we are using the capability maturity model developed by the software engineering institute ( located at carnegie mellon university ) . the model is used by dod and the private sector to assess an organization's software engineering capability . in addition , dod needs to pursue short - term actions to improve the quality and reliability of the data in its current systems , such as ( 1 ) following and enforcing current accounting policies and procedures , ( 2 ) reviewing and analyzing its monthly reports to identify inaccuracies , and ( 3 ) taking action to correct the problems identified . these actions are not new or revolutionary , but rather fundamental internal control procedures . the director of dfas has recognized the need to reinforce these key procedures and issued a september 1 , 1995 , directive that called for all dfas locations to place increased emphasis on adhering to established internal controls . another key responsibility that the cfo act assigned to agency cfos is directing and upgrading the agency's financial management personnel , including enhancing their professional training . well - qualified personnel with the knowledge and skills required to carry out existing systems operation and accounting procedures will be essential if dod is to make marked strides toward improving its financial operations . while we have not yet done any comprehensive assessment of the department's financial personnel , recurring audit findings have highlighted problems relating to dod personnel adhering to basic control requirements . for example , these audits have consistently found that dod personnel did not carry out required supervisory reviews or reconciliations , nor did they properly document adjustments to financial records . in addition , both our financial audits and those of the dod inspector general have raised questions about the adequacy of dod's financial management personnel , as shown in the following examples . our 1993 review of the army's financial operations disclosed that of its 84 top managers responsible for overseeing the work of over 1,500 personnel at its central accounting location , only 7 had any professional certifications . our recent review of the navy's financial operations disclosed that 31 percent of the positions at its central accounting facility were vacant .