for many agencies , this was too late . we hope it will provide an opportunity to examine our processes for developing threat assessments and providing warnings as well as an opportunity to examine our overall security posture . we performed our review from may 8 through may 17 , 2000 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . for information about this testimony , please contact jack l. brock , jr. , at ( 202 ) 512-6240 . jean boltz , cristina chaplain , nancy defrancesco , mike gilmore , danielle hollomon , paul nicholas , and alicia sommers made key contributions to this testimony . such concerns highlight the need to improve the government's capacity and capability for responding to virus attacks . clearly , more needs to be done to enhance the government's ability to collect , analyze , and distribute timely information that can be used by agencies to protect their critical information systems from possible attack . while some files were recovered from backup media , others were not . at the department of labor , recovery required over 1,600 employee hours and over 1,200 contractor hours . for example , they can act to increase user awareness and understanding regarding unusual and suspicious e - mail and other computer - related activities . in particular , agencies can teach computer users that e - mail attachments are not always what they seem and that they should be careful when opening them . users should never open attachments whose filenames end in “.exe” unless they are sure they know what they are doing . users should also know that they should never start a personal computer with an unscanned floppy disk or cd - rom in the computer drive . strengthening intrusion detection capabilities may also help . clearly , it is difficult to sniff out a single virus attached to an e - mail coming in but if 100 e - mails with the same configuration suddenly arrive , an alert should be sounded . furthermore , agencies can clarify policies and procedures for reporting and responding to unusual events and conduct “dry runs” on these procedures . they can ensure that up - to - date virus detection software has been installed on their systems . they can establish effective alternative communication mechanisms to be used when e - mail systems are not operating properly . and they can participate in interagency efforts to prepare for and share information on cyber threats , such as those sponsored by fedcirc . while such actions can go a long way toward helping agencies to ward off future viruses , they will not result in fully effective and lasting improvements unless they are supported by strong security programs on the part of individual agencies and effective governmentwide mechanisms and requirements . as noted in previous testimonies and reports , almost every federal agency has poor computer security . the social security administration required 5 days to become fully functional and completely remove the virus from its systems . the department of energy experienced a slowdown in external e - mail traffic , but suffered no disruption of mission - critical systems . ten to 20 percent of doe's machines nationwide required active cleanup .