additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . it is now a matter of carrying out improvement plans . this concludes my statement , and i will be glad to answer any questions . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . irs has recognized its problems and essentially knows what needs to be done . i would like to begin by discussing why it is important for irs to have good financial management . irs currently has a system under development ( called the enforcement revenue information system ) that will attempt to track and correlate this information . finally , irs needs to have good financial management to show that it does not have a double standard for financial management — one that taxpayers must adhere to and another that applies to itself . in recent years , irs has reported collections against accounts receivables of about $25 billion annually . however , irs cannot reliably report cash collections on accounts receivable , and the amounts reported are estimates . irs' financial management system does not include a detailed record of debtors who owe taxes ( a subsidiary accounts receivable record ) that tracks these accounts and their related activity from one reporting period to the next . as a result , irs has to employ sampling techniques to project estimated collections on accounts receivable . the lack of a detailed subsidiary record also severely hampers the ability to readily and reliably assess the performance of irs' various collection efforts because reliable information on accounts receivable activity from one period to the next is not readily available . the ability to account for day to day operations and tax collections accurately is the foundation for any efforts to assess and improve irs' operational performance . taxpayers' views of the government and on the fairness of tax administration are shaped in a big way by their perception of irs . for irs to demand the kind of recordkeeping it requires for taxpayers to support tax returns ( a form of financial reporting ) and to not be able to sustain a comparable or better set of records to support its own financial reporting does not bode well .