this borrower is no longer in the rus program . in the early part of fiscal year 1997 , another g&t borrower made a lump sum payment of approximately $238.5 million in exchange for forgiveness of its remaining $502 million loan balance . the g&t and its six distribution cooperatives borrowed the $238.5 million from a private lender , the national rural utilities cooperative finance corporation . the g&t had originally borrowed from rus to build a two - unit coal - fired generating plant and to finance a coal mine that would supply fuel for the generating plant . the plant was built in anticipation of industrial development from the emerging shale oil industry . however , the growth in demand did not materialize , and there was no market for the power . although the borrower had its debt restructured in 1989 , it still experienced financial difficulties due to a depressed power market . rus and doj decided that the best way to resolve the matter was to accept a partial lump sum payment on the debt rather than force the borrower into bankruptcy . the borrower and its member distribution cooperatives are no longer in the rus program . it is probable that rus will have additional loan write - offs and therefore that the federal government will incur further losses in the short term from loans to borrowers that have been identified as financially stressed by rus management . at the time of our review , rus reports indicated that about $10.5 billion of the $22.5 billion in g&t debt was owed by 13 financially stressed g&t borrowers . of these , four borrowers with about $7 billion in outstanding debt were in bankruptcy . the remaining nine borrowers had investments in uneconomical generating plants and / or had formally requested financial assistance in the form of debt forgiveness from rus . borrower j: invested in a nuclear plant that proved to be uneconomical . according to rus officials , these plant investments became uneconomical because of cost overruns , continuing changes in regulations , and soaring interest rates . as a result , the cooperative's wholesale power rates are very high . i will then discuss our risk assessment of the electric loan portfolio . our assessment was generally based on the condition of the portfolio as of september 30 , 1996 ; therefore , changes may have occurred since the date of our review . the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) is the federal government's principal provider of loans used to assist the nation's rural areas in developing their utility infrastructure . through rus , usda finances the construction , improvement , and repair of electrical , telecommunications , and water and waste disposal systems . rus provides credit assistance through direct loans and through repayment guarantees on loans made by other lenders . established by the federal crop insurance reform and the department of agriculture reorganization act of 1994 , rus administers the electricity and telecommunications programs that were operated by the former rural electrification administration and the water and waste disposal programs that were operated by the former rural development administration .