this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the committee may have at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the following are examples of these weaknesses . large amounts of combustible materials were found adjacent to and inside the data center . paper and cardboard trash was piled in adjacent areas , and boxes of envelopes were stacked in the data center . the data center's fire extinguishers required recharging and were haphazardly placed in the center , increasing vulnerability to extensive fire damage . the center uses wet standpipe sprinklers for fire suppression in lower than normal ceilings . taller individuals in the center have to duck to avoid hitting the sprinklers , which , if inadvertently sheared off , will release water that can damage the center . the data center is located on the subbasement level of a building and does not have water detectors under the raised floor , increasing the risk of extensive electrical damage to computer equipment if the center floods . this type of contract can be awarded with limited or no competition . in this case , ntis awarded a contract under “section 8 ( a ) ” on a sole source basis . the selected contractor then subcontracted a significant part of its work to other firms . information obtained indicates that the selection of some of these subcontractors may have been directed by ntis or irs . these actions may have resulted in the complete elimination of competition for a significant amount of government business . also , numerous actions were conducted quickly and information obtained to date does not provide a clear understanding of what transpired . for example , in rushing to implement cyberfile , it appears that irs contracted for services that ntis was tasked with providing under their interagency agreement . however , as we mentioned earlier more work is needed to assess the appropriateness of all such actions .