agencies cannot afford to neglect any of these issues . if they do , the impact of year 2000 failures could be widespread , costly , and potentially disruptive to vital government operations worldwide . for example: flights could be grounded or delayed and airline safety could be degraded ; the military services could find it extremely difficult to efficiently and effectively equip and sustain their forces around the world ; internal revenue service tax systems could be unable to process returns , thereby jeopardizing revenue collection and delaying refunds ; the social security administration process to provide benefits to disabled persons could be disrupted ; and payments to veterans with service - connected disabilities could be erroneous or severely delayed . because of the urgent nature of the year 2000 problem and the potentially devastating impact it can have on critical government operations , we designated the problem as a high - risk area for the federal government in february 1997 . since that time , we have issued over 40 reports and testimony statements detailing specific findings and recommendations related to the year 2000 readiness of a wide range of federal agencies . we have also issued guidance to help organizations successfully address the issue . overall , the government's 24 major departments and agencies are making slow progress in fixing their systems . in may 1997 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) reported that about 21 percent of the mission - critical systems ( 1,598 of 7,649 ) for these departments and agencies were year 2000 compliant . a year later , in may 1998 , these departments and agencies reported that 2,914 of the 7,336 mission - critical systems in their current inventories , or about 40 percent , were compliant . unless progress improves dramatically , a substantial number of mission - critical systems will not be compliant on time . in addition to slow progress in fixing systems , many agencies were not adequately acting on critical steps to establish priorities , solidify data exchange agreements , and develop contingency plans . likewise , more attention needs to be devoted to ( 1 ) ensuring the government has a complete and accurate picture of year 2000 progress , ( 2 ) setting national priorities , ( 3 ) ensuring that the government's critical core business processes are adequately tested , ( 4 ) recruiting and retaining information technology personnel with the appropriate skills for year 2000-related work , and ( 5 ) assessing the nation's year 2000 risks , including those posed by key economic sectors . i would like to highlight some of these vulnerabilities and our recommendations made in april 1998 for addressing them . first , governmentwide priorities in fixing systems have yet to be established . there has not been a concerted effort to set governmentwide priorities based on such criteria as the potential for adverse health and safety effects , adverse financial effects on american citizens , detrimental effects on national security , and adverse economic consequences . furthermore , while individual agencies have been identifying mission - critical systems , this has not always been done based on a determination of the agency's most critical operations .