year 2000 . like all other federal agencies — and private businesses — vba must address the effects of processing information in light of the change of century . most of the computer software in use today employs 2-digit date fields . consequently , at the turn of the century , computer software will be unable to distinguish between the years 1900 and 2000 , since both would be designated “00.” industry and government experts have already gone on record saying that the effort to correct this problem will become extremely costly and time - consuming , and requires early and detailed planning . if the year - 2000 problem is not addressed , it will render the vast majority of date - sensitive computer information unusable or obsolete . for example , calculations based on incorrect dates in service could result in errors in processing benefit checks in the compensation and pension programs . in vba's educational assistance program , vba could send threatening debt - collection letters to veterans who do not actually owe money ; charge incorrect interest rates to veterans or charge interest to veterans who do not owe money ; or send debtor information to the internal revenue service for refund withholding , to the federal government for wage garnishment , or to private credit firms to go on a veteran's credit report . in our opinion , the year - 2000 issue is an absolutely critical challenge that vba faces over the next 2-3 years . some of the computer code was developed more than 20 years ago , using nonstandard coding techniques . in some cases , the software documentation may be incomplete or nonexistent . it is essential that vba develop and implement a strategy to address the inherent risks that accompany the year - 2000 change . first , a sufficient number of experienced staff must be devoted to this task , especially since vba must maintain its current software and service levels at the same time that it is correcting date - sensitive code . second , it will need to complete the programming by 1998 , since industry experts recommend that 1999 be reserved for thoroughly testing the year - 2000 changes . third , vba must have a contingency plan that outlines alternatives for processing claims if systems are not corrected . data - center consolidation and related software conversion . in response to a request from omb , va and vba are in the process of developing a strategy paper to reduce operational costs by consolidating their data centers . however , critical information in terms of costs and benefits is missing — information needed to determine how and when this should be done and how this effort ranks in terms of priority with competing demands , such as the year - 2000 activities . currently , va's data center is in austin , texas , and uses ibm computer equipment to process the department's accounting and financial management information related to administrative operations . vba's two data centers — hines and philadelphia — use mostly honeywell equipment ; the hines facility primarily processes disability ( compensation and pension ) claims , while philadelphia processes insurance claims .