most importantly , there is no audit trail . although sybase 10 has this capability , we were told it has not been turned on because it would inhibit system performance . the sybase audit capability would allow system administrators to monitor and react to attempts to log on and log off the system ; execution of update , delete , and insert operations ; restarts of the system ; execution of system administration commands ; and changes to system tables . the data base is comprised of 125 tables . data is input to and retrieved from these tables using simple screens and drop - down menus . sybase's system 10 is built with published and readily available interface specifications . it is open to the extent that anyone can write a program that will connect to the server . this is unlike traditional proprietary data base management systems , which could be accessed only with vendor - supplied tools or programs written with vendor - specific languages and compilers . in developing the data base , the white house acquired well - established , commercially available products and created a system that users we interviewed were generally satisfied with . however , as i will discuss in more detail , the design of the data base limits system performance . further , the system — while having in place some internal controls — needs additional controls to assure the integrity and accuracy of data . as noted earlier , data base users primarily use the data base as a tool for maintaining contact with individuals and organizations important to the presidency . users told us that they were generally satisfied with the system . less than 100 white house staff actually use the system , and only about 25 make moderate to heavy use ( relative to other users ) of the system — with the heaviest users representing the white house social office , personal correspondence office , and outreach office , as well as system administrators . we examined user accounts and interviewed those staff making heavy use of the system in terms of amount of data both input to and read from the system . these included two staff in the social office , one in the outreach office , two on the personal correspondence staff , the data base data administrator , and a sybase system administrator . we also interviewed four other business users and a system administrator who represent less heavy users of the system . social office personnel use the system to assist in developing invitation lists and planning state dinners and other events . personal correspondence personnel use the data base to help compose letters for the president . in doing so , they retrieve information from the data base on addresses , names of family members , white house events attended , and how the correspondent knows the president . the outreach user we interviewed entered data into the data base for use in generating lists of holiday card recipients . many users supplement the data base with information from manually accessed address lists .