carelessness . what is internal control ? internal control is concerned with stewardship and accountability of resources consumed while striving to accomplish an agency's mission with effective results . specifically , gao's standards for internal controls in the federal government defines internal control as “the plan of organization and methods and procedures adopted by management to ensure resource use is consistent with laws , regulations , and policies ; that resources are safeguarded against waste , loss , and misuse ; and that reliable information is obtained , maintained , and fairly disclosed in reports.” internal control is synonymous with management control in that the broad objectives of internal control cover all aspects of agency operations . although ultimate responsibility for internal controls rests with management , all employees have a role in the effective operation of internal controls established by management . effective internal control provides reasonable , not absolute , assurance that an agency's activities are being accomplished in accordance with its control objectives . ( requiring agency strategic and annual performance planning ) ; and the federal financial management improvement act of 1996 ( to improve federal financial management systems ) . what happens when internal controls are not effective ? weak internal controls pose a significant risk to the government — losses in the millions , or even billions , of dollars can and do occur . for example , weak internal controls contributed significantly to the failure of over 700 savings and loans in the 1980s , costing the taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars . in the health care area , the health and human services inspector general estimated that $23 billion of $163 billion in processed fee - for - service payments during fiscal year 1996 were improper . gao and others have reported that weak internal controls over safeguarding and accounting for government property are a serious continuing problem . gao's 1997 high - risk series identifies major areas of government operations where the risks of losses to the government is high and where achieving program goals is jeopardized . effective internal controls are essential to achieving agency missions . management and employees should focus not necessarily on more controls , but on more effective controls . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: we are pleased to be here today to discuss the subject of internal control . its importance cannot be understated , especially in the large , complex operating environment of the federal government . internal control is the first line of defense against fraud , waste , and abuse and helps to ensure that an entity's mission is achieved in the most effective and efficient manner . although the subject of internal control usually surfaces for discussion after improprieties or inefficiencies are found , good managers are always aware of and seek ways to help improve operations through effective internal control . as you requested , my testimony today will discuss the following questions: ( 1 ) what is internal control ? ( 2 ) why is it important ? and ( 3 ) what happens when it breaks down ?