additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary , visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . omb is now updating this supplement on a more regular basis . the initial compliance supplement for audits under the 1996 amendments was issued in june 1997 . a revision was issued for june 1998 audits in may 1998 , and a revision for june 1999 audits was just recently finalized . we commend omb for its leadership in developing and issuing the guidance and the collaborative efforts of the federal inspectors general , federal and state program managers , the state auditors , and the public accounting profession in working with omb proactively to ensure that the guidance effectively implements the 1996 refinements . highlighted below are several of the key refinements and some of the actions taken to implement them . the 1984 act did not cover colleges , universities , hospitals , or other nonprofit recipients of federal assistance . instead , audit requirements for these entities were established administratively in a separate omb audit circular , which in some ways was inconsistent with the audit circular that covered state and local governments . for example , the criteria for determining which programs received detailed audit coverage were different between the circulars . the 1996 amendments expanded the scope of the act to include nonprofit organizations . to implement the 1996 amendments , omb combined the two audit circulars into one that provided consistent audit requirements for all recipients . the 1996 refinements and omb circular a - 133 require a single audit for entities that spend $300,000 or more in federal awards , and exempt any entity that spends less than that amount in federal awards . also , the threshold is based on expenditures rather than receipts . the congress intended for the entities receiving the greatest amount of federal financial assistance disbursed each year to be audited while exempting entities receiving comparatively small amounts of federal assistance . to achieve this , a $100,000 single audit threshold was included in the 1984 act . the fixed threshold , however , did not take into account future increases in amounts of federal financial assistance . as a result , over time , audit resources were being expended on entities receiving comparatively small amounts of federal financial assistance . in 1984 , we reported that setting the threshold for requiring single audits at $100,000 would result in 95 percent of all direct federal financial assistance being covered by single audits . in 1994 , we reported that coverage at the same 95 percent level could be achieved with a $300,000 threshold . as a result of these changes , audit attention is focussed more on entities receiving the largest amounts of federal financial assistance , while the audit burden is eliminated for many entities receiving relatively small amounts of assistance . for example , pennsylvania reported that this change will still provide audit coverage for 94 percent of the federal funds spent at the local level in the state , while eliminating audit coverage for approximately 1,200 relatively smaller entities in the state .