chairmen . we will be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittees may have at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . these are all good ideas . we see problems , however , that seem to stem from the lack of a disciplined management process that has as its hallmark managing information systems and technology as investments . not managing mts in this way has led to system design and development proceeding despite ( 1 ) difficulties in defining requirements , ( 2 ) a compressed schedule containing significant overlap of system - development phases , and ( 3 ) a lack of reliable information about costs and benefits . these deficiencies increase risk . the results of our work looking at systems - development initiatives shows , however , that management attention to implementing effective investment - control practices can reduce such risk . hcfa officials have expressed interest in learning more about effective management practices that have helped other organizations succeed with similar projects , and we have agreed to continue to work with them by suggesting successful approaches to reduce mts development risks . now is the time for careful scrutiny and improvement to enhance the chances that mts will perform as required: fortunately , the project is still in its early developmental stages , and the outlay of funds has been limited . hcfa's vision , which we support , is for a single , unified system to replace the nine current systems now used by medicare , the nation's largest health insurer , serving about 37 million americans . the goals of mts are to better protect program funds from waste , fraud , and abuse ; allow better oversight of medicare contractors' operations ; improve service to beneficiaries and providers ; and reduce administrative expenses . at present , hcfa expects mts to be fully operational in september 1999 , and to process over 1 billion claims and pay $288 billion in benefits per year by 2000 . these are ambitious goals , and we realize that developing such a system is complex and challenging .