the regulators have been working on these issues . for example , they are querying data centers and service providers on their capacity to service new clients due to year 2000 problems and putting together a “bidders list” for year 2000 purposes that will include institutions that have demonstrated , well - managed year 2000 programs and are capable of processing acquisitions of other institutions . however , none of these efforts have been finalized . developing these plans promptly is paramount to minimizing the risk of not having enough time to implement a viable plan for dealing with institutions that cannot successfully complete their efforts . fourth: the challenge to protect u.s. banks from international year 2000 risks . u.s. banks have many external links to financial institutions and markets around the world . for example , overseas financial institutions and markets depend on our electronic funds transfer systems and clearinghouses . unfortunately , it has been reported that many countries are well behind their u.s. counterparts in year 2000 remediation . for example , a survey of 15,000 companies in 87 countries by the gartner group found that nations including germany , india , japan , and russia were 12 months or more behind the united states . given the fact that many countries are behind schedule in addressing the year 2000 problem , it will be essential for regulators to ( 1 ) ensure that financial institutions have adequately identified and mitigated their international risks and ( 2 ) prepare contingency plans for handling disruptions caused by problems abroad . fifth: the challenge to protect financial institutions from year 2000 disruptions caused by their telecommunications and power service providers . the most vital business operations of financial institutions — atm transactions , fund transfers , and credit card authorizations , for example — are dependent on telecommunications and power networks . in fact , according to the president's national security telecommunications advisory committee , the financial services industry may be the telecommunications industry's most demanding customer: over $2 trillion is sent by international wire transfers every day . in june 1998 testimony on the year 2000 readiness of the telecommunications sector , we reported that most major telecommunications carriers expect to achieve year 2000 network compliance by december 1998 . for a few though , the planned date for compliance is either later than december 1998 , or we were unable to obtain this information . the carriers are working to test their networks but until the tests are completed and the results made public , it is not clear to what degree — if any — financial institutions and the public will be subject to telecommunications disruptions . the situation for electric power companies is similar . first: the challenge of time . regardless of good practices and good progress , less than 16 months remain to the century date change . with over 22,000 institutions , vendors , and service providers to examine and monitor , the regulators face a formidable task in continuing to provide adequate coverage . second: the challenge to provide effective oversight during the later and more complicated stages of the remediation effort . by december 1998 , ffiec expects financial institutions to be well into the testing phase .