additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . this guidance is needed by financial institutions to complete their own preparations . in addition , their follow - on assessments to be completed by june 1998 were not in all cases designed to collect the complete data required to be definitive about the status of individual institutions . furthermore , it is questionable whether all regulators have an adequate level of technical staff to completely evaluate industry readiness . despite these problems , the regulators cannot turn back the clock and start again . consequently , it will be important for regulators to address these problems quickly and confront their next challenge which is how they can best use their resources from here to the millennium to ensure that banks , thrifts , and credit unions mitigate year 2000 risks . with regard to their own systems , the regulators have generally done much to mitigate the risk to their mission - critical systems . in some areas , such as contingency planning , the regulators can do more to provide added assurance that they will be ready for the century date change and any unexpected problems . accordingly , we have made recommendations to strengthen both year 2000 examination processes and internal system mitigation efforts . second , we also found that the ffiec - developed examination work program and guidance for the initial and follow - on assessments were not designed to collect all the data needed to determine where ( i.e. , in which phase ) the institutions are in the year 2000 correction process . for example , the guidance for the work program does not contain questions that ask whether specific phases have been completed . in addition , the work program used to perform the on - site assessments is not organized by the 5 phases of the year 2000 correction process . furthermore , the terms used in the guidance to describe progress are vague . for example , it notes that banks should be well into assessment by the end of the third quarter of 1997 , that renovation for mission - critical systems should largely be completed , and testing should be well underway by december 31 , 1998 . without defining any of these terms , it would be very hard to deliver uniform assessments on the status of institutions' year 2000 efforts . at the time of our reviews , ots had issued additional examination guidance and procedures to supplement those of ffiec .