, rolling it over . in this way , the total debt held by the public can be reduced . according to cbo's march projections , using the projected surpluses to pay off part of the maturing issues could reduce debt held by the public by about $550 billion between 2001 and 2008 . just as the budget can affect the levels of outstanding debt , the debt itself also affects both the economy and the budget . the main economic effect is the impact of federal deficits / surpluses on national saving and private investment . this level is very high by historical standards . since the early days of the republic , the only events prompting debt held by the public to increase above 30 percent of the economy were the civil war , world war i , the great depression , and world war ii — until recently . wartime borrowing allowed the government to protect the nation's security by increasing defense spending without enacting large tax increases that could be disruptive to the economy . borrowing during the great depression helped the economy by maintaining income and spending levels and today our income , revenue , and spending structure is such that the deficit would rise automatically in a recession . recent increases in the debt broke with historical patterns by climbing significantly during a period marked by the absence of a major war or depression . beginning in the 1970s , rising federal budget deficits fueled a corresponding increase in debt held by the public , which essentially doubled as a share of gdp over this period through the mid - 1990's . since then , the debt - gdp measure has stabilized and begun to drop , reflecting recent progress in reducing the deficit and continued economic growth . according to cbo projections , this proportion is expected to drop again to about 25 percent by 2008 due to projected budget surpluses . our annual unified budget decisions affect the nominal levels of debt held by the public , that is , the amount of treasury securities outstanding . the unified budget is the most comprehensive measure of annual fiscal policy and represents the net amount of all federal spending and revenue . with some minor exceptions , it generally approximates the amount of annual federal borrowing from the public . another measure of federal fiscal policy used for budget enforcement purposes is known as the “on - budget” measure , which excludes social security . excluding social security's surpluses results in a deficit in the “on - budget” measure for the near term . each year's unified deficit adds to the amount of debt held by the public , while surpluses reduce it . in other words , deficits or surpluses essentially represent the annual change in the amount of government borrowing while the debt represents the amounts of deficits accumulated over time less any annual surpluses . the debt in turn affects the budget by requiring annual outlays to pay interest to public holders of federal securities . thus , in formulating each year's fiscal policy , congress at least implicitly is also making a decision about the level of nominal debt held by the public .