section 362 . in addition , debts in foreclosure are governed by state laws that may preclude the government from pursuing foreclosure if collection is attempted through offset . further , debts subject to forbearance generally are not legally enforceable , thus precluding collection of the debt until the forbearance process is completed . also , agencies generally cannot certify debts under appeal as valid and legally enforceable until the appeal process is completed . consequently , treasury has agreed with agencies that these types of debts should be excluded from referral for offset . about $3.6 billion involves delinquent foreign debts . treasury has stated that , for the most part , collecting these delinquent debts through administrative offsets is infeasible primarily due to foreign diplomacy considerations and affairs of state . about $3 billion of delinquent nontax debt has been referred by agencies to doj for litigation . ( see footnote 3. ) these debts are no longer under the control of the agencies and , therefore , treasury does not hold the agencies responsible for referring such debt for administrative offset . rather , doj is to determine if , and when , such debt is referred for offset . about $525 million of delinquent nontax debt owed to hud , much of which will be scheduled for sale , is not being required to be referred for administrative offset at this time . in addition to these categories of unreferred debt , about $7 billion of outstanding nontax debt over 180 days delinquent remains . most of this debt involves circumstances that may delay or preclude offset . for example , the vast majority of the department of education's approximate $3.1 billion of unreferred nontax delinquent debt consists primarily of debts related to student loans , most of which were being serviced by state or private guaranty agencies . according to education officials , although delinquent debt serviced by guaranty agencies is subject to referral for administrative offset , many referrals have not yet been made because the required due process for the debtors has not been completed . another example involves delinquent debts related to the department of agriculture's ( usda ) state - administered food stamp program and farm loans . according to usda officials , the food stamp program's delinquent debts , which totaled about $775 million , must be further reviewed by the states to determine whether these debts are in repayment status or whether the debtors have been afforded due process . also , according to usda officials , statutory servicing rights normally require that the farm loan debtors be offered workout alternatives prior to collection by offset . as such , this debt , which totaled about $420 million , will not be made available for offset until this statutory process has been completed . finally , according to a dod official , dod delinquent debts totaling about $2 billion are primarily in protest or dispute . accordingly , these debts have not yet been referred to treasury for offset . while referring all legally enforceable delinquent nontax debts for offset is an essential element of an effective administrative offset program , the program's objectives cannot be achieved in the absence of another equally essential element — payments that can be offset .