i will then discuss our findings on each of the questions . the three pmas we studied ( southeastern , southwestern , and western ) market primarily wholesale power in 30 states produced at large , multiple - purpose water projects . collectively , in fiscal year 1995 , they had revenues of almost $1 billion . most of the power they sell is produced at 102 hydroelectric dams built and run primarily by the u.s. army corps of engineers or the department of the interior's bureau of reclamation , commonly referred to as “operating agencies.” the operating agencies constructed these facilities as part of a larger effort in developing multipurpose water projects that have functions other than power generation , including flood control , irrigation , navigation , and recreation . to transmit this power , southwestern and western have their own transmission facilities . southeastern relies on the transmission services of other utilities . the three pmas receive annual appropriations to cover operating and maintenance ( o&m ) expenses and , if applicable , the capital investment in transmission assets . federal law calls for pmas to set power rates at levels that will repay these appropriations as well as the power - related o&m and capital appropriations expended by the operating agencies generating the power . the department of energy's ( doe ) implementing order specifies that unless otherwise prescribed by law , appropriations used for o&m expenses be recovered in the same year the expenses are incurred , but that appropriations used for capital investments ( which we refer to as appropriated debt ) be recovered , with interest , over periods that can last up to 50 years . at the end of fiscal year 1995 , the three pmas had about $5.4 billion of appropriated debt outstanding . in addition , western is required to recover about $1.5 billion of capital costs related to assistance on completed irrigation facilities ( which we refer to as irrigation debt ) , without interest , with repayment periods of up to 60 years . because pmas and operating agencies generally receive financing from appropriations , department of the treasury checks are issued for their disbursements . operating agencies allocate power - related costs to the pmas for recovery . pmas set rates to recover power - related costs , bill customers , and the resultant revenue is returned to treasury . the chart in attachment i demonstrates the flow of appropriated funds , costs to be recovered , and how repayment is made to treasury from the revenues collected from power customers . it also outlines the costs that have not been recovered through this process , as well as the financing subsidy , that are discussed in detail in this testimony . the reclamation project act of 1939 and the flood control act of 1944 generally require that the pmas recover through power rates the costs of producing and marketing federal hydropower . however , these acts do not define which costs are required to be recovered . in addition , doe's implementing order ra 6120.2 , which was issued in 1979 and last revised in 1983 , excludes certain costs associated with nonoperational facilities and is not specific about recovery of others .