department of energy . general services administration . department of labor . small business administration . environmental protection agency . the executive branch recognizes the extent and severity of the financial management deficiencies discussed in this report and that addressing them will require concerted improvement efforts across government . financial management has been designated one of the president's priority management objectives , with the goal of having performance and cost information in a timely , informative , and accurate way , consistent with federal accounting standards . also , the administration has made a commitment to complete audits and gain unqualified opinions for all cfo act agencies and the government as a whole . to help achieve this goal , strategies are being established involving specific agencies . for example , plans at the department of defense include completing a new accounting systems architecture , reviewing inventory accounting processes , and developing a departmentwide property accountability system . treasury and omb are developing plans to improve the accuracy and timeliness of governmentwide accounting and reporting . omb is also working with individual agencies to address problems precluding unqualified audit opinions , which will require the active involvement of individual agency igs as well . we will continue to focus on financial systems and internal control deficiencies at particular agencies . for example , we have issued a series of reports on the factors to be considered and the data that must be available to meet accounting standards for defense's environmental and disposal liabilities . also , we plan to further evaluate defense's property and logistical systems to recommend additional corrective actions to address weaknesses in accounting for major asset categories on the financial statements . we look forward to continuing to work with these officials to achieve the cfo act's financial management reform goals . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time . we are also working with the major credit agencies to improve reporting of loans and loan guarantees . in addition , the coordinated efforts of treasury and omb will be required to identify and provide solutions for certain governmentwide deficiencies , such as the inability to properly identify and eliminate transactions between federal entities . we will continue to provide suggestions for resolving governmentwide problems and to monitor progress in overcoming them . we appreciate the cooperation and assistance we received from the chief financial officers and inspectors general throughout government , as well as department of the treasury and office of management and budget officials , in carrying out our responsibility to audit the government's consolidated financial statements . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nuclear regulatory commission . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .