additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . the agency expects to complete these plans by the middle of 1998 . our final concern is that even though ots has corrected the majority of its mission - critical systems and is making good progress toward remediating other systems and equipment , it does not have a comprehensive year 2000 program plan . to its credit , the agency has prepared plans for correcting its systems and has been reporting its progress to treasury on a monthly basis . however , ots did not develop a single plan providing a clear understanding of the interrelationships and dependencies among the automated systems that support its business operations , such as thrift supervision , office equipment , payroll , and facilities . instead , ots officials told us they prepared separate plans for ( 1 ) systems operated and maintained by the information resources management office , ( 2 ) systems operated and maintained by other offices and regions , and ( 3 ) office equipment and facilities . without an integrated plan , ots cannot provide assurance that all systems and interrelationships had been assessed and corrected . this increases the risk that systems will not operate as intended in the year 2000 and beyond . the on - site examinations will be complete as will the assessment of vendors and service providers . such plans are expected within the next 3 months . such consequences would at the very least cause significant inconveniences to both thrifts and their customers . as part of its goal of maintaining safety and soundness , ots is responsible for examining and monitoring thrifts' efforts to adequately mitigate the risks associated with the century date change . to ensure consistent and uniform supervision on year 2000 issues , ots and the other regulators coordinate their supervisory efforts through ffiec . for example , the regulators jointly prepared and issued an august 1996 ffiec letter to banks , thrifts , and credit unions informing them of the year 2000 problem and its potential adverse impacts . for example , they facilitate the collection of thrift assessments , monitor the financial condition of thrifts , provide the congress and the public with information on thrift mortgage activity , schedule and track examinations , and calculate ots employee payroll benefits . as with the other regulators , the effects of year 2000 failure on ots could range from annoying to catastrophic .