methods of attack . defense has taken steps to strengthen its information systems security , but it has not established a comprehensive and effective security program that gives sufficient priority to protecting its information systems . some elements of a good security program are in place . most notably , defense has implemented a formal information warfare program . disa is in charge of the program and has developed and begun implementing a plan for protecting against , detecting , and reacting to information systems attacks . disa established its global defensive information warfare control center and its automated systems security incident support team ( assist ) in arlington , virginia . both the center and assist provide centrally coordinated , around - the - clock response to attacks and assistance to the entire department . each of the military services has established computer emergency response capabilities , as well . the air force is widely recognized as the leader among the services for having developed considerable experience and technical resources to defend its information systems . however , many of defense's policies relating to computer systems attacks are outdated and inconsistent . they do not set any standards or require actions for what we and many others believe are important security activities , such as periodic vulnerability assessments , internal reporting of attacks , correction of known vulnerabilities , and damage assessments . in addition , many of the department's system and network administrators are not adequately trained and do not have enough time to do their jobs properly . computer users throughout the department are often unaware of fundamental security practices , such as using sound passwords and protecting them . further , defense's efforts to develop automated programs and use other technology to help counter information systems attacks need to be much more aggressive and implemented on a departmentwide basis , rather than in the few current locations . administrators receive enough time and training to do their jobs properly . further , we recommend that defense assess its incident response capability to determine its sufficiency in light of the growing threat , and implement more proactive and aggressive measures to detect systems attacks . the fact that these important elements are missing indicates that defense has not adequately prioritized the need to protect its information resources . top management at defense needs to ensure that sufficient resources are devoted to information security and that corrective measures are successfully implemented . we have testified and reported on information systems weaknesses for several years now . in november 1991 , i testified before the subcommittee on government information and regulation on a group of dutch hackers breaking into defense systems . some of the issues and problems we discussed here today existed then ; some have worsened , and new challenges arise daily as technology continues to advance . without increased attention by defense top management and continued oversight by the congress , security weaknesses will continue . hackers and our adversaries will keep compromising sensitive defense systems . kuji was never caught . consequently , no one knows what happened to the data stolen from rome lab .