additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . interior regularly exchanges data with other organizations . in many instances , these data are critical to the department's operations . in response to a recent survey we conducted , interior reported that 40 of its 95 mission - critical systems exchange electronic data with other federal , state , and local agencies ; domestic and foreign private sectors ; and foreign governments . although the bureaus have identified over 2,900 incoming and outgoing external data exchanges , the department does not have a central inventory . while it has asked each bureau and office head to certify that date - sensitive data exchanges have been identified and data exchange partners contacted to begin resolving date - format issues , the lack of a centralized inventory and an automated way to maintain it means that interior could be missing key information showing whether exchange agreements are proceeding as scheduled . failure to reach such agreements raises the risk that interior's systems will receive noncompliant data that can corrupt its databases . the risk of failure is not limited to an organization's internal information systems , but includes the potential year 2000 failures of others , such as business partners . one weak link in the chain of critical dependencies and even the most successful year 2000 program will fail to protect against major disruption of business operations . because of these risks , agencies must start business continuity and contingency planning now in order to reduce the risk of year 2000-induced business failures . interior has recognized , to some degree , the critical need for contingency planning , and has asked its bureaus and offices to develop such plans for all mission - critical systems that are behind schedule . however , it has not instructed its component organizations to develop plans to ensure the continuity of core business operations . as noted , agencies developing such plans only for systems currently behind schedule are not addressing the need to ensure business continuity in the event of unforeseen failures . further , such plans should not be limited to the risks posed by year 2000-induced failures of internal information systems . in conclusion , the change of century will initially present many difficult challenges in information technology and continuity of business operations , and has the potential to cause serious disruption to the nation and to the department of the interior . these risks can be mitigated and disruptions minimized with proper attention and management . while interior has been working to mitigate its year 2000 risks , further action must be taken to avoid losing the ability to continue mission - critical business operations . continued congressional oversight through hearings such as this can help ensure that such attention continues and that appropriate actions are taken to address this crisis . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the committee may have at this time .