this is not easy . although there is virtually universal agreement that the current process has problems , changes must be carefully considered . in fact , the current process is , in part , the cumulative result of many changes made to address previous problems . in october 1993 , and in march and april 1994 , i testified on proposals for biennial budgeting . before discussing biennial budgeting for the federal government , however , i'd like briefly to discuss biennial budgeting in the states . however , as noted above , the congress has already addressed this budget execution problem for many of these programs by giving them some multiyear funding . while a shift of the entire cycle would ease planning and increase predictability for all program managers , multiyear or advance funding can be provided for those programs for which 1-year money seriously impairs program effectiveness without that shift . regardless of the potential benefits to agencies , the decision on biennial budgeting will depend on how the congress chooses to exercise its constitutional authority over appropriations and its oversight functions . annually enacted appropriations have long been a basic means of exerting and enforcing congressional policy . oversight has often been conducted in the context of agency requests for funds . a 2-year appropriation cycle could lessen congressional influence or control over program and spending matters , largely because the process would afford fewer scheduled opportunities to affect agency programs and budgets . although it could be argued that the existence of fixed - dollar caps on discretionary spending mean that multiyear decisions have already been made , that is so only at the aggregate level . the congress has retained the right to rearrange priorities within those caps . a shift to a biennial appropriations cycle could lessen that flexibility . we have long advocated regular and rigorous congressional oversight of federal programs . such oversight should examine both the design and effectiveness of federal programs and the efficiency and skill with which they are managed . through the chief financial officers act and the government performance and results act , the congress has put in place the building blocks to improved accountability — both for the taxpayer's dollar and for results . congressional involvement in reviewing agency strategic plans and in develop performance indicators will be critical to the success of these efforts . however , it is not necessary to change the budget and appropriations cycle to have effective congressional oversight . indeed , as i mentioned before , the regular appearance before appropriations committees historically has provided one vehicle for oversight . this brings me back to my main point: the decision on whether the budget and appropriations cycle should be annual or biennial is fundamentally a decision about the form and forum the congress wishes to use to affect agency programs and operations . we believe that multiyear fiscal policy agreements and multiyear authorizations make a great deal of sense , but they do not require changing the appropriations decision cycle from annual to biennial . while biennial appropriations could save time for agencies , they would also result in a shift in congressional control and oversight .