there are problems with this approach , however . since the estimates would not be reflected in the deficit or surplus — the numbers that receive the most attention and scrutiny — it is unclear how much more effect this approach would have on the budget decision - making process than the supplemental information approach . deposit insurance is a key example . many analysts believe that the cash - based budget treatment of deposit insurance exacerbated the savings and loan crisis by creating a disincentive to close failed institutions . since costs were not recognized in the budget until cash payments were made , leaving insolvent institutions open avoided recording outlays in the budget and raising the annual deficit but ultimately increased the total cost to the government . cash - based budgeting also may not be a very accurate gauge of the economic impact of federal insurance programs . although discerning the economic impact of federal insurance programs can be difficult , private economic behavior generally is affected when the government commits to providing insurance coverage . at this point , insured individuals or organizations alter their behavior as a result of insurance . however , as i noted above , the cash - budget records costs not at this point but rather when payments are made to claimants . these payments generally have little or no macroeconomic effect because they do not increase the wealth or incomes of the insured . rather , they are merely intended to restore the insured to his or her approximate financial position prior to the insured event . the cash flow patterns of some federal insurance programs can result in fluctuations in the federal deficit unrelated to the budget's long - term fiscal balance . as noted earlier , uneven cash flows may result from both the erratic nature of some insured risks or temporary cash flows , as in the case of the acquisition and subsequent sale of assets from failed savings and loan institutions . in addition , insurance programs with long - term commitments , such as pension and life insurance programs , can distort the budget's long - term fiscal balance by reducing the aggregate deficit in years that premium income exceeds payments without recognizing the programs' expected costs . while annual cash flows for federal insurance programs generally do not provide complete information for resource allocation and fiscal policy , the magnitude of the problem and the implications for budget decision - making vary across the insurance programs reviewed . for example , the implications of the shortcomings of the current budget treatment appear greatest for the largest programs , pension and deposit insurance . it would recognize the government's full cost when budget decisions are being made , permitting more fully informed resource allocation decisions . since the cost is recognized in the budget's overall results — the deficit or surplus — incentives for managing costs may be improved . because of their large size , incomplete or misleading information about their cost could distort resource allocation and fiscal policy significantly , making the limitations of cash - based budgeting more pronounced than for other federal insurance programs .