focus on the evaluation of results . the congress must continually ask agency heads for hard numbers and facts on what was spent on information technology and what the agency got in return for the investment . these evaluations , wherever possible , must focus on information technology's contribution to measurable improvements in mission performance . improvements in productivity , quality and speed of service delivery , customer satisfaction , and cost savings are common areas where technology's impact can be most immediate . how should the congress expect this scenario to change once agencies take steps to implement itmra ? in 5 to 7 years , the congress should have a much clearer , confident understanding of the benefits to agencies' performance that are attributable to it expenditures . on a governmentwide basis , there should be higher overall success rates for it projects completed within reasonable time frames , at acceptable costs , with positive net rates of return on investment . modular , well - defined it projects with short - term deliverables should be the rule rather than the exception . and institutionalized , up - to - date management processes should be producing consistent high - value investment decisions and results . mr chairman , itmra also has to reinforce and be reinforced by other important management reform legislation . just as technology is most effective when it supports defined business needs and objectives , itmra will be more powerful if it can be integrated with the objectives of broader governmentwide management reforms . for example , changes made by the federal acquisition reform act ( fara ) and the federal acquisition streamlining act ( fasa ) are focused on removing barriers to agencies obtaining products and services from outside sources in a timely , efficient manner . this is crucial in the technology arena where significant changes occur very rapidly . itmra builds in essential investment and performance ingredients that empower agencies to make wiser , not just faster , acquisitions of it products and services . the paperwork reduction act ( pra ) emphasizes the need for an overall information resources management strategic planning framework , with it decisions linked directly to mission needs and priorities . and , the act also focuses on reducing unnecessary information requirements on industry and citizens . itmra can work in concert with pra by making sure that agencies understand what information is needed , the purpose it is being used for , and ensure it is collected once and shared many times . the cfo act requires sound financial management practices and systems to be in place essential for tracking program costs and expenditures . itmra based - approaches to managing information systems should have a direct , positive impact on the creation of financial systems to support the higher levels of accountability envisioned by the act . gpra focuses attention on defining mission goals and objectives , measuring and evaluating performance , and reporting on results . budgets based on performance information provided under gpra should include clear treatment of it capital expenditures and its impact on agency operations . similarly , itmra effectively supports gpra by requiring that performance measures be used to indicate how technology effectively supports mission goals , objectives , and outcomes .