this is referred to as up - front funding . the requirement of full up - front funding is an essential tool in helping the congress make trade - offs among various spending alternatives . up - front funding helps ensure that decisionmakers are fully accountable for the budgetary and programmatic consequences of their decisions . this also ensures that the full costs of capital projects are recognized at the time the congress and the president make the commitment to undertake them . agencies have not always requested or received full up - front funding for capital acquisitions , however , which has occasionally resulted in higher acquisition costs , cancellation of major projects , and inadequate funding to maintain and operate the assets . for example , our work has identified the lack of full up - front funding as one of the key factors in the high rate of cost overruns , schedule slippages , and terminations in the department of energy's ( doe ) major acquisitions . and fourth , how should the program be evaluated after implementation ? ideally , policymakers should have access to measures of relative rates of return from federal investment programs in allocating resources among programs . however , such data are scarce and further research is needed to develop additional and better information on the economic effect of various types of investment proposals . potential economic returns may determine whether to embark on a plan for increased federal investment . in seeking the “best” federal investment , however , decisionmakers should consider not only estimated returns , but also whether the federal government is the right entity to address that need . alternative approaches to meeting the perceived public need should be considered before addressing the problem with federal outlays . program design is important to the ability of a program to contribute to private sector output and economic growth . decisionmakers should consider design issues to promote effective program delivery , including ( 1 ) coordination with other federal programs and those of state and local governments and ( 2 ) targeting of funds to achieve the highest possible benefit . coordination with state and local governments is particularly important when federal investments are implemented through those governments . policymakers need to be aware of the possibility that the states and localities could use federal investment funds to supplant their own spending . we have reported on this issue and found that studies have suggested that even the prospect of additional federal grant funds can prompt states and localities to reduce their planned spending , which could trigger a decline in total overall public spending for the funded activity . thus , even if a program is properly classified as an investment , its economic impact can be thwarted when federal funds are used to replace nonfederal funding . it is important that all public investment programs include , at the time of their implementation , provisions for evaluating program outcomes . policymakers should use outcome data to ensure that ongoing investment programs continue to be worthwhile and well designed under changing circumstances . also , to improve the federal government's ability to invest wisely in the future , it is important to learn from public investments that have already been made .