additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the world bank is reporting similar findings . the subcommittee is also addressing contingency planning for telecommunications . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . international voice and data services would be disrupted . telecommunications problems can affect virtually all network components — switches , routers , pbxs , and internet servers — all of which must be assessed and tested . compounding the risk is the global nature of today's telecommunications , which rely on seamless connections among widely scattered and widely diverse networks . in light of the potential risks involved , the federal government has recently begun to address the year 2000 readiness of the telecommunications sector . the government is undertaking telecommunications initiatives from three perspectives: national , international , and governmental . on february 4 of this year , the president's council on year 2000 conversion was created , with the mandate to cooperate with private - sector operators of critical national and local systems , including telecommunications , in addressing the year 2000 crisis . the council's recently established telecommunications working group — chaired by a federal communications commission ( fcc ) commissioner — held its first meeting on april 29 , 1998 ; membership includes representatives of the departments of agriculture , commerce , defense , and state ; fcc ; the general services administration ( gsa ) ; and the national science foundation . the group reports that it is developing a strategy and an action plan to address the key issues facing the telecommunications sector . these include raising industry awareness of the problem and disseminating information on best practices and contingency planning . in addition to its role on the council , within the past 2 months fcc has established a year 2000 internet web site , formed a task force to coordinate the activities of fcc bureaus to provide year 2000 information for consumers and industry , and coordinated an outreach effort to state public utility commissions . its specific national efforts are focusing on raising the year 2000 awareness of companies under its jurisdiction , monitoring the status of year 2000 readiness of the telecommunications sector , and helping telecommunications users obtain information from individual telecommunications service providers needed for testing . as part of this campaign , fcc in late april sent letters to over 200 telecommunications service providers , industry associations , and other interested organizations , advising them of the seriousness and potential impact of the year 2000 problem and asking them to share information about the year 2000-compliance status of their services with fcc , others in the telecommunications industry , and the public — including making such information available on the internet .