additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . these initiatives were planned for implementation in fiscal year 1995 . however , otfm has delayed its contract solicitation for investment custodian services until the end of june 1996 and has only recently begun to develop a contract solicitation for investment advisors . otfm officials told us that a lack of resources has caused them to delay contracting for these services . since 1991 , our testimonies and reports have called for interior to develop a comprehensive strategic plan to guide trust fund management improvements across interior agencies . we have criticized interior's past planning efforts as piecemeal corrective action plans which fell short of identifying the departmentwide improvements needed to ensure sound trust fund management . our june 1992 and september 1994 reports and our april 1994 testimony recommended that interior's strategic plan address needed improvements across interior agencies , including bia , blm , and mms . we endorsed the american indian trust fund management reform act of 1994 , which established a special trustee for american indians reporting directly to the secretary of the interior . the act made the special trustee responsible for overseeing indian trust fund management across these interior agencies and required the special trustee to develop a comprehensive strategic plan for trust fund management . tribes have expressed concerns about the scope and results of the reconciliation process . as stated in the secretary's may 31 , 1996 , report to the house committee on resources on indian trust fund reconciliation results , by april 30 , 1996 , only 2 tribes had accepted their account reconciliation results , 3 tribes had disputed their results , and the remaining 275 tribes had not decided whether to accept or dispute their account balances . if interior is unable to resolve tribes' concerns , a legislated settlement process could be used to resolve disputes about tribal account balances . our september 1995 report contained draft legislation outlining a settlement process , which we prepared in response to a request from the house committee on resources and the senate committee on indian affairs to initiate discussions on options for resolving disputed balances . while interior has initiated several management improvement actions over the past 3 years to correct the long - standing problems that gave rise to the concerns over the accuracy of tribal trust fund accounts , the improvements will take several years to complete . additionally , the current trust fund management and accounting systems and controls remain inadequate to ensure accurate trust fund accounting and asset management .