we support their enactment . second , entities now have 13 months from the end of the fiscal year to submit their single audit reports to the federal government . the proposed amendments would shorten this to 9 months . the amendments would require omb to establish a transition period of at least 2 years for entities to comply with the shorter time frame . after the transition period , federal agencies could authorize an entity to report later than 9 months , consistent with criteria issued by omb . we strongly support these provisions . of the officials we surveyed , 84 percent of the federal program managers and 64 percent of the state program managers believe the 13-month time frame is excessive . moreover , in fiscal year 1991 , 44 percent of state and local governments were able to submit their reports within 9 months after the end of their fiscal years . over time , i hope that it will be the rule , rather than the exception , for the audit reports to be submitted in less than 9 months . the proposed amendments would also expand the single audit act to include nonprofit organizations , thereby placing all entities receiving federal funds under the same ground rules . presently , the single audit act applies only to state and local governments while nonprofit organizations are administratively required to have single audits under omb circular a - 133 , “audits of institutions of higher education and other nonprofit organizations.” omb is in the final stages of revising circular a - 133 to parallel the requirements of the proposed amendments to the single audit act . the proposed amendments would provide a statutory basis for consistent , common requirements for state and local governments and nonprofit organizations . we strongly support this change . the proposed amendments would also reinforce one of the goals of the act to use single audits as the foundation for other audits . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . we encourage the enactment of the proposed amendments and commend the subcommittee for focusing on this important issue . mr. chairman , we would be pleased to work with the subcommittee as it considers the amendments to the single audit act . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or members may have at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . combined with summary reporting , the ability of federal agencies to review single audit working papers , and make necessary copies , can provide valuable information in their oversight of federal assistance programs . in closing , a number of organizations have worked for some time in gaining consensus on how to make the single audit process as efficient and effective as possible .