many agencies are behind schedule . at the current pace , it is clear that not all mission critical systems will be fixed in time . much more action is needed to ensure that federal agencies satisfactorily mitigate year 2000 risks to avoid debilitating consequences . vital economic sectors of the nation are also vulnerable . these include state and local governments ; telecommunications ; banking and finance ; health , safety , and emergency services ; transportation ; utilities ; and manufacturing and small business . as a result , if not modified , computer systems or applications that use dates or perform date - or time - sensitive calculations may generate incorrect results beyond 1999. leadership and public / private partnerships essential to confronting the unprecedented challenges posed by the year 2000 crisis . our testimony today outlines year 2000 risks and presents actions that should be taken by the president's council . we have provided for comment a draft report on these issues to the chairman of the president's council on year 2000 conversion and the office of management and budget ( omb ) and expect to issue it soon . in addition , at your request , my statement today will include an initial assessment of hud's year 2000 program . the public faces a risk that critical services could be severely disrupted by the year 2000 computing crisis . financial transactions could be delayed , airline flights grounded , and national defense affected . the many interdependencies that exist among governments and within key economic sectors could cause a single failure to have adverse repercussions . while managers in the government and the private sector are taking many actions to mitigate these risks , a significant amount of work remains , and time frames are unrelenting . the federal government is extremely vulnerable to the year 2000 issue due to its widespread dependence on computer systems to process financial transactions , deliver vital public services , and carry out its operations . this challenge is made more difficult by the age and poor documentation of the government's existing systems and its lackluster track record in modernizing systems to deliver expected improvements and meet promised deadlines . unless this issue is successfully addressed , serious consequences could ensue . for example: unless the federal aviation administration ( faa ) takes much more decisive action , there could be grounded or delayed flights , degraded safety , customer inconvenience , and increased airline costs . payments to veterans with service - connected disabilities could be severely delayed if the system that issues them either halts or produces checks so erroneous that it must be shut down and checks processed manually . the military services could find it extremely difficult to efficiently and effectively equip and sustain its forces around the world . federal systems used to track student loans could produce erroneous information on loan status , such as indicating that a paid loan was in default . internal revenue service tax systems could be unable to process returns , thereby jeopardizing revenue collection and delaying refunds . the social security administration process that provides benefits to disabled persons could be disrupted if interfaces with state systems fail .