agencies cannot afford to neglect any of these issues . if they do , the impact of year 2000 failures could be widespread , costly , and potentially disruptive to vital government operations worldwide . nevertheless , overall , the government's 24 major departments and agencies are making slow progress in fixing their systems . in their may 1998 quarterly reports to omb , only four agencies reported that they had drafted contingency plans for their core business processes . without such plans , when unpredicted failures occur , agencies will not have well - defined responses and may not have enough time to develop and test alternatives . federal agencies depend on data provided by their business partners as well as services provided by the public infrastructure ( eg , power , water , transportation , and voice and data telecommunications ) . one weak link anywhere in the chain of critical dependencies can cause major disruptions to business operations . given these interdependencies , it is imperative that contingency plans be developed for all critical core business processes and supporting systems , regardless of whether these systems are owned by the agency . our recently issued guidance aims to help agencies ensure such continuity of operations through contingency planning . third , omb's assessment of the current status of federal year 2000 progress is predominantly based on agency reports that have not been consistently reviewed or verified . without independent reviews , omb and the president's council on year 2000 conversion have little assurance that they are receiving accurate information . in fact , we have found cases in which agencies' systems compliance status as reported to omb has been inaccurate . for example , the dod inspector general estimated that almost three quarters of dod's mission - critical systems reported as compliant in november 1997 had not been certified as compliant by dod components.in may 1998 , the department of agriculture reported ( usda ) 15 systems as compliant , even though these were replacement systems that were still under development or were planned for development . in may 1997 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) reported that about 21 percent of the mission - critical systems ( 1,598 of 7,649 ) for these departments and agencies were year 2000 compliant . ssa agreed with these recommendations and , in july 1998 , we reported that actions to implement these recommendations had either been taken or were underway . further , we found that ssa has maintained its place as a federal leader in addressing year 2000 issues and has made significant progress in achieving systems compliance . however , essential tasks remain . for example , many of the states' disability determination service systems still had to be renovated , tested , and deemed year 2000 compliant . our work has shown that much likewise remains to be done in dod and the military services . consequently , agencies must work early and continually with their data exchange partners to plan and execute effective end - to - end tests .