however , under h.r . 853 , if a joint resolution is enacted into law , it would specify subtotals of new budget authority and outlays for nondefense and defense discretionary spending , direct spending , emergencies , and other subsets of spending if deemed necessary . if the president signs the joint resolution and it is enacted , these subtotals would replace the current law's spending limits . it was neutral as to fiscal policy . it was not until the enactment of the balanced budget and emergency deficit control act ( also known as gramm - rudman - hollings or grh ) in 1985 that the budget process was designed to achieve a particular goal . both grh and the 1987 amendments to it sought to achieve a specific outcome: a balanced budget by a time certain . however , grh sought to use a change in process to force agreement on substance - - and measured against its stated objective of a balanced budget , it did not succeed . the 1990 budget enforcement act ( bea ) took a different tack toward the same end . while it also sought to achieve a balanced budget , it used process to enforce a previously reached agreement . it was designed to limit congressional actions that would increase the deficit . on its own terms bea succeeded , but its ambition was limited . it did not seek to control economic or demographic - driven growth in existing entitlement programs - - and that is the area of greatest growth today . nevertheless , the combination of fiscal discipline and economic growth led to the first balanced budget in nearly 30 years . today , therefore , a different fiscal situation has emerged . after nearly 30 years of unified budget deficits , current projections are for “surpluses as far as the eye can see.” at the same time , the country faces a demographic tidal wave that will - - absent a change in policy - - overwhelm the budget . bea contains a number of different limits on budget authority and / or outlays . for fiscal years 2001and 2002 , it contains budget authority and outlay limits for discretionary programs and separate outlay limits for highway and mass transit programs . however , h.r . 853 contains “fall - back” procedures for expediting a concurrent resolution if the president vetoes the joint resolution . while this is a workable way for dealing with the possibility of a presidential veto , failure to enact the joint resolution on the budget means that bea's limits on discretionary , highway , and mass transit are still in effect . this would lead to a situation in which the concurrent resolution would contain subtotals for defense , nondefense , and emergencies while the governing law contained statutory limits on discretionary , highway , and mass transit spending . it would appear that the concurrent resolution on the budget's subtotals for defense , nondefense , and emergencies would serve as a blueprint / guide for congressional action on spending , revenue , and debt without the force of law .