we are currently reviewing these actions . over the past decade , gao has issued several reports and testified before congressional committees on irs' costs and difficulties in modernizing its information systems . as a critical information systems project that is vulnerable to schedule delays , cost over - runs , and potential failure to meet mission goals , in february 1995 , tax systems modernization ( tsm ) was added to our list of high - risk areas . in july 1995 , we reported that one of irs' most pressing problems is efficiently and effectively processing the over 200 million tax returns it receives annually ; handling about 1 billion information documents , such as w2s and 1099s ; and , when needed , retrieving tax returns from the over 1.2 billion tax returns in storage . irs' labor - intensive tax return processing , which uses concepts instituted in the late 1950s , intensifies the need to meet this enormous information processing demand by reengineering processes and using modern technology effectively . since 1986 , irs has invested over $2.5 billion in tsm . it plans to spend an additional $695 million in fiscal year 1996 for this effort , and through 2001 , it is expected to spend up to $8 billion on tsm . by any measure , this is a world - class information systems development effort , much larger than most other organizations will ever undertake . tsm is key to irs' vision of a virtually paper - free work environment where taxpayer account updates are rapid , and taxpayer information is readily available to irs employees to respond to taxpayer inquiries . irs recognizes the criticality to future efficient and effective operations of attaining its vision of modernized tax processing , and has worked for almost a decade , with substantial investment , to reach this goal . in doing so , irs has progressed in many actions that were initiated to improve management of information systems ; enhance its software development capability ; and better define , perform , and manage tsm's technical activities . however , our july report noted that the government's investment and irs' efforts to modernize tax processing were at serious risk due to pervasive management and technical weaknesses that were impeding modernization efforts . in this regard , irs did not have a comprehensive business strategy to cost - effectively reduce paper submissions , and it had not yet fully developed and put in place the requisite management , software development , and technical infrastructures necessary to successfully implement an ambitious world - class modernization effort like tsm . many management and technical issues were unresolved , and promptly addressing them was crucial to mitigate risks and better position irs to achieve a successful information systems modernization . first , irs' business strategy did not maximize electronic filings because it primarily targeted taxpayers who use a third party to prepare and / or transmit simple returns , were willing to pay a fee to file their returns electronically , and were expecting refunds .