controls . consequently , these agencies rely on costly , time - consuming ad hoc procedures to determine year - end balances . error ! no text of specified style in document . to the congress and the administration . without reliable financial information , government leaders do not have the full facts necessary to make investments of scarce resources or direct programs . creating a government that runs more efficiently and effectively has been a public concern for decades . over the past 10 years , dramatic changes have occurred in federal financial management in response to the most comprehensive management reform legislation of the past 40 years . the combination of reforms ushered in by ( 1 ) the chief financial officers ( cfo ) act of 1990 , ( 2 ) the government management reform act of 1994 , ( 3 ) the federal financial management improvement act ( ffmia ) of 1996 , ( 4 ) the government performance and results act ( gpra ) of 1993 , and ( 5 ) the clinger - cohen act of 1996 will , if successfully implemented , provide the necessary foundation to run an effective , results - oriented government . efforts to continue to build the foundation for generating accurate financial information through lasting financial management reform are essential . only by generating reliable and useful information can the government ensure adequate accountability to taxpayers , manage for results , and help decisionmakers make timely , well - informed judgments . education's fiscal year 1999 audit was conducted by ernst & young llp , independent auditors contracted for by the education inspector general . we reviewed the independent auditors' reports and workpapers . we also interviewed education officials to obtain the status of corrective actions and reviewed available corrective action plans . we shared a draft of this statement with education officials , who provided technical comments . we have incorporated their comments where appropriate . our work was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . the office of management and budget's ( omb ) implementation guidance for audited financial statements requires the 24 cfo act agencies to receive three reports from their auditors annually: ( 1 ) an opinion or report on the agencies' financial statements , ( 2 ) a report on the agencies' internal controls , and ( 3 ) a report on the agencies' compliance with laws and regulations . as of august 2000 , 15 of the 24 cfo act agencies had received “clean” or unqualified opinions on their fiscal year 1999 financial statements . the department of education did not receive such an opinion because of its financial management weaknesses . error ! no text of specified style in document . while education's financial staff and its contractors worked very hard to prepare education's fiscal year 1999 financial statements before the march 1 , 2000 , deadline , and the auditors' opinion on the financial statements improved over that of fiscal year 1998 , serious internal control and financial management systems weaknesses continued to plague the agency . for fiscal year 1999 , education made significant efforts to work around these weaknesses and produce financial statements .