the questions that remain are when and how . our 1995 simulations also confirm the long - term economic and fiscal benefits of deficit reduction . we assessed the long - term impacts of balancing the budget by 2002 , as was contemplated in the fiscal year 1996 budget resolution and in the recent executive - congressional discussions over budget policy , and of sustaining such a posture through 2025 . we also estimated the effects of following a path that we called “muddling through” — that is , running deficit of about 3 percent of gdp over the next 30 years . although current policy is better than this in the near term , it is still a useful illustration . a fiscal policy of balance would yield a stronger economy in the long term than either a policy of no action or of muddling through . table 1 shows that a budget balance reached in 2002 and sustained until 2025 would , over time , lead to increased investment , increased capital stock , a larger economy , and a much lower national debt than either of the other scenarios . this means that americans could enjoy a higher standard of living than they might otherwise experience . reaching and sustaining balance would also shrink the share of federal spending required to pay interest costs , thereby reducing the long - term programmatic sacrifice necessary to attain deficit reduction targets . even “muddling through” with deficits of 3 percent of gdp would exact a price through higher interest costs and thus require progressively harder fiscal choices as time progresses . under the balance path , debt per capita would decline from $13,500 in 1994 to $4,800 in 1995 dollars by 2025 ; debt as a percentage of the economy would drop from about 52 percent to 13 percent . because of this shrinkage in the debt , by 2025 a balance path could bring interest costs down from about 12 percent in 1994 to less than 5 percent of our budget , compared to about 18 percent under “muddling through” and almost a third of our budget with no action . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . these differences are illustrated in figure 3 . a higher level of national savings is essential to the achievement of a higher rate of economic growth but , by itself , is not sufficient to assure that result . certain other ingredients are necessary — including the basic stability with which this nation has been blessed in its social , political , and economic environment . in addition , however , economic growth depends on an efficient public infrastructure , an educated work force , an expanding base of knowledge , and a continuing infusion of innovations . in the past , the federal government , through its investments in these areas , has played an important role in providing an environment conducive to growth .