the benefits have been enormous . vast amounts of information are now literally at our fingertips , facilitating research on virtually every topic imaginable ; financial and other business transactions can be executed almost instantaneously , often on a 24-hour - a - day basis ; and electronic mail , internet web sites , and computer bulletin boards allow us to communicate quickly and easily with a virtually unlimited number of other individuals and groups . in addition to such benefits , however , this widespread interconnectivity poses significant risks to our computer systems and , more important , to the critical operations and infrastructures they support . telecommunications , power distribution , national defense — including the military's warfighting capability , law enforcement , government services , and emergency services all depend on the security of their computer operations . the speed and accessibility that create the enormous benefits of the computer age likewise , if not properly controlled , allow individuals and organizations to inexpensively eavesdrop on or interfere with these operations from remote locations for mischievous or malicious purposes , including fraud or sabotage . disruptions caused by recent virus attacks , such as the iloveyou virus this past may and 1999's melissa virus , have illustrated the potential for damage that such attacks hold.in addition , natural disasters and inadvertent errors by authorized computer users can have devastating consequences if information resources are poorly protected . government officials are increasingly concerned about attacks from individuals and groups with malicious intent , such as crime , terrorism , foreign intelligence gathering , and acts of war . according to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , terrorists , transnational criminals , and intelligence services are quickly becoming aware of and using information exploitation tools such as computer viruses , trojan horses , worms , logic bombs , and eavesdropping sniffers that can destroy , intercept , or degrade the integrity of and deny access to data . as greater amounts of money are transferred through computer systems , as more sensitive economic and commercial information is exchanged electronically , and as the nation's defense and intelligence communities increasingly rely on commercially available information technology , the likelihood that information attacks will threaten vital national interests increases . our previous analyses have shown that federal agency systems were not being adequately protected from these threats , even though these systems process , store , and transmit enormous amounts of sensitive data and are indispensable to many federal agency operations . in september 1996 , we reported that serious weaknesses had been found at 10 of the largest 15 federal agencies.in that report we concluded that poor information security was a widespread federal problem with potentially devastating consequences ; accordingly , in 1997 and 1999 reports to the congress , we identified information security as a high - risk issue.in 1998 , we analyzed audit results for 24 of the largest federal agencies: all of them had significant information security weaknesses . evaluations published since july 1999 continue to show that federal computer systems are riddled with weaknesses that continue to put critical operations and assets at risk . as in 1998 , our current analysis identified significant weaknesses in each of the 24 agencies covered by our review .