many of these audits are now done annually . this growing body of audit evidence is providing a more complete and detailed picture of federal information security than was previously available . the most recent set of audit results that we evaluated — those published since march 1996 — describe significant information security weakness in each of the 24 federal agencies covered by our analysis . these weaknesses cover a variety of areas , which we have grouped into six categories of general control weaknesses . the most widely reported weakness was poor control over access to sensitive data and systems . this area of control was evaluated at 23 of the 24 agencies , and weaknesses were identified at each of the 23 . access control weaknesses make systems vulnerable to damage and misuse by allowing individuals and groups to inappropriately modify , destroy , or disclose sensitive data or computer programs for purposes such as personal gain or sabotage . access controls limit or detect inappropriate access to computer resources ( data , equipment , and facilities ) , thereby protecting them against unauthorized modification , loss , and disclosure . access controls include physical protections , such as gates and guards , as well as logical controls , which are controls built into software that ( 1 ) require users to authenticate themselves through the use of secret passwords or other identifiers and ( 2 ) limit the files and other resources that an authenticated user can access and the actions that he or she can execute . in today's increasingly interconnected computing environment , poor access controls can expose an agency's information and operations to potentially devastating attacks from remote locations all over the world by individuals with minimal computer and telecommunications resources and expertise . common types of access control weaknesses included overly broad access privileges inappropriately provided to very large access that was not appropriately authorized and documented ; multiple users sharing the same accounts and passwords , making it impossible to trace specific transactions or modifications to an individual ; inadequate monitoring of user activity to deter and identify inappropriate actions , investigate suspicious activity , and penalize perpetrators ; improperly implemented access controls , resulting in unintended access or gaps in access control coverage ; and access that was not promptly terminated or adjusted when users either left an agency or when their responsibilities no longer required them to have access to certain files . the second most widely reported type of weakness pertained to service continuity . service continuity controls ensure that when unexpected events occur , critical operations continue without undue interruption and critical and sensitive data are protected . in addition to protecting against natural disasters and accidental disruptions , such controls also protect against the growing threat of “cyber - terrorism,” where individuals or groups with malicious intent may attack an agency's systems in order to severely disrupt critical operations . for this reason , an agency should have ( 1 ) procedures in place to protect information resources and minimize the risk of unplanned interruptions and ( 2 ) a plan to recover critical operations should interruptions occur . to determine whether recovery plans will work as intended , they should be tested periodically in disaster simulation exercises .