the questionnaires also did not include system interface issues . for example , they did not inquire about ( 1 ) identifying interfaces with outside organizations and their systems , such as payment , check clearing , credit card , and benefit transfer systems , and ( 2 ) establishing agreements with these organizations specifying how data will be exchanged in the year 2000 and beyond . as a result , even when ncua assesses the results , it still will not have a complete understanding of how far along the industry is in addressing the problem . in addition , ncua examinations are conducted only on an annual basis . this means that each credit union will be examined only two more times between the end of 1997 and the year 2000 . further , ncua has not yet established a formal mechanism for credit unions to submit interim progress reports to provide an up - to - date picture of individual correction efforts between examinations . ncua officials told us that examiners perform off - site supervision in between exams by tracking performance via credit union financial reports and by contacting credit union officials should a problem arise . however , this may not be enough given the seriousness of the problem and the fact that the year 2000 deadline is just 2 years away . further complicating ncua's situation is the fact that it is still involved in assessment phase activities . specifically , ncua should require credit union auditors to include year 2000 issues within the scope of their management and internal control work and report serious problems and corrective actions to ncua immediately . according to omb and gao guidance , these activities should have been completed back in the summer . as it stands , ncua does not plan to complete them until the end of this calendar year . such a certification process should include credit union compliance testing by an independent third party and should allow sufficient time for ncua to review the results . our fourth concern is that ncua does not have enough staff qualified to conduct examination work in complex technical areas . at present , ncua is the process of hiring one edp auditor to help examine thousands of credit unions . recognizing this weakness , ncua is considering hiring up to three edp auditors . accordingly , we believe ncua should accelerate agency efforts to complete the assessment of the state of the industry by no later than november 15 , 1997 , rather than waiting until the end of the year . ncua should also collect the necessary information to determine the exact phase of each credit union and vendor in addressing the year 2000 problem . because ncua currently does not have a process in place for interim reporting of this information between examinations , ncua should require credit unions to report the precise status ( phase ) of their efforts on at least a quarterly basis . one option would be to use the financial reports , commonly referred to as call reports , that credit unions provide to ncua quarterly .