our audits have spanned fiscal years 1992 through 1995 . the taxpayer has an opportunity to refute an estimated assessment , and often does , because the amount may be overstated or may not apply . in fiscal year 1995 , irs' financial statements and our audit covered a reported $1.4 trillion of tax revenue , or over 90 percent of revenues used to help fund the federal government's operations . also covered were $8 billion of operating costs for carrying out irs activities and programs involving processing tax returns and providing taxpayer assistance , enforcing tax laws and collecting revenues , maintaining and building information systems , and carrying out various administrative and management activities . prior to the cfo act's requirements , irs had not prepared financial statements and had never undergone a financial audit . cfo act implementation has ( 1 ) led to irs top managers having a much better understanding than ever before of irs' serious and pervasive accounting and reporting problems , ( 2 ) provided information on the magnitude of irs' tax receivables collection problems , and ( 3 ) identified the need for stronger controls over such areas as payroll operations . the cfo act's requirements also have provided the impetus for efforts to improve irs operations and address the substantial problems identified by our financial audits . since our first audit of irs' financial statements , irs has implemented a new financial system to improve accounting and reporting for its administrative operations , has begun to use the payroll services provided by the department of agriculture's national finance center , and has other improvement efforts ongoing . however , we have been unable to express an opinion on the reliability of irs' financial statements for any of the 4 fiscal years from 1992 through 1995 . the following fundamental , persistent problems remain uncorrected and , until they are resolved , will continue to prevent us from expressing an opinion on irs' financial statements in the future . the amounts of total revenue ( $1.4 trillion ) and tax refunds ( $122 billion ) cannot be verified or reconciled to accounting records maintained for individual taxpayers in the aggregate . the amounts reported for various types of taxes collected ( for example , social security , income , and excise taxes ) cannot be substantiated . the reliability of reported estimates of $113 billion for valid accounts receivable and $46 billion for collectible accounts receivable cannot be determined . a significant portion of irs' reported $3 billion in nonpayroll operating expenses cannot be verified . the amounts irs reported as appropriations available for expenditure for operations cannot be reconciled fully with treasury's central accounting records showing these amounts , and hundreds of millions of dollars in differences have been identified . to help irs resolve these issues , we have made 59 recommendations to improve irs' financial management systems and reporting . irs agreed with these recommendations and has worked to implement them and correct its financial management systems and information problems . however , many of the more significant recommendations have not yet been fully implemented .