additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . some individual agencies have successfully solved these problems . for example , the social security administration ( ssa ) prepared financial statements for fiscal year 1987 — prior to the expanded cfo act's requirement — addressed financial weaknesses , and attained its first unqualified audit opinion for fiscal year 1994 . as this subcommittee heard at its april 17 , 1998 , hearing , ssa now produces financial statements within 2 months of the close of the fiscal year and continues to receive unqualified audit opinions annually . at the department of energy , the inspector general identified problems related to the balance sheet energy prepared for fiscal year 1995 . the problems , for example , involved identifying liabilities associated with environmental cleanup and controls over property and equipment , which energy worked to correct . the following year , fiscal year 1996 , energy prepared agencywide financial statements that received an unqualified opinion and sustained these results for fiscal year 1997 . many people are actively working to resolve federal financial management problems . for example , omb has issued guidance to agencies on producing useful financial reports that meet fasab standards . in addition to individual cfos working to address issues in their agencies , the cfo council , working with omb , develops an annual financial management status report and 5-year plan . inspectors general are carrying out their responsibilities to ensure annual audits of financial statements . on march 31 , 1998 , the secretary of the treasury , in consultation with the director of omb , issued the 1997 consolidated financial statements of the united states government . these audited governmentwide financial statements were the first prepared and issued under provisions of the expanded cfo act and included our first report required by the act . on april 1 , 1998 , we testified before this subcommittee on the results of our audit . our testimony framed the most serious financial management improvement challenges facing the federal government . in summary , significant financial systems weaknesses ; problems with fundamental recordkeeping ; incomplete documentation ; and weak internal controls , including computer controls , prevented the government from accurately reporting a large portion of its assets , liabilities , and costs . our audit of the federal government's consolidated financial statements and the inspectors general audits of agencies' financial statements have resulted in an identification and analysis of deficiencies in the government's recordkeeping and control system and recommendations to correct them . the executive branch recognizes the extent and severity of the financial management deficiencies and that addressing them will require concerted improvement efforts across government . financial management has been designated one of the president's priority management objectives , with the goal of having performance and cost information in a timely , informative , and accurate way , consistent with federal accounting standards . also , the administration has set goals for individual agencies , as well as the government as a whole , to complete audits and gain unqualified opinions .