currently , it is not . 4246 to work , however , this legislation needs to be accompanied by aggressive outreach efforts ; effective centralized leadership ; and good tools for collecting , analyzing , and sharing information . moreover , the federal government cannot realistically expect to engage private - sector participation without putting its own house in order . doing so will require concerted efforts by senior executives , program managers , and technical specialists to institute the basic management framework needed to effectively detect , protect against , and recover from critical infrastructure attacks . moreover , it will require cooperative efforts by executive agencies and by the central management agencies , such as omb , to address crosscutting issues and to ensure that improvements are realized . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for questions regarding this testimony , please contact jack l. brock , jr. at ( 202 ) 512-6240 . individuals making key contributions included cristina chaplain , michael gilmore , and paul nicholas . data on possible threats — ranging from viruses , to hoaxes , to random threats , to news events , and computer intrusions — must be continually collected and analyzed from a wide spectrum of globally distributed sources in addition to sector - based groups . nevertheless , fusing the right information from the public and private sectors in an operational setting is essential to detecting , warning , and responding to information - based attacks . the national infrastructure protection center ( nipc ) , located in the federal bureau of investigation , is charged with this mission , but it is not clear whether nipc has the right tools and resources needed to successfully coordinate information collection efforts with the private sector and to effectively correlate and analyze information received . we are currently engaged in an effort to review this capability . in addition to collecting and analyzing data , the federal government needs to be able to effectively share information about infrastructure threats . again , nipc is charged with this responsibility and we are also reviewing its capability with respect to this issue . but , already , results in this area have been mixed . in december 1999 , nipc provided early warnings about a rash of denial - of - service attacks prominently on its website — 2 months before the attack arrived in full force – and offered a tool that could be downloaded to scan for the presence of the denial of service code . however , as we recently testified,nipc had less success with the iloveyou virus . nipc first learned of the virus at 5:45 a.m. edt from an industry source , yet it did not issue an alert about the virus on its own web page until 11 a.m. — hours after many federal agencies were reportedly hit . this notice was a brief advisory ; nipc did not offer advice on dealing with the virus until 10 p.m. that evening . the lack of a more effective early warning clearly affected most federal agencies .