additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . many of these problems will take years to fully correct . they represent serious agencywide financial and other management challenges that will require a substantial commitment of resources , time , effort , and expertise to correct . others , while serious issues , can be effectively addressed in the near term through a concerted effort on the part of irs management . in irs' response to our audit , the agency has acknowledged the issues raised in our audit and has pledged to take the corrective actions needed to resolve these serious internal control and financial management issues . i would now like to summarize the major issues identified in our fiscal year 1998 audit , several of which directly affected our opinions on irs' fiscal year 1998 financial statements . irs does not have internal controls over its financial reporting process adequate to provide reasonable assurance that its principal financial statements are reliable . as a result , irs ( 1 ) was unable to prepare reliable statements of net cost , changes in net position , budgetary resources , and financing and ( 2 ) could not support material amounts reported on its balance sheet , including fund balance with treasury , accounts payable , and net position . in addition , we found that property and equipment is likely to be materially understated . we found that the custodial and administrative general ledger systems which support the principal financial statements are not in conformance with the u.s. government standard general ledger ( sgl ) at the transaction level and do not provide a complete audit trail for recorded transactions , material balances reported on irs' principal financial statements are not supported by detailed subsidiary records , and irs' principal financial statements are not subject to management oversight adequate to provide reasonable assurance that significant errors and omissions are identified and corrected before the principal financial statements are issued . in an effort to overcome these deficiencies , irs employs a costly , labor intensive , and time - consuming process involving extensive and complex analysis and ad hoc procedures to assist in preparing its principal financial statements . irs continues to utilize specialized computer programs to extract information from databases underlying the administrative and custodial general ledgers to derive and / or support amounts to be reported in the principal financial statements . for example , irs must use this process to identify the portion of its unpaid assessments that represent taxes receivable for financial reporting purposes .