va concurred with this recommendation . it decided to separate the cio function from the chief financial officer and established the position of assistant secretary for information and technology to serve as va's cio . this executive branch position — assistant secretary for information and technology — has remained unfilled , however , since its creation in 1998 . instead , the principal deputy assistant secretary for information and technology served as va's acting cio from july 1998 until he retired on june 1 , 2000 . in addition , vba must develop data exchanges to allow the compensation and pension replacement system to share data with other systems . for example , it is critical that changes to veteran information , such as name and address , captured in the compensation and pension replacement system be changed in other vba systems . lastly , vba is vulnerable to disruptions due to contractor volatility and staffing uncertainties . for example , of the 25 contractors currently involved in the compensation and pension replacement project , over half ( 13 ) have been added to the project within the last year . according to vba officials , they may also experience problems with obtaining in - house staff from its data centers to help develop the compensation and pension replacement system and other vba projects , such as an effort to consolidate vba's data center operations from hines ( illinois ) and philadelphia to austin , because they compete for some of the same people over the next 2 years . these concerns increase the likelihood that schedule delays and cost overruns may occur . vba officials acknowledge the above issues and have informed us that efforts are underway to address them . however , until vba develops a fully integrated project plan and schedule that incorporates all critical system development areas , challenges and vulnerabilities will remain . the last area you asked us to discuss is computer security — critical to any organization's ability to safeguard its assets , maintain the confidentiality of sensitive information , and ensure the reliability of its financial data . if effective computer security practices are not in place , financial and sensitive information contained in va's systems is at risk of inadvertent or deliberate misuse , fraud , improper disclosure , or destruction — possibly occurring without detection . over the past several years we have reported on va's computer security weaknesses . in september 1998 we reported that computer security weaknesses placed critical va operations such as financial management , health care delivery , and benefits payments at risk of misuse and disruption.we reported in october 1999 that va's success in improving computer security largely depended on strong commitment and adequate resources being dedicated to the information security program plan.in may 2000 we testifiedthat va had still not adequately limited the access granted to authorized users , appropriately segregated incompatible duties among computer personnel , adequately managed user identification and passwords , or routinely monitored access activity .