further , not all of these applications are critical . for example , a january 1998 forest service analysis of the applications that it plans to repair indicated that only 48 of 137 are critical applications . we do not agree with gipsa and rma . it is misleading to list systems as compliant when work is still to be completed . usda's year 2000 program executive stated that he agreed that these systems should not be listed as compliant . at the same time that usda is facing an enormous challenge to replace , repair , and retire its mission - critical systems , component agencies are beginning to report losses of information technology staff . while usda has not performed a departmentwide assessment of its year 2000 technology staffing needs and losses , several component agencies have recently expressed concern that the loss of staff will affect their ability to complete their year 2000 programs . for example , fsa stated that it had lost 28 of 403 ( 7 percent ) of its information technology staff between october 1997 and april 1998 , and forest service officials said that they lost 12 information technology staff in the past 5 months . moreover , in its may 1998 report , forest service reported losing contractors to better paying positions . the cio has taken some action , such as obtaining a waiver from the office of personnel management that allows usda to rehire former federal personnel without financial penalty . however , according to usda , this rehiring authority does not cover usda employees who left the agency under the department's specific buyout authority . usda will incur substantial costs to implement its year 2000 program . it has estimated its year 2000 costs at $118 million ( as of february 1998 ) . however , this estimate does not include all year 2000-related costs , such as ( 1 ) fns' share of repairing or replacing the state systems that are used to implement its programs and ( 2 ) the cost to renovate or replace telecommunications or vulnerable systems ( which usda defines as embedded systems such as laboratory equipment and facility systems ) . at the request of the year 2000 program office , some component agencies started reporting these cost estimates and usda intends to incorporate the costs to renovate or replace telecommunications and vulnerable systems in its next quarterly report to omb , due may 15 , 1998 . although agencies should have completed the assessment phase of year 2000 readiness last summer , critical assessment tasks for many usda agencies remain unfinished . even some basic tasks , such as inventorying systems , have not yet been completed . for example , while some of the component agencies in our review reported having completed inventories of telecommunications and vulnerable systems , most have not . usda expects these inventories to be completed this july . table 1 identifies key tasks that should be done during the assessment or renovation phases , yet remain incomplete in many cases . according to our year 2000 readiness guide , agencies should track their renovation and replacement efforts and use project metrics to manage costs and schedules .