what was achieved ? what are the government's assets and are they well managed ? what are its liabilities and how will they be paid for ? stewardship: has the government's overall financial capacity to satisfy current and future needs and costs improved or deteriorated ? what are its future commitments and are they being provided for ? how will the government's programs affect the future growth potential of the economy ? systems and control: does the government have sufficient controls over its programs so that it can detect and correct problems ? standards and reports addressing these objectives are being phased in over time . since the enactment of the cfo act , omb's guidance on the form and content of financial statements has stressed the use of narrative “overview” sections preceding the basic financial statements as the best way for agencies to relate mission goals and program performance measures to financial resources . each financial statement includes an overview describing the agency , its mission , activities , accomplishments , and overall financial results and condition . the overview also should discuss what , if anything , needs to be done to improve either program or financial performance , including an identification of programs or activities that may need significant future funding . agencies are beginning to produce reports that do this . for example , ssa's fiscal year 1994 financial statement overview presented a number of performance measures dealing with the adequacy of the trust fund , service satisfaction , promptness in issuing earnings statements and processing claims , and the adequacy of employee training . linking the costs of achieving these performance levels is the next challenge . in this regard , fasab's cost accounting standards — the first set of standards to account for costs of federal government programs — will require agencies to develop measures of the full costs of carrying out a mission or producing products or services . they are to ( 1 ) develop a strategic plan , ( 2 ) establish performance measures to monitor progress in meeting strategic goals , and ( 3 ) link performance information to resource requirements through the budget . gpra requires up to five performance budgeting pilots for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 . omb will report the results of these pilots in 2001 and recommend whether performance budgets should be legislatively required . cultural changes in federal agencies are beginning as agency pilots develop strategic plans and performance measures . omb also has prompted progress by giving special emphasis in the fiscal year 1996 circular a - 11 , preparation and submission of budget estimates , to increasing the use of information on program performance in budget justifications . moreover , omb director rivlin instructed her agency to use performance information in making budget recommendations . in preparation for the fiscal year 1997 budget cycle , omb held performance reviews in may with agencies on performance measures and recently issued guidance on preparing and submitting strategic plans . further progress in implementing gpra will occur as performance measures become more widespread and agencies begin to use audited financial information in the budget process to validate and assess agency performance .