this is not easy . over the past several years gao has made a number of suggestions about changes in the budget process . a list of some of those testimonies and reports is attached to my statement . today , however , as you requested , i'd like to focus not on specific changes but on the question of how the process came to look as it does today and the challenges you face in the near term . for fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , omb once again included a citizen - oriented document as part of the budget documents . the citizen's guide to the federal budget provided an overview of the budget , highlighting such concepts as the deficit and the debt , and reviewing the president's budget proposals . they did not , however , provide much insight on the long - term implications of current spending policies . citizens cannot be expected to feel a stake in the budget debate — a debate that will affect all our lives and our national future — or to accept decisions made by others without basic information . at a minimum citizens need to how much money the federal government takes in — and how — and on what funds are spent . each of the criteria or goals are important , and they are related — but they cannot all be maximized in a single process . trade - offs are necessary . any review of the budget process comes up against the overarching question: is there just too much process ? the feeling that there are too many votes on related issues is , as i noted , in part a function of the way the process was created , of the decision to layer the budget committees and the budget process on top of the existing committee and procedural structure of the house and the senate . the idea was that the budget resolution would define the overall aggregates and the rest of the process would proceed within those aggregates . as i mentioned above , however , especially as the goal of the process shifted to deficit reduction , this distinction became increasingly strained . there are a number of possible responses , but most of them involve considering the relationship of the budget resolution to legislation and of the various committees in the congress . streamlining — making the process take less time — has been the focus of a number of proposals in the past . however , it is in this area that it is especially important to think about the fact that a response to one problem may create another problem . eliminating parts of the process or changing the cycle will have consequences beyond reducing the number of votes . these may or may not be acceptable , but they should be recognized . i will touch very briefly on three processes: the budget resolution , authorizations , and appropriations . if the recent pattern of multi - year fiscal policy agreements is to continue , are annual budget resolutions still necessary ? it is important to review progress every year , but such a review may not require a complete budget resolution .