inquiry is read only access . clerk access allows the user to enter data other than remittance addresses . subsupervisor access allows the user to input or change contract data ; information on obligations , invoices , and receiving reports ; and remittance addresses . supervisor access allows the user to perform all subsupervisor functions as well as assign or remove access . the staff sergeant who committed the dfas dayton fraud had supervisor access . proper and effective internal controls would preclude allowing any individual user to have the ability to record an obligation , create and change invoices and receiving reports , and enter remittance addresses . our review of the vendor payment process at dfas dayton and dfas denver's directorate of finance and accounting operations confirmed that employees with supervisor and subsupervisor access to the vendor payment system could make fraudulent payments without detection by entering contract information and obligations , invoice and receiving report data , and changing or creating a remittance address . if the data on a false invoice and receiving report match the information on the voucher , certifying officers are not likely to detect a fraudulent payment through their certification process , a key prevention control . second , problems with the lack of segregated access within the payment system application are compounded by the excessive and widespread access to the system throughout dfas and the air force . our review of vendor payment system access levels as of mid - june 1998 showed that 1,867 users across dfas and air force installations had supervisor or subsupervisor access . further , 94 of these users had not accessed the system since 1997 , indicating that they may no longer be assigned to vendor payment operations . in addition , 171 users had not accessed the system at all , possibly indicating that access is not required as a regular part of their duties . dfas officials told us they were unaware that such a large number of employees had broad access to the vendor payment system . after we briefed the dfas denver center director about our concerns , he told us that the current operational review program would be revised to place a greater focus on internal controls , including the review of vendor payment system access levels . dfas officials told us that for air force employees outside the operating locations who had supervisor or subsupervisor access , but only need status reports , they have initiated action to reduce the level of access to inquiry only . they also told us that they would consider modifying the supervisor and subsupervisor access levels across dfas locations to provide for greater segregation of duties within the vendor payment application for employees responsible for processing payments . finally , with respect to access controls , there are significant weaknesses in the mainframe operating system security and the vendor payment system application that would allow unauthorized users to make fraudulent or improper payments . a recently completed review by the defense information systems agency ( disa ) , performed at our request , identified the following problems with the mainframe operating system on which dfas denver's directorate of finance and accounting operations vendor payment system runs . excessive access to powerful system utilities was permitted .