this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . what has that money purchased ? a huge learning experience about the difficulty of acquiring such a large system under a single contract and a better understanding of the requirements for developing a medicare claims processing system , but no integrated claims processing software to aid hcfa in preventing fraud and abuse . still to be delivered to hcfa , at additional cost under the original contract , is a set of application requirements for what was to have been the managed care module . the agency is considering awarding another contract for the development and implementation of managed care software using these requirements . in addition , it is now beginning to reconsider its approach for identifying requirements and developing software for two features that were planned as part of mts: a beneficiary insurance file and a financial management component . while the mts termination delays one means of possibly combatting fraud and abuse , hcfa has two other independent information technology initiatives in this area that are continuing . these separate initiatives are analyzing the potential for using existing commercial software and exploring the possibilities for developing antifraud software . in may 1995 , we reported on the potential benefits of hcfa's use of commercial software to help detect inappropriate medical coding , a common form of billing abuse . we concluded that hcfa had not kept pace with private industry's use of such software , and that hcfa's internal efforts to develop the capability to detect such code manipulation were limited and unlikely to fully stem the losses being suffered from these abuses . we recommended that hcfa require medicare carriers to use a commercial system to detect code manipulation when processing medicare claims for physicians' services and supplies . although senior hcfa officials voiced their support for our recommendation to use modern information technology to strengthen payment controls , they did not begin to test the feasibility of using commercial code manipulation - detection software to process medicare claims until about a year after we reported on its potential . furthermore , any positive results from this testing are not expected to be implemented nationally for at least several years . in the meantime , hundreds of millions of dollars continue to be lost annually , some of which could have possibly been saved with timely implementation of this software . in addition to our report on opportunities to use commercial software to detect billing abuse , we reported in 1995 that new antifraud systems were available and being used by private insurers , some of whom were also medicare carriers . concluding that this technology could possibly complement existing medicare systems , we recommended that hhs direct hcfa to develop a plan for implementing antifraud technology . however , hhs expressed three reservations about implementing new technology for identifying fraudulent patterns of behavior in the medicare program .