this is not surprising . what are the government's assets and are they well managed ? what are its liabilities and how will they be paid for ? stewardship — has the government's overall financial capacity to satisfy current and future needs and costs improved or deteriorated ? what are its future commitments and are they being provided for ? how will the government's programs affect the future growth potential of the economy ? systems and control — does the government have sufficient controls over its programs so that it can detect and correct problems ? the fasab principals have approved eight basic standards and statements , which i will refer to as fasab standards in my testimony today , and approval of the final one for revenue accounting is expected this spring . this will complete the body of basic accounting and cost accounting standards for all federal agencies to use in preparing financial reports and developing meaningful cost information . the basic standards and statements are: objectives of federal financial reporting — a statement of general concepts on the objectives of financial reporting by the u.s. government providing the basic framework for the board's work . entity and display — a statement of general concepts on how to define federal financial reporting entities and what kinds of financial statements those entities should prepare . managerial cost accounting concepts and standards — a statement of general concepts combined with a statement of specific standards emphasizing the need to relate cost information with budget and financial information to provide better information for resource allocation and performance measurement . accounting for selected assets and liabilities — a statement of specific standards for accounting for basic items such as cash , accounts receivable , and accounts payable . accounting for direct loans and loan guarantees — a statement of accounting standards responding to the credit reform act of 1990 . accounting for inventory and related property — a statement of standards for accounting for inventories , stockpiled materials , seized and forfeited assets , foreclosed property , and goods held under price support programs . accounting for liabilities of the federal government — a statement of standards for federal insurance and guarantee programs , pensions and post - retirement health care for federal workers , and other liabilities , including contingent liabilities . accounting for property , plant and equipment — a statement of standards for accounting for the various types of property ( including heritage assets ) , plant and equipment held by the government . accounting for revenue and other financing sources — a statement of standards for accounting for inflows of resources ( whether earned , demanded , or donated ) and other financing sources . a standard for stewardship reporting is also scheduled for completion this spring . while not part of the package of basic standards , it will help inform decisionmakers about the magnitude of federal resources and financial responsibilities and the federal stewardship role over them . the standards and new reports are being phased in over time . some are effective now ; all that have been issued will be effective for fiscal year 1998 . omb defines the form and content of agency financial statements in periodic bulletins to agency heads .