the following are just a few of these challenges . ensuring that federal operations will not be disrupted by the year 2000 problem is one of the foremost and most pressing issues facing agencies — one that we have designated as a governmentwide high - risk area . efforts by this subcommittee have underscored repeatedly that many agencies are seriously behind schedule in resolving this problem during the next 2 years . poor security management is putting billions of dollars worth of assets at risk of loss and vast amounts of sensitive data at risk of unauthorized disclosure , making it another of our governmentwide high - risk areas . agencies need to make much better progress in designing and implementing security programs and getting skilled staff in place to manage them . this extreme vulnerability has been given added emphasis by the recent presidential commission report on the growing exposure of u.s. computer networks to exploitation and terrorism . agencies need to develop , maintain , and facilitate integrated systems architectures to guide their system development efforts . we have seen major modernization efforts handicapped by incomplete architectures , such as at the federal aviation administration ( faa ) and the internal revenue service ( irs ) , as well as the departments of veterans affairs and education . agencies need to establish sound information management investment review processes that provide top executives with a systematic , data - driven means to select and control how technology funds are spent . our reviews of system development and modernization projects , such as the medicare transaction system and the four high - risk efforts included in our 1997 high - risk series , continue to show the crucial importance of structured investment oversight.in our 1997 high - risk series we identified 25 high - risk areas covering a wide array of key federal activities , ranging from medicare fraud to financial management at the department of defense . resolving the problems in these areas depends heavily on improved information management . agencies need to integrate strategic information planning with the overall strategic plan that they must prepare under the results act . our review of recent attempts by agencies to develop sound strategic plans showed very weak linkages between the strategic goals and the information technology needed to support those goals . agencies must build their staffs' skills and capabilities to react to the rapid developments in information technology , develop needed systems , and oversee the work of systems contractors . weaknesses in agencies' technology skills bases , especially in the area of software acquisition and development , have been a recurring theme in our reviews of federal information technology projects . despite the urgent need to deal with these major challenges , we still see many instances of cios who have responsibilities beyond information management . at present , only 12 agencies have cios whose responsibilities are focused solely on information management . the other 15 agencies have cios with multiple responsibilities . together , these 15 agencies account for about $19 billion of the nearly $27 billion dollars in annual federal planned obligations for information technology .