will there be a presumption against supplementals ? will changes in the second year be limited to responses to large and significant , unforeseen or unforeseeable events ? even with an annual cycle the time lag between making initial forecasts and budget execution creates challenges . indeed , increased difficulty in forecasting was one of the primary reasons states gave for shifting from biennial to annual budget cycles . even in this era of discretionary spending caps , the congress has demonstrated the need to address changing conditions among the numerous budget accounts and program activities of the federal government . although in the aggregate there may be little change , individual agencies or accounts have seen significant changes from year to year . some statistics may give an indication of the extent of that change . while total current appropriations grew by only 0.9 percent between 1994 and 1995 , more than half of all budget accounts that received current appropriations had net changes greater than plus or minus 5 percent . more recently , between 1996 and 1997 , almost 55 percent of budget accounts with current appropriations experienced changes of more than plus or minus 5 percent although total current appropriations declined by about 0.5 percent . because these are account - level statistics , it is possible that annual changes at the program activity level may have been even greater . dramatic changes in program design or agency structure , such as those considered in the last congress and those being considered now , will make budget forecasting more difficult . for biennial budgeting to exist in reality rather than only in theory , the congress and the president will have to reach some agreement on how to deal with the greater uncertainty inherent in a longer budget cycle and / or a time of major structural change . you also asked me to review the information on state experiences with biennial budgeting and to comment on any issues i thought pertinent in considering s. 261 , with particular attention to ( 1 ) the requirement directing that “during the second session of each congress , the comptroller general shall give priority to requests from congress for audits and evaluations of government programs and activities” and ( 2 ) issues involved in the integration of gpra into a biennial budget cycle . let me turn now to these areas . advocates of biennial budgeting often point to the experience of individual states . in looking to the states it is necessary to disaggregate them into several categories . in 1996 , when we last looked at this data , 8 states had biennial legislative cycles and hence necessarily biennial budget cycles.as the table below shows , the 42 states with annual legislative cycles present a mixed picture in terms of budget cycles: 27 describe their budget cycles as annual , 12 describe their budget cycles as biennial , and 3 describe their budget cycles as mixed . the national association of state budget officers reports that those states that describe their system as “mixed” have divided the budget into two categories: that for which budgeting is annual and that for which it is biennial .