this issue needs to be addressed in the plan . ( 2 ) the strategic plan proposes the establishment of an indian trust and development bank . the plan also proposes that the td bank receive appropriations , judgment funds , or funds provided by other gses . this problem has not yet been resolved . moreover , continued fractionation of indian land and lease ownerships has seriously complicated trust fund accounting and asset management . according to the strategic plan , interior may soon be unable to cope with the recordkeeping of land titles and accurate distribution of income due to the worsening fractionation . the plan contains a proposal for dealing with this problem . interior officials agree that fractionation must be reduced and eliminated to ensure the success of indian trust fund accounting and resource management reforms . interior has submitted a legislative proposal for congressional consideration . the strategic plan proposes a two - phase change to interior's current organizational and management structure for indian trust management . the first phase would establish a single organization for trust management activities — the american indian trust and development administration ( aitda ) — independent of the interior department . the proposed organization would be in the form of a government - sponsored enterprise ( gse ) . the aitda would be organized by function — such as accounting or land titles — and would be managed by a full - time chairman and chief executive officer and a five - member board of directors appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate . three members are to be proposed by the indian community and two members — the chairman and chief executive officer — are to have financial and trust management expertise and may also be american indians . board members would serve staggered terms of 12 years . attachment ii provides a chart showing aitda and identifies those organizational components of aitda and lines of coordination with interior agencies . the plan proposes that aitda assume the federal government's indian trust authority related to indian trust funds and assets . it also proposes that certain organizations and related funding be transferred to aitda — including ost and otfm , bia's land title and records office , and interior's office of american indian trust — along with various interior agency records management functions related to trust fund accounting and asset management . specifically , the plan proposes that responsibility for and funding of various interior asset management and compliance functions be transferred to aitda . these transfers include the following: bia's leasing activities and its land title and records office to aitda's trust resources management division . blm's lease inspection , enforcement , and production verification activities to aitda's trust resources management division . mms' compliance and valuation function to aitda's risk management and control division . interior's office of american indian trust to aitda's risk management control division . according to the plan , aitda would use the funds transferred from bia , blm , and mms to contract with these agencies or with tribes to perform the related trust asset management activities .