hcfa's approach was similar . from contract award on september 30 , 1996 , through its conclusion 15 months later at the end of december 1997 , both hcfa and contractor staff made significant progress in integrating the test commercial system and evaluating its potential for medicare use nationwide . hcfa used both a policy evaluation team and a technical team to concentrate separately on these aspects of the test . a detailed comparison of the commercial system's payment policies with those of medicare identified conflicting edits — inconsistencies that in some cases would increase and in others decrease the amount of the medicare payments . for example , the commercial system would pay for the higher cost procedure of those deemed mutually exclusive , while medicare dictates paying for the lower cost procedure . ( a mutually exclusive procedure would be , for instance , the same patient's receiving both an open and a closed treatment for a fracture. ) conversely , the commercial claims - auditing system would deny certain payments for assistant surgeons , while medicare allows them . these and all other identified conflicts were provided to the vendor , who modified the system's edits to make them consistent with hcfa policy . the technical team carried out three critical tasks . first , it developed the design specifications and related computer code necessary for integrating the commercial system into the medicare claims - processing software . second , it integrated the claims - auditing system into the system that processes medicare part b claims . finally , the team conducted numerous tests of the integrated system to determine its effect both on processing speed and accuracy . hcfa management was kept apprised of the status of the test through regular progress reports and frequent contact with the project management team . hcfa found that the edits in this commercial system could save medicare up to $465 million annually by identifying inappropriate claims . specifically , hcfa's analysis showed that the system's mutually exclusive and incidental procedure edits would save about $205 million , and the diagnosis - to - procedure edits could save about $260 million . further , hcfa's deputy director of the provider purchasing and administration group stated that the agency has no explicit medicare policy requiring it to disclose to providers the specific edits used to audit their claims . before hcfa completed its test it did compare the commercial system as a supplement . this comparison showed that commercial systems offer the potential for substantial medicare savings . despite the successful outcome of the test , two early management decisions , if left unchanged , would have significantly delayed national implementation of claims - auditing software in the medicare program . first , the use of the test system was limited to its single iowa location , thereby requiring another contract for nationwide implementation . second , hcfa's initial plan following the test was to proceed with developing its own edits , rather than to acquire those available through commercial systems . this plan would not only have required additional time before implementation , but could well have resulted in a system less comprehensive in its capacity to flag suspect claims than what is available commercially .