they are also expensive . as i mentioned earlier , this is a costly approach to systems acquisition . our chart , reproduced at the end of this statement , shows that education's information technology costs have almost tripled since fiscal year 1994 . the reported cost of these systems in fiscal year 1994 was $106 million ; for fiscal year 1998 it is expected to be about $317 million . this has still not been accomplished . hence , the nslds database cannot be updated without expensive conversion workaround programs . the result is a collection of independent systems , many of which keep data that duplicate information stored in nslds . this lack of integration promotes an environment of reduced management efficiency , compromised system integrity , and escalating costs as new stand - alone systems are developed . while nslds was envisioned as the central repository for student financial aid data , it is not readily compatible with most of the other title iv systems . these various systems are operated by several different contractors and have different types of hardware , operating systems , application languages , and database management systems . along with education's internal systems , thousands of schools and numerous guaranty agencies also employ disparate systems through which they send data to nslds . therefore , to accept data from these other systems , nslds must have the necessary workarounds in place . education and its data providers currently use over 300 computer formatting and editing programs — many of them workarounds — to bridge the gaps in this complex computing environment . these programs , however , may themselves introduce errors and that would not be necessary in a fully integrated environment . such programs contribute to the rapidly escalating costs for the 5-year nslds contract — from an original $39 million estimate to about $83 million today . department officials have acknowledged that integration is important and has not been fully achieved . they told us , however , that they had little time to consider viable alternatives in designing and implementing nslds because of statutory requirements and the large number of diverse organizations from which data had to be gathered . the nonstandard use of student identifiers by various title iv systems complicates tracking of students across programs , making the task cumbersome and time - consuming . likewise , identifying institutions can be problematic because multiple identifiers are used ; for instance , the same school may have different identifying numbers for each of the title iv programs in which it participates . the 1992 amendments required common institutional identifiers by july 1 , 1993 ; as of now , the department's plans call for their development and implementation for the 1999-2000 academic year . beyond simply having common identifiers , it is important that data standards be established ; this is the accepted technique used to govern the conventions for identifying , naming , and formatting data . the absence of such standards usually results at best in confusion , at worst in possible misinformation leading to the improper awarding of aid . having data standards in place means that everyone within an organization understands the exact meaning of a specific term .