additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . there are two primary reasons for this decline . the first reason relates to the previously mentioned , one - time accounting change that artificially inflated fiscal year 1993 revenues but did not affect the cash received from real property tax revenues . specifically , the district changed its real property tax year - end , which caused an additional 3 months of revenue to be recognized for accounting purposes in fiscal year 1993 . this change resulted in a small annual surplus in the district's financial statements . if the change had not occurred , as previously mentioned , the district would have recorded an annual deficit of about $165 million in fiscal year 1993 . according to district officials , the tax year was changed so that the real property tax year - end would coincide with the district's september 30 fiscal year - end , which would ease reporting requirements . if fiscal year 1993 real property tax revenues had been adjusted by removing the additional 3 months of revenues , the decline between fiscal years 1993 and 1995 would not have been as great . the second reason for the decline in real property tax revenue is a decrease in the assessed value of the district's commercial and residential property . lower assessed property values generally equate to lower property tax revenues . from fiscal years 1993 through 1995 , the assessed value of the district's taxable property declined by about 6.3 percent , with most of the decline attributable to commercial property . consolidation of federal office space , increased competition from suburban office space , and the downward renegotiation of rents on existing space have contributed to the decline in the assessed value of commercial property . in addition , a declining population and falling employment among district residents have caused a decline in housing values and residential sales in all but a few district neighborhoods . the district forecasts real property taxes to decline slightly in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 . operating grant revenue has fluctuated in recent years . operating grants increased from $760 million to $960 million from fiscal year 1993 through fiscal year 1994 , but then decreased to $855 million in fiscal year 1995 . operating grants are primarily a function of the level of expenditures on social programs . as the level of expenditures in these programs increases or decreases , the level of revenues from operating grants increases or decreases accordingly . in fiscal year 1995 , over 75 percent , or about $653 million , of the district's operating grants were for health and welfare programs . in addition , a significant portion of the operating grant revenue is due to medicaid expenditures — the district's largest health care expenditure . in fiscal year 1995 , medicaid expenditures for private providers of health care services totaled $744 million . the district is to receive 50 cents for each dollar spent on medicaid from operating grants .