but presently , there is a shortage of such expertise . but now about 35 percent are regarded as harmful . information sharing and coordination among organizations are central to producing comprehensive and practical approaches and solutions to these threats . first , having information on threats and on actual incidents experienced by others can help an organization better understand the risks it faces and determine what preventative measures should be implemented . second , more urgent , real - time warnings can help an organization take immediate steps to mitigate an imminent attack . lastly , information sharing and coordination are important after an attack has occurred to facilitate criminal investigations , which may cross jurisdictional boundaries . such after - the - fact coordination could also be useful in recovering from a devastating attack , should such an attack ever occur . the recent episode of the iloveyou computer virus in may 2000 , which affected governments , corporations , media outlets , and other institutions worldwide , highlighted the need for greater information sharing and coordination . because information sharing mechanisms were not able to provide timely enough warnings against the impending attack , many entities were caught off guard and forced to take their networks off - line for hours . getting the word out within some federal agencies themselves also proved difficult . at the department of defense , for example , the lack of teleconferencing capability slowed the response effort because defense components had to be called individually . the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) had difficulty communicating warnings when e - mail services disappeared , and while backup communication mechanisms are in place , nasa officials told us that they are rarely tested . we also found that the few federal components that either discovered or were alerted to the virus early did not effectively warn others . for example , officials at the department of the treasury told us that the u.s. customs service received an air force computer emergency response team ( afcert ) advisory early in the morning of may 4 , but that customs did not share this information with other treasury bureaus . the federal government recognized several years ago that addressing computer - based risks to our nation's critical infrastructures required coordination and cooperation across federal agencies and among public - and private - sector entities and other nations . in may 1998 , following a report by the president's commission on critical infrastructure protection that described the potential devastating implications of poor information security from a national perspective , the government issued presidential decision directive ( pdd ) 63 . among other things , this directive tasked federal agencies with developing critical infrastructure protection plans and establishing related links with private industry sectors . it also required that certain executive branch agencies assess the cyber vulnerabilities of the nation's critical infrastructures — information and communications ; energy ; banking and finance ; transportation ; water supply ; emergency services ; law enforcement ; and public health , as well as those authorities responsible for continuity of federal , state , and local governments .