what is important is that the approach be consistent with these tenets . specifically , agencies should appoint a cio with expertise and practical experience in technology position the cio as a senior partner reporting directly to the agency head ; ensure that the cio's primary responsibilities are for information have the cio serve as a bridge between top management , line management , and information management support professionals , working with them to ensure the effective acquisition and management of information resources needed to support agency programs and missions ; task the cio with developing strategies and specific plans for the hiring , training , and professional development of staff in order to build the agency's capability to develop and manage its information resources ; and support the cio position with an effective cio organization and management framework for implementing agencywide information technology initiatives . having an effective cio with the institutional capacity and structure needed to implement the management practices embodied in the broad set of reforms set out in clinger - cohen and other legislation is crucial for improved planning and management of it investments . success at usda will depend on how well the department implements such legislation , and how well the cio exercises whatever authority she possesses to make positive change — and the degree to which this individual is held accountable for doing so . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . it has a diverse portfolio of over 200 federal programs throughout the nation and the world . the department delivers about $80 billion in programs , at a cost in federal outlays of an estimated $54 billion . the fourth largest federal agency , usda employs over 100,000 individuals in 31 agencies and departmental offices having multiple and sometimes disparate missions . its responsibilities range from forests and timber to food assistance for the needy and the safety of meat and poultry products for human consumption .