additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the act requires sba to ensure that the loan monitoring system is consistent with the architecture . an information technology architecture provides a comprehensive “construction plan” or “blueprint” that systematically details the breadth and depth of an organization's mission - based mode of operation . an architecture provides details first in logical terms , such as defining business functions , providing high - level descriptions of information systems and their interrelationships , and specifying information flows ; and second in technical terms , such as specifying hardware , software , data , communications , security , and performance characteristics . by enforcing an information technology architecture to guide and constrain a modernization program , an agency can preclude inconsistent systems design and development decisions , and the resulting suboptimal performance and added cost . sba has started developing an information technology architecture by documenting its current computing environment . each of these methodologies is complex and will require staff with the necessary skills and abilities for rigorous implementation . the staff currently on the project management team will need to develop the skills and abilities to use the new methodologies as they execute this large undertaking . sba may also need to hire staff with the necessary skills and abilities to use the new methodologies , and hire contractors with the necessary expertise to support the project team . successfully learning and employing several new methodologies simultaneously will present a considerable technical and management challenge . if the team is not up to the task , the project may not achieve its intended results . sba plans to work concurrently on an information technology architecture and the loan monitoring system as separate projects . it plans to continue developing the architecture while the loan monitoring system project is underway . as stated earlier , sba assumes that the information technology architecture will be completed before it is needed to support this project . if both logical and technical components of the architecture are not completed as scheduled , the loan monitoring system project will likely be delayed and plans may need to be revised because , as required by the act , the plans must be consistent with the information technology architecture .