the position itself is not the solution . what matters is the influence that the right person can bring to bear on strategic management issues and it's role in both helping resolve existing performance problems and capturing potential from new opportunities . an effective cio should: serve as a bridge between top executives , line management , support staff , advise top executives and senior managers on the worthiness of major technology decisions and investments , work with managers to understand and define the role of it in helping achieve expected business or program outcomes , creating a joint partnership with line management to achieve successful project outcomes , design and manage the system architecture supporting the business needs and decision - making processes of the organization , and set and enforce appropriate technical standards to facilitate the effective use of information resources throughout the entire organization . in one of our case study organizations , prior to establishing a cio , the cost of maintaining and enhancing existing systems consumed nearly all the organization's it budget . there was no one to focus senior management attention on critical information management and technology decisions . once an experienced cio was put in place , technology investment decisions became highly visible and line executives were held accountable for the business case underlying these decisions . the cio focused on improving the speed , productivity , and quality of it products and services . a key cio responsibility is to promote a productive relationship between the users of technology and the information management and systems staff who support them . managers in leading organizations recognize that they are customers of it products and services . they assert control over the funding of it projects and take responsibility for understanding and helping to define the technology needed to support their work . the it professionals then act as suppliers , working to support efforts to meet clearly defined management objectives , make critical decisions , and solve business problems . this requires facilitation , mediation , balance , and consensus — particularly when weighing the needs of individual business units with the corporate needs of the organization . the cio can help make this process work smoothly . if the management focus of leading organizations who are successful at applying technology to business needs and problems are compared with typical management practices found in federal departments and agencies , major differences appear . table 3 summarizes some of the primary discrepancies . congress has provided clear direction to move the debate from whether to change information management practices in the government to what exactly to change and how to do it . significant changes in law have already occurred that represent major , positive steps forward in pushing for greater top management responsibility and accountability for successful it outcomes and provide the impetus for improvements in agency management approaches . last year , the paperwork reduction act was revised to include many of the fundamental management practices endorsed by our research . for example , strategic it planning provisions explicitly call for linkages between agency business plans and it projects . this strategic planning is to be anchored in customer needs and mission goals .