this completes our testimony . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . faa does not have a cio reporting to the administrator . although the nis group has access to certain key associate administrators ( eg , the associate administrator for civil aviation security and the associate administrator for research and acquisitions ) , it does not have access to the management level that can effect change across organizational divisions , especially faa's administrator or deputy administrator . these concerns are well - founded . at the request of you , mr. chairman , and senator glenn , we have undertaken a large body of work to address the issue , including reviews of most of the federal government's largest departments' and agencies' computer security programs . in conjunction with our financial statement audit focus and high - risk reviews , this work has revealed a disturbing picture of our government's lack of success in protecting federal assets from fraud and misuse , sensitive information from inappropriate disclosure , and critical operations from disruption . for example: in may 1996 , we reported that computer hackers had penetrated department of defense computer systems ; obtained and corrupted sensitive information ; shut down and crashed entire systems and networks ; and denied service to users who depend on automated systems to help meet critical missions , including weapons and supercomputer research , logistics , procurement , and military health . our recommendations focused on the need for defense to assign clear responsibility and accountability for the successful implementation of its security program , improve its security policies and procedures , increase security awareness , and implement more proactive technical protection and monitoring systems.in september 1996 , we reported that , over the previous 2 years , serious weaknesses had been reported for 10 of the largest federal agencies , concluding that poor information security was a widespread federal problem with potentially devastating consequences . in that report , we recommended that the office of management and budget ( omb ) play a more proactive role in overseeing agency practices and managing improvements , in part through its role as chair of the chief information officers ( cio ) council .