va has been responsive to our recommendations . for example , vba reassessed its mission - critical efforts for the compensation and pension online application and the beneficiary identification and record locator sub - system , as well as other information technology initiatives . it also reallocated resources to ensure that the y2k efforts had adequate resources , including contract support , to achieve compliance . in addition , vba completed a draft business continuity and contingency plan in january 1999 for its core business processes , as well as a related planning template for its regional offices . the plan provides a high - level overview of the resources , staff roles , procedures , and timetables for its implementation . it addresses risks , including mitigation actions to reduce the impact of y2k - induced business failures , and analyzes the effect on each business line of a number of potential y2k disasters - - such as loss of electrical power , loss of communications , loss of data processing capabilities , and failure of internal infrastructure . according to vba , the plan , which it expects to test this august , is an evolving document , to be revised and updated periodically until january 1 , 2000 . vba's plan makes no reference to contingencies for the failure of three of vba's benefit payment systems - - compensation and pension , education , and vocational rehabilitation and counseling . however , it is currently developing a payment contingency plan for these systems and expects this to be completed in may 1999 . a vba official told us that the payment contingency plan should have been referenced in vba's business continuity and contingency plan and will be in future versions . the current plan also does not contain the designation of an information technology security coordinator and a physical security coordinator - - individuals that vba acknowledges are essential to the agency's y2k efforts - - with responsibility for ensuring overall security for vba's network and web site and backing up data storage before , during , and following january 1 , 2000 . this type of information will be necessary if security - related failures occur . according to vba , it expects to designate these individuals by august 1999 . vha has also made progress in developing business continuity and contingency plans for its medical facilities . last month , vha issued its patient - focused year 2000 contingency planning guidebook to its medical facilities describing actions they can take to minimize y2k - related disruptions to patient care . the guidebook discusses how the facilities should develop contingency plans for each major hospital function - - such as radiology , pharmacy , and laboratory - - as well as each major support function - - such as telecommunications , facility systems , medical devices , and automated information systems . the guidebook also contains examples of plans , policies , and solutions for problems that a medical facility may face and provides y2k templates describing the areas a facility should address by specific hospital function .