this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the year 2000 challenge for vha is enormous . it plans to renovate the remaining applications by november 1998 . such elements are vitally important to vha's ability to provide high - quality health care services . vha is working with the general services administration and manufacturers on this issue . since it is often critical that medical services not be interrupted , vha is required to have contingency plans in place in case hospital systems fail . these plans are reviewed and assessed regularly by the joint commission on accreditation of healthcare organizations . however , such contingency plans are meant to ensure continued operation in the event of disaster ; such approval does not necessarily ensure that all backup systems are year 2000 compliant . health care facilities depend on the reliable operation of a variety of biomedical devices — equipment that can record , process , analyze , display , or transmit medical data . examples include computerized nuclear magnetic resonance imaging ( mri ) systems , cardiac monitoring systems , cardiac defibrillators , and various tools for laboratory analysis . such devices may depend on a computer for calibration or day - to - day operation . this computer could be either a personal computer that connects to the device from a distance or a microprocessor chip embedded within the device . in either case , the software that controls the operation of the computer may be susceptible to the year 2000 problem . the impact could range from incorrect formatting of a printout to incorrect operation of the device , having the potential to affect patient care or safety . the risks for a specific medical device depend on the role of the device in the patient's care and the design of the device . although medical treatment facilities have the expertise to understand how medical devices are used , they rely on device manufacturers to analyze designs and disclose year 2000 compliance status .