additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary , visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . some of these problems had been identified in earlier tests but had not been corrected . additional testing uncovered software errors that resulted in missing , incorrect , and incomplete data , and error files that contained accurate data . as a result of these problems , blm postponed the operational assessment test and evaluation ( oat&e ) that had been scheduled for december 1997 . the oat&e was to determine whether almrs ioc was ready to be deployed to the first state office . in october 1998 , the oat&e was conducted and showed that almrs ioc was not ready to be deployed because it did not meet requirements . during the test , users reported several problems , including that almrs ioc ( 1 ) did not support blm's business activities , ( 2 ) was too complex , and ( 3 ) significantly impeded worker productivity . for example , one tester reported that entering data for a $10 sale of a commodity , such as gravel , required an hour of data entry using almrs ioc , whereas with the existing system , the same transaction would have taken about 10 minutes . users also reported that system response time problems were severe or catastrophic at all test sites . one user said “it is ridiculous to spend 2 or 3 hours to enter information in this system , when it takes 30 minutes to an hour to process the information into the legacy system.” finally , users reported data converted from legacy databases were not accurate , and that validation of the converted legacy data required inordinate effort and time . because these problems are significant , senior blm officials have decided that almrs ioc is not currently deployable . according to blm , it obligated about $411 million on the almrs / modernization project between fiscal years 1983 and 1998 , of which more than $67 million was spent to develop almrs ioc software . the $67 million does not include almrs ioc costs that are part of other cost categories , such as costs for work performed from fiscal years 1983 through 1988 , project management , computer and telecommunications hardware and software , data management , and systems operation and maintenance . however , the officials recognize that this was not the same as the more comprehensive assessment suggested by sei . such assessments are needed to better identify and manage information technology investments . consequently , the bureau should evaluate and , where needed , enhance the knowledge and skills of its staff to help ensure that the investment management processes it puts in place can be effectively carried out by its information resources management organization . finally , the clinger - cohen act requires agencies to develop , maintain , and facilitate the implementation of a sound and integrated information technology architecture . an information technology architecture provides a comprehensive blueprint that systematically details the breadth and depth of an organization's mission - based mode of operation .