additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . year 2000-related problems have already occurred . for example , an automated defense logistics agency system erroneously deactivated 90,000 inventoried items as the result of an incorrect date calculation . according to the agency , if the problem had not been corrected ( which took 400 work hours ) , the impact would have seriously hampered its mission to deliver materiel in a timely manner . our reviews of federal agency year 2000 programs have found uneven progress , and our reports contain numerous recommendations , which the agencies have almost universally agreed to implement . among them are the need to establish priorities , solidify data exchange agreements , and develop contingency plans . one of the largest , and largely unknown , risks relates to the global nature of the problem . with the advent of electronic communication and international commerce , the united states and the rest of the world have become critically dependent on computers . however , with this electronic dependence and massive exchanging of data comes increasing risk that uncorrected year 2000 problems in other countries will adversely affect the united states . and there are indications of year 2000 readiness problems internationally . in september 1997 , the gartner group , a private research firm acknowledged for its expertise in year 2000 computing issues , surveyed 2,400 companies in 17 countries and concluded that “hirty percent of all companies have not started dealing with the year 2000 problem. as 2000 approaches , the scope of the risks that the century change could bring has become more clear , and the federal government's actions have intensified . this past february , an executive order was issued establishing the president's council on year 2000 conversion . the council chair is to oversee federal agency year 2000 efforts as well as be the spokesman in national and international forums , coordinate with state and local governments , promote appropriate federal roles with respect to private - sector activities , and report to the president on a quarterly basis . as we testified in march , there are a number of actions we believe the council must take to avert this crisis . in a report issued just last week , we detailed specific recommendations . the following summarizes a few of the key areas in which we recommend action: because departments and agencies have taken longer than recommended to assess the readiness of their systems , it is unlikely that they will be able to renovate and fully test all mission - critical systems by january 1 , 2000 . vital economic sectors of the nation are also vulnerable . these include state and local governments ; telecommunications ; banking and finance ; health , safety , and emergency services ; transportation ; utilities ; and manufacturing and small business . while actions by government and industry are underway throughout the nation , the creation of the president's council on year 2000 conversion represents an opportunity to orchestrate the leadership and public / private partnerships essential to confronting the unprecedented challenges that our nation faces .