this is just what we have experienced with iloveyou . while it looked a lot like melissa in its operation , it moved much more swiftly , and it appears to have caused as much , if not more , disruption . nevertheless , the lessons to be gleaned from both attacks are the same . federal agencies must implement vigorous security programs to enable them to closely watch their information resources for signs of attack or intrusion and to quickly react to such events when detected . moreover , the government as a whole must promptly implement long - term solutions that will ensure that agencies focus on security from an organizationwide perspective and implement a comprehensive set of security controls . we still do not know the full effect of this virus on the agencies that were penetrated . while many were forced to shut down their e - mail networks for some time , many also reported that mission - critical systems and operations were not affected . of course , if an agency's business depends on e - mail for decision - making and service delivery , then the virus / worm probably had a significant impact on day - to - day operations in terms of lost productivity . it also appears that major efforts were required to control the virus . based on a discussion with military cert representatives , for example , responding to the virus / worm has been a tremendous task that took several days to get under control . some dod machines required complete software reloads to overcome the extent of the damage . the virus / worm spread rapidly through the department , penetrating even some classified systems . dod's operational commands responded in widely varying ways — some made few changes to their daily operational procedures while others cut off all e - mail communications for an extended period of time . representatives of dod's joint task force - computer network defense said that they will recommend new procedures to better coordinate the department's response to future incidents , based on experience with the iloveyou virus / worm . while the iloveyou worm / virus resulted in relatively limited damage in terms of systems corrupted , the incident continues to underscore the formidable challenge that the federal government faces in protecting its information systems assets and sensitive data . it again shows , for example , that computer attack tools and techniques are becoming increasingly sophisticated ; viruses are spreading faster as a result of the increasing connectivity of today's networks ; commercial - off - the - shelf ( cots ) products can be easily exploited for attack by all their users ; and there is no “silver bullet” solution to protecting systems , such as firewalls or encryption . moreover , iloveyou illustrates the difficulty of investigating cyber crime . in particular , investigations of computer attacks such as iloveyou must be conducted on an international scale . moreover , only the computer used to launch the virus can be traced – not the programmer . lastly , evidence is fleeting – the more time that passes between the first attack and an arrest , the more time the programmer has to destroy all links to the crime .