le . sba depends on its it environment to support the management of its programs . this environment includes 42 mission - critical systems running on legacy mainframes and minicomputers . ten of these systems support administrative activities ; the remaining 32 support loan activities , including loan accounting and collection , loan origination and disbursement , and loan servicing and debt collection . according to sba's self - assessment of its it environment , the legacy systems are not effectively integrated and thus provide limited information sharing . the assessment also showed that sba cannot depend on the systems to provide consistent information . because of these problems , it has embarked on an agencywide systems modernization initiative to replace its outmoded legacy systems . at the logical level , the architecture provides a high - level description of an organization's mission , the business functions being performed and the relationships among the functions , the information needed to perform the functions , and the flow of information among functions . our may report presented the results of our evaluation of sba's management of it in the areas of investment management , architecture , software development and acquisition , information security , and human capital . our assessments of sba's information architecture disclosed that sba had drafted policies and procedures for key activity areas except for change management , and had drafted architecture components except for change management , as reflected in figure 2 . sba had made progress with its target it architecture by describing its core business processes , analyzing information used in its business processes , describing data maintenance and data usage , identifying standards that support information transfer and processing , and establishing guidelines for migrating current applications to the planned environment . our assessments of information security at sba disclosed that policies and procedures did not exist for risk assessments and were in draft form for other key activities ; and that practices were not performed for one critical activity , as shown in figure 4 . sba had not conducted periodic risk assessments for its mission - critical systems ; the agency had only recently conducted a security workload assessment and a risk assessment for one system . training and education had not been provided to promote security awareness and responsibilities of employees and contract staff . further , security management responsibilities were fragmented among all of sba's field and program offices . sba's computer security procedures for systems certification and accreditation were in draft form . without security policies , sba faces increased risk that critical information and assets may not be protected from inappropriate use , alteration , or disclosure . without defined procedures , practices are likely to be inconsistent for such activities as periodic risk assessments , awareness training , implementation and effectiveness of controls , and evaluation of policy compliance . to address information security weaknesses , sba has hired additional staff to develop procedures to implement computer security policies and to manage computer accounts and user passwords . these staff are also responsible for performing systems security certification reviews of new and existing it systems . in addition , sba planned to finish development and testing of a comprehensive disaster recovery and business continuity plan .