in particular , h.r . encourage use of performance - based management in complying with it management requirements . establish minimum criteria within 1 year of enactment to be used for independent evaluations of it programs and management processes . omb's current functionsrespect to the performance of investments made in it . direct agencies to develop capital planning processes for managing major it investments . services with regard to the provision of any information resources - related services for or on behalf of agencies , including the acquisition or management of telecommunications or other it or services . direct agencies to analyze private sector alternatives before making an investment in a new information system . direct the use of the information technology fund by the administrator of general services . direct agencies to undertake an agency mission reengineering analysis before making significant investments in it to support these missions . oversee the effectiveness of , and compliance with , directives issued under section 110 of the federal property and administrative services act ( which established the information technology fund ) . 4670's approach , on the other hand , is that federal information technology leadership would be shared . while the cio would be the president's principal adviser on these issues , omb would retain critical statutory responsibilities in this area . for example , both the federal cio and omb would have a role in overseeing the government's it and interagency initiatives . certainly , it would be crucial for the omb director and the federal cio to mutually support each other and work effectively together to ensure that their respective roles and responsibilities are clearly communicated . without a mutually constructive working relationship with omb , the federal cio's ability to achieve the potential improvements in it management and cross - agency collaboration would be impaired . 5024: this bill establishes an office of information policy within the executive office of the president and headed by a federal cio . the bill would substantially change the government's existing statutory information resources and technology management framework because it shifts much of omb's responsibilities in these areas to the federal cio . for example , it calls for the federal cio to develop and oversee the implementation of policies , principles , standards , and guidance with respect to ( 1 ) information technology , ( 2 ) privacy and security , and ( 3 ) information dissemination . a strength of this approach would be the single , central focus for information resources and technology management in the federal government . a primary concern we have with omb's current structure as it relates to information resources and technology management is that , in addition to their responsibilities in these areas , both the deputy director for management and the administrator of the office of information and regulatory affairs ( oira ) have other significant duties , which necessarily restrict the amount of attention that they can give to information resources and technology management issues.for example , much of oira is staffed to act on 3,000 to 5,000 information collection requests from agencies per year , review about 500 proposed and final rules each year , and to calculate the costs and benefits of all federal regulations .