we did not address these other factors . what we found was that leading organizations have cut administrative costs — some cut expense report processing costs by more than 80 percent — and time — what once took 3 weeks can now be done within 48 hours — as a direct result of reengineering how they arrange and process travel . their total administrative costs per trip now range from about $10 to $20 . they achieved these improvements by consolidating travel management and processing centers , eliminating unnecessary review layers , simplifying the travel process , and streamlining and automating the expense reporting process and integrating it with the financial system . most federal agencies' administrative travel costs and processes , on the other hand , lag behind those of leading organizations , although some agencies have begun to close the gap . many agencies have not determined what their administrative travel costs and processes are , and for those agencies for whom costs were determined , their administrative costs per trip ranged from about $37 to $123 — 1 and a half to 12 times more expensive than the leading organizations . many federal agencies use numerous processing centers , require multiple travel documents , and fill out these travel documents manually or maintain travel systems that do not have an agencywide automated interface with the financial system . part of the problem has been that a primary focus of many federal agencies' travel management has historically been on maintaining and monitoring compliance , rather than on managing costs and efficiencies . this is not to say that all federal agencies' processes are poor or that administrative costs are high . one organization , in fact , requires an explanation for any instance in which the corporate charge card is not used for at least 90 percent of all business travel expenses . a key benefit of using a corporate charge card is eliminating advance processing costs and cycle time . under the old system , a traveler would have to spend time filling out an advance request form and getting it approved by a supervisor . the organization would also have to keep an amount of petty cash on hand at various cash windows . and the organization had to track and reconcile each cash disbursement that occurred . by mandating charge card usage for cash advances , an organization can eliminate the processing time and costs for getting the advance , no longer has to maintain petty cash at cash windows , and can conduct one reconciliation for all travel expenses . other benefits of using a corporate charge card are that it provides greater cash management and establishes better information management . finally , once leading organizations had assessed and consolidated their current processes , they looked to use automation to further simplify and streamline operations . they integrated expense reporting with travel expense processing , built policy conformance checks into the travel system , reimbursed travelers electronically , and developed a management information system to maintain the travel data that were being gathered . maintaining this information gives an organization the specific information it needs when negotiating rates with travel vendors and setting predetermined travel costs .