mrs . chairwoman and mr . chairmen , this concludes my statement . i will be happy to answer any questions you or members of the subcommittees may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . we agree . therefore , to minimize disruptions to vital city services , it will be essential for the district to effectively manage risks over the next 15 months . first , because it is likely that there will not be enough time to remediate all systems , the district must identify and prioritize its most critical operations . this decision must collectively reside with the key stakeholders involved in providing district services and must represent a consensus of the key processes and their relative priority . the results of this decision should drive remediation , testing , and business continuity and contingency planning and should provide increased focus to the efforts of the year 2000 office and its contractor . to this end , we recommend that the district , along with its current year 2000 efforts , identify and rank the most critical business operations and systems by october 31 , 1998 . the district should use this ranking to determine by november 30 , 1998 , the priority in which supporting systems will be renovated and tested . continuity of operations and contingency plans for these processes and systems should also be initiated at this time if such action is not already underway . second , for systems that may not complete remediation but that are still important to city operations , managers will need to develop contingency plans for continued operations . it is essential that such plans be developed early to provide stakeholders as much time as possible to provide resources , develop “workarounds,” or secure legislative or administrative approvals as necessary to execute the plans . third , because of the dependencies between the district and the surrounding local and federal government entities , the district will need to work closely with those bodies to both identify and prepare appropriate remedial steps and contingency plans to accommodate those dependencies .