mr. chairman , this completes my statement . the other principles are squarely within the domain of the cio . for example , the cio must take full responsibility for ensuring the credibility of the im organization . while other leaders can contribute to this principle , the cio must be seen as the leader of the unit and must consistently raise the visibility and demonstrate the value of the im organization across the enterprise . overall , the principles are strikingly simple and strongly supported by a wide range of other cio - based research . nevertheless , consistent attention and commitment often remains elusive and pinpoints the notable difference between leading organizations and others . this lack of attention to the cio as the focal point of im practice in the agency extends to the failure of agency heads to include their cios in executive business decision - making . six principles of cio management recognize the role of im in creating value measure success and demonstrate results organize im to meet business needs develop im human capital position the cio for success ensure the credibility of the im organization let me also underscore , mr. chairman , that the principles are most effective when implemented together in a mutually reinforcing manner . as ad hoc efforts , each principle addresses a single aspect that while necessary , is not sufficient for success by itself . moreover , federal organizations are often less flexible in reassigning im staff and structuring capabilities across business and technology lines due to the highly decentralized im responsibilities found in many large agencies . also , the relative inflexibility of federal pay scales makes it difficult to attract and retain the highly skilled it professionals required to develop and support the systems being proposed . i will be discussing these and other constraints further momentarily , but i would like to point out that such challenges tend to slow the progress of implementing other principles . interestingly , the practices of federal cios tended to be most similar to those cios in our study in those principles in which cios could exert the most personal control . that is , federal cios tend to use the same approach to building credibility within the enterprise as our case study cios did . in addition , both groups of cios tend to have similar problems with performance measures and demonstrating results . our case study cios had made more advances in building links between im and business objectives , but the measures themselves are still evolving . on the federal side , the ties to mission performance are not as strong , perhaps because of a lack of collaboration between the program areas and the im organization in the development of mission requirements , though provisions of the clinger - cohen act are providing the motivation to improve this process . our interviews with federal cios and agency executives helped to highlight several aspects of the environment in which federal cios operate that are , in some respects , not common in private industry .