agencies cannot afford to neglect any of these issues . if they do , the impact of year 2000 failures could be widespread , costly , and potentially disruptive to vital government operations worldwide . nevertheless , overall , the government's 24 major departments and agencies are making slow progress in fixing their systems . in may 1997 , the office of management and budget ( omb ) reported that about 21 percent of the mission - critical systems ( 1,598 of 7,649 ) for these departments and agencies were year 2000 compliant . a year later , in may 1998 , these departments and agencies reported that 2,914 of the 7,336 mission - critical systems in their current inventories , or about 40 percent , were compliant . however , unless agency progress improved dramatically , a substantial number of mission - critical systems will not be compliant in time . in addition to slow governmentwide progress in fixing systems , our reviews of federal agency year 2000 programs have found uneven progress . some agencies are significantly behind schedule and are at high risk that they will not fix their systems in time . other agencies have made progress , although risks continue and a great deal of work remains . the following are examples of the results of some of our recent reviews . last month , we testified about faa's progress in implementing a series of recommendations we had made earlier this year to assist faa in completing overdue awareness and assessment activities . these recommendations included assessing how the major faa components and the aviation industry would be affected if year 2000 problems were not corrected in time and completing inventories of all information systems , including data interfaces . officials at both faa and the department of transportation agreed with these recommendations , and the agency has made progress in implementing them . in our august testimony , we reported that faa had made progress in managing its year 2000 problem and had completed critical steps in defining which systems needed to be corrected and how to accomplish this . first , governmentwide priorities in fixing systems have not yet been established . these governmentwide priorities need to be based on such criteria as the potential for adverse health and safety effects , adverse financial effects on american citizens , detrimental effects on national security , and adverse economic consequences . further , while individual agencies have been identifying mission - critical systems , this has not always been done on the basis of a determination of the agency's most critical operations . if priorities are not clearly set , the government may well end up wasting limited time and resources in fixing systems that have little bearing on the most vital government operations . other entities have recognized the need to set priorities . consequently , agencies must work early and continually with their data exchange partners to plan and execute effective end - to - end tests . so far , lead agencies have not been designated to take responsibility for ensuring that end - to - end testing of processes and supporting systems is performed across boundaries , and that independent verification and validation of such testing is ensured .