mr. chairman , ms . chairwoman , this concludes my statement . i will be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittees may have at this time . business continuity and contingency plans are essential . without such plans , when unpredicted failures occur , agencies will not have well - defined responses and may not have enough time to develop and test alternatives . federal agencies depend on data provided by their business partners as well as on services provided by the public infrastructure ( eg , power , water , transportation , and voice and data telecommunications ) . one weak link anywhere in the chain of critical dependencies can cause major disruptions to business operations . given these interdependencies , it is imperative that contingency plans be developed for all critical core business processes and supporting systems , regardless of whether these systems are owned by the agency . accordingly , in april 1998 , we recommended that the council require agencies to develop contingency plans for all critical core business processes . omb has clarified its contingency plan instructions and , along with the chief information officers council , has adopted our business continuity and contingency planning guide . in particular , on january 26 , 1999 , omb called on federal agencies to identify and report on the high - level core business functions that are to be addressed in their business continuity and contingency plans as well as to provide key milestones for development and testing of business continuity and contingency plans in their february 1999 quarterly reports . accordingly , in their february 1999 reports , almost all agencies listed their high - level core business functions . indeed , major departments and agencies listed over 400 core business functions . for example , the department of veterans affairs classified its core business functions into two critical areas: benefits delivery ( six business lines supported this area ) and health care . our review of the 24 major departments' and agencies' february 1999 quarterly reports found that business continuity and contingency planning was generally well underway . however , we also found cases in which agencies ( 1 ) were in the early stages of business continuity and contingency planning , ( 2 ) did not indicate when they planned to complete and / or test their plan , ( 3 ) did not intend to complete their plans until after april 1999 , or ( 4 ) did not intend to finish testing the plans until after september 1999 . in january 1999 , we testified before you that omb could consider setting a target date , such as april 30 , 1999 , for the completion of business continuity and contingency plans , and require agencies to report on their progress against this milestone . this would encourage agencies to expeditiously develop and finalize their plans and would provide the president's council on year 2000 conversion and omb with more complete information on agencies' status on this critical issue .