period of 1997 through 2002 . the results act requires agencies to consult with congress and solicit the input of others as they develop these strategic plans . beginning with fiscal year 1999 , executive agencies are then to use their strategic plans to prepare annual performance plans . these performance plans are to include annual goals linked to the activities displayed in budget presentations as well as to the indicators the agency will use to measure performance against the results - oriented goals . agencies are subsequently to report each year on the extent to which these goals were met , provide an explanation if these goals were not met , and present the actions needed to meet any unmet goals . congress can use the results act to provide the vital information that it needs to better make decisions . the congressional consultations on agencies' strategic plans provide an important opportunity for congress and the executive branch to work together to ensure that agencies' missions are focused , goals are results - oriented and clearly established , and strategies and funding expectations are appropriate and reasonable . one of the reasons we are here today is to provide our perspective on these plans . we note that , although these strategic plans are not due until september , each agency we reviewed had prepared a draft plan . overall , we found that each agency had made an effort to adhere to the results act , and we recognize that agency officials are still in the process of updating and revising the draft plans . addressed major management challenges and included indications of interagency coordination . on the basis of our review of the draft plans , we found that each plan contained most of the components required by the results act . three of the draft plans had all six components , and two draft plans had five of the components . in general , the draft plans reflected the statutory authorities and responsibilities of the federal regulators with respect to the institutions and matters within their jurisdictions . on the whole , the draft plans showed little evidence of interagency coordination . our analysis of individual plan components showed that the draft plans had mission statements that broadly defined the purpose of the agency and goals and objectives that were somewhat results - oriented and appropriate to the agency's mission . the content of other components varied across agencies . for example , some agencies had useful discussions of approaches and strategies to achieve the goals and objectives , while others could have benefitted from more discussion of the resources needed . each agency discussed key external factors but only one discussed how those factors would affect the achievement of its goals . none of the plans discussed how the external factors would be addressed . in general , two sections were most in need of improvement . each agency could strengthen its section on the relationship between strategic and annual goals by explicitly discussing the link between these two types of goals . also , each agency could improve its section on how program evaluations were used and a schedule for future evaluations .