we did not verify these estimates . we also contacted tax officials from virginia and maryland to ask whether eliminating the penny would create problems in collecting sales taxes . officials from both states said that rounding sales taxes to the nearest nickel would not be a problem . we asked five charitable organizations what effect they expected the elimination of the penny would have on donations . one of the five charitable organizations said that eliminating the penny could negatively affect donations . three said that they expected people would donate higher denomination coins instead of the penny , and one said they did not know if people would donate higher denomination coins . one was , “do you think that the penny is a useful coin or should the government do away with it ? ” the results were that 59 percent of respondents said the penny was useful ; 35 percent said the penny should be eliminated ; and 5 percent didn't know . the other question was , “when you buy things using cash , would you prefer that the total purchase price be rounded to the nearest nickel , making the pennies unnecessary ? ” the results were that 52 percent of respondents preferred that prices be rounded to the nearest 36 percent preferred using pennies ; and 12 percent had no preference or didn't know . federal reserve system data showed that the penny does not circulate as much as other coins . for example , as shown in figure 1 , in 1991 , we calculated that the circulation rate for pennies was 42 percent , whereas the circulation rate for quarters was 93 percent . our calculations showed that in 1995 , the circulation rates were 34 percent for pennies and 88 percent for quarters . these numbers tell us that for almost two - thirds of the billions of pennies produced , the trip from the mint to the federal reserve to the commercial banks and finally to consumers is a “one - way trip” — they are not seen again in circulation . one - time event , but that it occurs periodically and resulted from the penny's low circulation rate . according to a study by the garbage project at the university of arizona , households threw away about 3 pennies per year from 1980 to 1986 , the most recent years for which data was available . purchases would have been rounded up and one - half would have been rounded down . if the total price ended in 1,2,6 , or 7 cents , the total price would have been rounded down . if it ended in 3,4,8 , or 9 cents , it would have been rounded up . in 1990 , we reported that , in 1980 , the u.s. army in europe asked the american military facilities in europe to eliminate the penny because of the expense of transporting the coins there . all but three facilities — the post office , the commercial bank , and the finance office — agreed to the change . these three facilities were bound by regulations that would not allow them to round prices .