programs . of these 1.2 million returns , about 587,000 had additional tax assessments exceeding $500 , which is the minimum dollar threshold required for innocent spouse relief . however , our estimate of 587,000 couples represents the maximum number of taxpayers potentially eligible for innocent spouse relief . this is more than would probably actually qualify . for instance , some couples were probably assessed additional taxes as a result of overstated deductions , credits , or basis , which have other dollar thresholds in addition to the $500 threshold . further , some of the 587,000 couples may not have qualified for innocent spouse protection because they both knew there was a substantial tax understatement . this knowledge would have made them ineligible for relief even if the tax deficiency was solely attributable to the actions of one spouse . since divorced taxpayers seek innocent spouse relief most frequently , we also estimated the number of taxpayers who could potentially be eligible for relief and may have divorced during the 3 years since the 1992 joint returns were filed . using a 2-percent per year divorce rate , we estimated that 35,000 divorced taxpayers had additional tax assessments of more than $500 . although innocent spouse relief is clearly established in law and regulation , we observed that little information about the criteria for granting it or how to apply for it was available from irs . the innocent spouse relief provisions are described in several irs publications , but these publications do not provide any guidance on how to request relief . furthermore , these publications are developed to help taxpayers prepare their returns , which is far in advance of the time that taxpayers might need information on innocent spouse relief . moreover , the publications most directly related to the enforcement and collection procedures that apply when taxpayers are billed for their spouses' taxes are totally silent about innocent spouse relief . through an offer in compromise , which is used in the cases of taxpayers who cannot pay the full amount of the balance due and decide to offer a lesser amount . the fact that taxpayers are commonly using these two approaches to seek innocent spouse relief indicates to us that irs does not provide taxpayers with adequate guidance for seeking relief . some irs staff are as confused as taxpayers about how to request innocent spouse relief . the various irs units we contacted took different approaches to providing relief . for example , two district offices granted relief using offers in compromise based on doubt as to liability , while staff at one service center routinely denied such requests as inappropriate . the current provisions may not ensure that taxpayers receive equitable relief . for example , the dollar thresholds represent eligibility criteria for relief based on income or the size of the liability . these criteria appear to be more related to an ability to pay or degree of hardship than to the innocence of the taxpayer .