postal service . in my testimony , i shall provide an overview of where the service stands today , as we come to the end of the 20th century , by looking back at trends in its financial and service delivery performance and also looking forward to the major challenges confronting the service at the start of a new millennium . also , i will discuss ongoing work and work that we have completed since june 1998 related to four major challenges facing the postal service: maximizing performance in the face of increasing customer demands managing employees , the service's most valuable asset , to maximize attainment of agency goals and continuous improvement of employee performance ; maintaining financial viability by controlling costs and enhancing positioning the organization to adapt to a rapidly changing communications and delivery environment with a growing number of competitors . i will also discuss other major postal oversight issues related to work that we have completed during the past year . a list of the reports and testimonies we have issued since june 1 , 1998 , is included in the attachment to this statement . the service has continued to report improvements in the areas of financial and service delivery performance and has undertaken a number of initiatives to respond to the four major challenges that we identified . given the nature and extent of the challenges facing the service , we understand that it will take time to implement and assess the impact of major initiatives intended to address the challenges . and , although the service has made progress and is continuing to make significant changes , time appears to be growing short for the service to successfully address these challenges so that it can sustain and improve current performance levels and remain competitive into the 21st century . the service faces growing challenges from competition , notably from private delivery companies and electronic communications alternatives such as the internet . the service projects that such competition will lead to substantial declines in the service's first - class mail volume in the next decade . should this occur , the service will likely face unprecedented challenges as it seeks to fulfill its primary mission of providing universal postal service at reasonable rates while remaining self - supporting from postal revenues . the service and other stakeholders agree that growth in the service's core business of delivering first - class mail has already been affected by the rapid growth of the internet , electronic communications , and electronic commerce . although the service's mail volume increased in the 1990s to record levels , the rate of growth has slowed . the service's chief financial officer wrote us on september 9 , 1999 , that first - class mail volume is projected to decline on the basis of the assumption that diversion of mail to electronic communications alternatives would accelerate in a new and vastly different environment in which the service would operate . the postal service's ability to maintain financial viability by controlling costs , improving productivity , and enhancing revenues also presents a continuing challenge . the service's strategic plan stated that aggressive cost management would be necessary to guarantee success in mitigating historic cost trends that drive price increases .