postal service . within the last 6 months , have you received any mail delivered by the u.s . postal service involving sweepstakes or documents resembling cashier's checks that you believe were in any way misleading or deceptive ? ” a total of 1,014 adults ( 18 and older ) in the continental united states were interviewed between november 18 and 22 , 1998 . the contractor's survey was made up of a random - digit - dialing sample of households with telephones . to ensure that survey results could be generalized to the adult population 18 years of age and older in the continental united states , results from the survey were adjusted by icr to account for selection probabilities and to match the characteristics of all adults in the general public according to such demographic groups as age , gender , region , and education . because we surveyed a random sample of the population , the results of the survey have a measurable precision or sampling error . the sample error is stated at a certain confidence level . the overall results of our survey question regarding the public's opinion about misleading or deceptive mail are surrounded by 95 percent confidence levels of plus or minus 4 percentage points or less . the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce nonsampling errors . as in any survey , differences in the wording of questions , in the sources of information available to respondents , or in the types of people who do not respond can lead to somewhat different results . we took steps to minimize nonsampling errors . for example , we developed our survey question with the aid of a survey specialist and pretested the question prior to submitting it to icr . we did our work from november 1998 through july 1999 , in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards . we did not verify consumer complaint data obtained from ftc and postal inspection service nor did we verify data provided by ftc , postal inspection service , and state attorneys general offices on specific law enforcement actions . name of agency / organization federal government agencies: federal trade commission ( ftc ) u.s . postal inspection service state government agencies ( offices of attorneys general ) : connecticut florida local government agencies: citizen assistance ( consumer affairs ) for city of alexandria consumer affairs division for montgomery county nongovernmental organizations: american association of retired persons ( aarp ) arizona state university ( gerontology program ) direct marketing association ( dma ) national association of attorneys general ( naag ) national consumers league ( ncl ) / national fraud information center ( nfic ) u.s. public interest research group ( uspirg ) washington , d.c. washington , d.c. hartford , connecticut tallahassee , florida alexandria , virginia rockville , maryland washington , d.c. tempe , arizona washington , d.c. washington , d.c. washington , d.c. washington , d.c . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also .