studies . this supplement was issued subsequent to the expiration of several legislative provisions that temporarily limited agencies' a - 76 efforts , particularly those of dod . omb's revision of the supplement had the potential to re - focus attention on a - 76 . however , since issuing the revision , omb has not consistently worked with agencies to ensure that the provisions of a - 76 are being effectively implemented . for example , omb made only limited efforts to gather and use the commercial activities inventories that agencies are to develop under a - 76 . in june 1996 , omb requested that agencies submit not later than september 13 , 1996 , a summary of their updated inventory of commercial activities as required by a - 76 . according to omb , it did not receive inventories from all agencies , and of those that it did receive , many were based largely on previous inventory efforts . in june 1997 , after not receiving responses from several agencies , omb followed up with another request for the commercial inventory information . several months later , in april 1998 , we found that 6 of the 24 largest agencies still had not complied with omb's initial and follow - up requests to provide updated commercial activities inventories . omb also has not systematically reviewed the inventories of commercial activities that it did receive to determine whether agencies are missing opportunities to generate savings . omb generally has not attempted to determine whether agencies have inappropriately omitted some commercial activities . omb also does not compare commercial activities among agencies to identify inconsistent application of a - 76 guidance across the federal government . as a result , some agencies may not be identifying commercial activities that are similar to those included in other agencies' commercial activities inventories , thereby missing opportunities to use the a - 76 process to achieve cost savings . these paragraphs instruct agencies that their savings estimates should reflect the probable results generated by cost comparisons or conversions . omb officials stated that they rely primarily on program examiners in the omb resource management offices ( rmo ) to review agencies' a - 76 efforts in conjunction with the budget review and approval process . in 1996 , the omb deputy director for management asked the rmos to examine competition initiatives , such as a - 76 , as part of their continuing program management and budget reviews . the deputy director highlighted agencies' strategic plans and streamlining plans as being especially appropriate vehicles for examining agencies' efforts to compete their support service requirements . however , since then , omb has not provided its program examiners with more recent written requirements or guidance on the need to review agencies' a - 76 efforts . omb officials said that , despite the lack of current guidance , some review has been done on an ad hoc basis in conjunction with budget reviews . according to these officials , examiners were given copies of agencies' commercial activities inventories where they existed and were instructed to keep in mind all reinvention efforts , including a - 76 , as they reviewed agency budget requests .