the consumer did not send in the form . a consumer complained that a company instructed him to call immediately concerning his sweepstakes winnings . when he called , a company representative tried to solicit his telephone number as well as credit card information . the consumer refused to provide the information . as shown in table 1 , 26 complaints contained a variety of miscellaneous consumer complaints that did not easily fit into one of the previous four groups . examples of these miscellaneous complaints included the following: a consumer received three letters informing him that he was the winner of a large sum of money . after writing many letters to the company , the consumer never received any explanation as to why he had not received his money . a consumer reported that he had received a notice that he was the winner in a company sweepstakes . the notice stated that the company was preparing to award him a prize . the consumer sent the company a letter requesting the prize , but subsequently , the company notified the consumer that he in fact was not the winner . postal inspection service officials told us that the fraud complaint system ( fcs ) is used by the postal inspection service to collect and maintain consumer complaint information about various types of alleged fraudulent activities , including those involving deceptive mail marketing practices . the officials estimated that the postal inspection service generally receives between 60,000 and 100,000 consumer complaints each year that pertain to alleged fraudulent activities . however , officials were unable to estimate how many of these complaints were related to mailed sweepstakes material and cashier's check look - alikes . winnings or verify their winning numbers . examples of such complaints included the following: a consumer complained that he had received an award notification in the mail . he was required to call a 900 telephone number to verify his winning number . the company told the consumer that he had won one dollar . later , the consumer was charged $56 for the telephone call . a consumer was told by a company that she had won either a car or cash and required her to either call a 900 telephone number or send in a card to receive her prize . although she sent in the card , she did not receive her promised prize . as indicated in table 1 , 7 consumer complaints from our sample involved organizations requesting personal information , such as the consumer's social security number or bank account number . some examples of these types of complaints included the following: a consumer reported that a company informed him that he could win as much as $100,000 if he would send in a release form that included bank account information . the officials told us that generally , it would be difficult to identify such complaints because fcs has limited search capabilities . in large part , complaints regarding mailed sweepstakes material and cashier's check look - alikes in fcs can only be identified by searching on the company name or product sold .