additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . i would be happy to respond to your questions at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . ins has been delegated the authority to enforce the immigration laws . in 1997 , we reported to this subcommittee that the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) needed to improve its efforts to identify potentially deportable criminal aliens in federal and state prisons and complete the ihp for these aliens before they were released . we based this conclusion on our analysis of data provided by the federal bureau of prisons ( bop ) and five states on foreign - born inmates who were released from their prison systems between april and september , 1995 . ins' executive associate commissioner for programs told the subcommittee that ins had improved program operations since 1995 . in response , the subcommittee asked us to review program performance during 1997 . our report in response to that request was based on foreign - born inmates released from bop and four states' prisons between january and june , 1997 . although our results indicated that ins' performance had shown some improvement , we continue to have several of the same concerns about the ihp . in 1997 , ins still had not identified many potentially deportable aliens while they were in prison . the majority of these released criminal aliens were aggravated felons , some of whom were reconvicted for new felonies . ins completed the ihp for about half of the released criminal aliens it identified as potentially deportable while they were in prison . ins could use this information to determine which of the released foreign - born inmates had been screened for the ihp , identified as deportable , or placed in the hearing process . we recommended that the commissioner of ins establish a nationwide data system containing the universe of foreign - born inmates reported to ins by bop and the state departments of corrections and use this system to track the ihp status of each inmate .