have not begun process . only performed quick issue assessment last year . performed preliminary assessment , will not start until year 2000 is complete , many systems decimal ready . status of effort to convert ? started conversion 2 years ago , and plan to complete internal testing by the end of 1998 . replacing old systems with new that will be decimal ready . inventory conducted , budgeted , and plan being developed . some trading systems being replaced that will be decimal ready . preliminary analysis of project but have not begun process . waiting for specifications . as part of system modernization , have begun converting . conducting inventory and have budgeted . some scoping but have not begun formal process . conducted inventory , budgeted , and have plan . had only one affected system , which was already decimal ready . national market systems ( securities industry automation corporation ) quoting ( cqs ) and trade reporting systems ( cts ) decimal ready now . intermarket trading system ( its ) modifications under way . options - related systems have not begun to be converted . systems for exchange - traded stocks completed in march 1998 . systems for nasdaq - listed stocks to be completed by may 1998 . conducted preliminary inventory . high level assessment of scope . previously performed a preliminary assessment , will not start until have specifications . preliminary assessment of scope . have not begun process . ( continued ) status of effort to convert ? internal systems completed but its clearing firm provides systems that are not ready processing done by vendor that is not ready . taken ancillary look but no inventory , budget , or plan . instead , project is part of ongoing systems development . have not begun process . have not begun process . have not begun process but minimal effort required . have not begun process . the implementation of decimal pricing within the securities industry may lead to increased processing and communication volumes , because such increases resulted from the reduction in tick size to 1 / 16ths . all of the exchanges we contacted , along with representatives of organizations that provide information processing for the national market system , indicated that their systems experienced increased processing volumes and operated at greater capacity levels following the reduction in the minimum trading increment from 1 / 8th to 1 / 16th . they also indicated that they experienced information processing and communications - related problems during the record trading volumes that were reached in october 1997 . according to nyse officials , that exchange experienced as much as a 40-percent increase in message traffic following the conversion to 1 / 16ths . they attributed these increases to the doubling of the number of potential price points from 8 to 16 , which likely encouraged traders to submit larger numbers of smaller orders in an attempt to achieve the most favorable pricing . additional message traffic was created by traders who increased the practice of cancelling and resubmitting orders as a way of attempting to ascertain the direction of price movements .