is achieving its goals and objectives . we also noted that the strategies component does not discuss priorities among the goals and objectives . such a discussion would be helpful to decisionmakers in determining where to focus priorities in the event of a sudden change in funding or staffing . finally , gsa deferred to the president's budget its discussion about capital and other resources . we believe it seems reasonable to include in this component at least some general discussion of how capital and other resources will be used to meet each general goal . although the external factors component in the september 30 plan is much clearer and provides more context than the draft version we reviewed , the factors are not clearly linked to the general goals and objectives . omb circular a - 11 states that the plan should include this link , as well as describe how achieving the goals could be affected by the factors . this improvement would allow decisionmakers to better understand how the factors potentially will affect achievement of each general goal and objective . the program evaluations component in the september 30 plan provides a listing of the various program evaluations that gsa indicates were used in developing the plan . however , it still does not include a schedule of future evaluations . instead , the plan states that the schedule for future program evaluations is under development and that gsa intends to use the remainder of the consultation process to obtain input from congress and stakeholders concerning the issues that should be studied on a priority basis . however , omb circular a - 11 indicates that the schedule should have been completed and included in the september 30 plan , together with an outline of the general methodology to be used and a discussion of the particular issues to be addressed . although the plan does a much better job of setting forth gsa's statutory authorities in the attachment , this description could be further improved if the different statutory authorities discussed therein were linked with either the general goals and objectives or the performance goals included in the plan . further , the plan only makes limited reference to the other important areas we identified in our july 1997 report — crosscutting issues , major management problems , and data reliability . the plan's improved clarity and context should help decisionmakers understand the crosscutting issues that affect gsa as a central management agency . however , explicit discussion of these issues is limited , and the september 30 plan makes no reference to the extent to which gsa coordinated with stakeholders . the september 30 plan references major management problems in the program evaluations component , but it does not explicitly discuss these problems or identify which problems could have an adverse impact on meeting the general goals and objectives . our work has shown over the years that these types of problems have significantly hampered gsa's and its stakeholder agencies' abilities to accomplish their missions . for example , the plan could address how gsa will attempt to ensure that its information systems meet computer security requirements or how gsa plans to address the year 2000 problem in its computer hardware and software systems .