under the provisions of h.r . 3150 as introduced and as it passed the house , debtors must pass three tests to be required to file under chapter 13: • debtors must have monthly gross income that exceeds a set percentage of the national median income for households of comparable size ( debtors below this threshold are presumed to be eligible to file under chapter 7 ) ; • debtors must have income of more than $50 per month after allowable living expenses and payments on secured and unsecured priority debts ; and , • debtors could repay at least 20 percent of their unsecured nonpriority debts over a 5-year period if they used this remaining income for such payments . passed by the house of representatives . the principal effect of using the two different versions of h.r . 3150 was that each report used a different threshold of gross annual income to screen debtors for further repayment analysis . in the ernst & young analysis , debtors whose gross annual income was 75 percent or less of the national median income for a household of comparable size were deemed eligible for chapter 7 . debtors whose gross annual income was more than 75 percent of the national median household income were subject to further analysis of their repayment capacity . in the abi report's analysis , debtors whose gross annual income was at least 100 percent of the national median income for households of comparable were subject to further repayment analysis . the three reports used different estimates of debtors' allowable living expenses . the credit center report established its own criteria for debtors' living expenses . basically , the credit center's analysis used the debtor's living expenses as reported on the debtor's schedule of estimated monthly living expenses . the ernst & young and abi reports used the internal revenue service's ( irs ) financial collection standards , as specified in h.r . however , ernst & young and abi interpreted them somewhat differently . the principal difference was for transportation expenses . ernst & young did not include an automobile ownership allowance for debtors who leased cars or whose cars were debt - free . abi included an ownership allowance for leased cars and for debtors with debt - free cars . the abi report noted that this difference in allowable transportation expenses accounted for “a substantial part” of the difference between the abi and ernst & young estimates of the percentage of chapter 7 debtors who could potentially repay at least 20 percent of their unsecured nonpriority debt . abi also deducted from the debtors' total unsecured priority debt the value of any student loans and added the value of these loans to debtors total unsecured nonpriority debt . to the extent this was done , it had the effect of freeing debtor income to pay unsecured nonpriority debt . finally , the abi report assumed that administrative expenses , such as the trustee fee , would consume about 5.6 percent of debtors' nonhousing payments to creditors under a 5-year repayment plan .