postal service . my testimony will ( 1 ) focus on the performance of the postal service and the need for improving internal controls and protecting revenue in an organization that takes in and spends billions of dollars each year and ( 2 ) highlight some of the key reform and oversight issues that continue to challenge the postal service and congress as they consider how u.s. mail service will be provided in the future . i will also provide some observations from our ongoing work relating to labor - management relations at the postal service and other areas . my testimony is based on our ongoing work and work that we completed over the past year . first , i would like to discuss both the reported successes and some of the remaining areas of concern related to the postal service's performance . last year , the postal service reported that it had achieved outstanding financial and operational performance . financially , the postal service had the second most profitable year in its history . according to the postal service's 1996 annual report , its fiscal year 1996 net income was $1.6 billion . similarly , with regard to mail delivery service , the postal service continued to meet or exceed its goals for on - time delivery of overnight mail . most recently , the postmaster general announced that , during 1996 , the postal service delivered 91 percent of overnight local residential mail on time or better . additionally , during fiscal year 1996 , the postal service's volume exceeded 182 billion pieces of mail and generated more than $56 billion in revenue . while these results are encouraging , other performance data suggest that some areas of concern warrant closer scrutiny . for example , last year's delivery of 2-day and 3-day mail — at 80 and 83 percent respectively — did not score as high as overnight delivery . we also identified several issues surrounding the postal service's role in the international mail arena that remain unresolved . chief among them is the appropriateness of the postal service's pricing practices in setting rates for international mail services . we also reviewed postal reform in other countries to learn about their experiences . recently , we issued a report on canada's efforts since 1981 to reform its postal service , the canada post corporation ( cpc ) . although cpc retained basic letter mail services at a uniform rate , it also reduced the frequency of mail delivery to some businesses , as well as in urban and rural areas . cpc uses a regulatory rate - making process that includes the opportunity for public comment and government approval for basic domestic and international single - piece letters . however , postage rates for other mail services can be approved by cpc without issuing regulations or obtaining government approval . some of the key concerns that have been raised by cpc customers include cpc's closure of rural post offices and its conversion of others to private ownership . in addition , cpc's competitors have expressed concern about whether cpc is cross - subsidizing the prices of its courier services with monopoly revenues .