primarily for tax reasons . more often , tax considerations affected the timing or structure of a business action not whether the action would occur . for example , in acquiring a business equipment would consider tax implications in terms of whether to buy or lease the equipment . few of the businesses we spoke with could readily separate tax compliance costs from other costs of doing business . the integration of the tax compliance activities with other business activities makes it difficult and time - consuming to collect the information necessary from businesses to generate reliable cost estimates . for example , businesses said it would be difficult to take payroll expenditures and isolate those associated with tax compliance . further , business respondents said that they do not routinely need , thus it does not make sense for them to collect , information on compliance costs . and , to separate tax compliance costs from other costs of doing business would be burdensome and of questionable usefulness to them . a few business officials provided estimates of some compliance costs , such as legal fees , payroll management fees , and tax software expenditures , but expressed limited confidence in their ability to provide accurate , comprehensive cost data . in addition , those few businesses that said they could isolate some of their tax compliance costs indicated that even in their cases , it would be difficult to separate federal compliance costs from state and local compliance costs . while we did not identify existing reliable business tax burden cost estimates , there was consensus among the business respondents , tax experts , and the literature that tax compliance burden is significant and that it can be reduced . although some gains can be made by reducing administrative burden imposed by irs , the greatest potential for reducing the compliance burden of business taxpayers is by dealing with the complexity of the tax code . provisions has the potential for reducing the compliance burden of many businesses . another approach that has been proposed is to completely overhaul the tax code by replacing the current income tax with some form of consumption tax . in considering changes to the tax code , whether they be limited in nature or comprehensive , legislators need to weigh several sometimes competing concerns . these include the revenue implications of any change , the need to address equity and fairness , and the desire to achieve social and economic goals . the tension in achieving balance among these trade - offs and at the same time making it easier for taxpayers to comply presents a significant challenge to congress . the tax system is burdensome for many individuals as well as for businesses . almost 100 million american taxpayers currently must file individual tax returns , even though most have fully paid their taxes through the withholding system . to assist the congress in identifying options for reducing taxpayer burden and irs paper processing , we are in the process of studying return - free filing systems and the potential impact they would have on the federal income tax system .