improve its collection programs . the private collectors will be bound by the same taxpayer rights and disclosure considerations as apply to irs employees . other useful information could also be obtained from the pilot . for example , irs could learn what actions are most productive based on the type of case , type of taxpayer , and age of the account . for the information to be useful to irs and congress in evaluating the pilot , however , the sample of cases must be drawn and the data captured in such a way that the appropriate analyses and tests can be done . we have not analyzed irs' methodologies for selecting its sample of cases or for evaluating the pilot . irs faces many challenges in its efforts to improve the management and collection of its accounts receivable . the key is to find solutions to the major problems we previously discussed and their underlying causes that affect irs' ability to collect more delinquent taxes . solutions will take time because the problems are pervasive and may involve all irs functions and processes . currently , irs is making some changes to its collection process as a part of its modernization effort . we reported in the past that private collectors and states that are engaged in collection activities similar to irs' may provide some best - practice examples for irs to use in benchmarking its efforts . many states use private collectors to supplement their own collection programs , thereby taking advantage of private sector capability in managing receivables , gaining access to better technology , or avoiding the expense of hiring permanent staff . although many states — including 33 of the 43 states that responded to our survey — have used private collectors , their experiences have varied widely . collections from its proposed pilot , but not necessarily a significant windfall . who have taxes withheld from their wages . taxpayers with nonwage income are required to calculate their projected income and make estimated tax payments to irs during the year . according to irs data , the average tax delinquency for taxpayers with primarily nonwage income was about 4 times greater than that for wage earners — $15,800 versus $3,600 . irs data also show that , at the end of fiscal year 1995 , about $75 billion , or 74 percent of the $101 billion in irs' inventory of tax debts owed by individuals , was owed by taxpayers whose income was primarily nonwage . irs' collection process was introduced several decades ago , and although some changes have been made , the process generally is costly and inefficient . the three - stage collection process — computer - generated notices and bills , telephone calls , and personal visits by collection employees — generally takes longer and is more costly than collection processes in the private sector . while the private sector emphasizes the use of telephone collection calls , a significant portion of irs' collection resources is allocated to field offices where personal visits are made by revenue officers .