high volume . these officials told us that their views had not changed significantly since we issued our 1994 report . generally , the officials tended to blame each other for the high volume of grievances being filed and the large number of backlogged grievances . finally , at the time our 1997 report was issued , the postal service and the other seven organizations had been unable to convene a labor - management relations summit . the postmaster general ( pmg ) proposed the summit over 2 years ago to , among other things , address our recommendation to establish a framework agreement of common goals and approaches that could help postal , union , and management association officials improve labor - management relations and employee working conditions . initially , the responses from the other seven organizations to the pmg's invitation were mixed . for instance , around january 1995 , the leaders of the three management associations and the rural carriers union accepted the invitation to participate in the summit . however , at that time , the contracts for three unions — apwu , nalc , and mail handlers — had expired and negotiations had begun . the union leaders said they were waiting until contract negotiations were completed before making a decision on the summit . in april 1996 , when negotiations had been completed , the three unions agreed to participate . because of these initial difficulties in convening the summit , in february 1996 , the service asked the director of fmcs to provide mediation services to help convene the summit . also , in march 1996 , mr. chairman , you encouraged the fmcs director to assist the service by providing such services . as discussed in our 1997 report , although various preliminary meetings had taken place to determine an agenda , the efforts to convene a summit were not successful . recently , according to an fmcs official , a summit occurred on october 29 , 1997 , that was attended by various officials from the eight organizations , including the postal service , the four major unions , and the three management associations . we are encouraged by the fact that this meeting occurred . such meetings can provide the participants a means of working toward reaching agreement on common approaches for addressing labor - management relations problems . we believe that such agreement is a key factor in helping these organizations sustain improvements in their relations and in the postal work environment . september 1996 ) on delivery redesign , have not endorsed the testing of the revised processes . at the national level , nalc officials told us that they believed that revisions to the processes by which city carriers sort and deliver mail should be established through the collective bargaining process . the employee opinion survey ( eos ) is an example of an initiative that was discontinued . the nationwide annual eos , begun in 1992 and continued through 1995 , was a voluntary survey designed to gather the opinions of all postal employees about the service's strengths and shortcomings as an employer .