more lines not printing completely . these gaps were inconsistently distributed throughout the notes , thus making them difficult to correct . how did the production of flawed notes come about ? what actions are planned about the flawed notes , and what are the costs associated with these notes ? have any lessons been learned from this experience that could be applied to the future production of redesigned currency ? to address the questions you raised , we interviewed officials and reviewed relevant documents at the department of the treasury , including the bureau of engraving and printing ( bep ) , which designs and produces the nation's currency ; the secret service , which conducts investigations of counterfeiting activities ; and the federal reserve , which distributes u. s. currency and ensures its physical integrity . we also performed a limited inspection of the newly designed $50 notes stored at bep in washington , d.c. , and at federal reserve banks in philadelphia , pennsylvania ; and richmond , virginia . these two banks were among 16 federal reserve banks that received the flawed notes . we chose them because of their proximity to washington , d.c. we also interviewed officials at these two banks . other than the limited inspections we performed , we did not independently verify the information provided by bep , the secret service , or the federal reserve . we did our work between september 26 , 1997 , and october 1 , 1997 . the introduction of significantly redesigned currency began in march 1996 , with the introduction into circulation of the newly designed $100 note . redesigned lower denomination notes were expected to be introduced into circulation at subsequent 9- to 12-month intervals , but the introduction of the $50 note has been delayed because of efforts to make the denomination easier to read by the visually impaired . the note is now expected to be introduced later this month . the redesigned currency includes several new security features . some of these features are overt ; that is , they are designed to be recognized by the public . during the initial production of the newly designed $50 notes , bep detected flaws in some of the notes , specifically a gap , or white space , between some of the concentric lines surrounding grant's portrait . neither bep nor the federal reserve know specifically how many flawed notes are among the 217.6 million redesigned notes produced before september 8 , 1997 . although both bep and the federal reserve have done some inspections to identify flawed notes , neither has done a complete count or a statistically projectable sample . bep said it is not prepared to estimate the number of flawed notes without more thorough sampling , which it plans to do . in philadelphia , federal reserve officials looked at 200 of the $50 notes and estimated that 50 to 60 percent were flawed . on september 30 , 1997 , we and federal reserve officials jointly reviewed judgmentally selected samples of newly redesigned $50 notes that had been shipped to the philadelphia and richmond federal reserve banks .