vests . in addition to the standard equipment available , srts have access to additional firearms , such as bolt - action rifles , and specialized tactical equipment , such as diversionary devices . equipment used by srts is generally comparable to that used by dea and fbi agents during similar operations . atf's procedures for reporting , investigating , and reviewing shooting and excessive force incidents , as revised in october 1994 , are consistent with guidelines and / or standards recommended by the international association of chiefs of police , the president's council on integrity and efficiency , and the commission on accreditation for law enforcement agencies . for example , agents are required to immediately report shooting incidents to their supervisors , incidents are to be investigated by an independent unit , and certain reports are to be reviewed by a review board on the basis of the nature and seriousness of the incident . overall , dea's and fbi's procedures for reporting , investigating , and reviewing shooting incidents are comparable to atf's . distinctions in the procedures include ( 1 ) dea and fbi delegate some investigations to their field divisions but atf does not and ( 2 ) dea's and fbi's review boards include representatives from justice — atf's review board does not include representatives from treasury . although atf's excessive force procedures are comparable to dea's , with one distinction relating again to delegation , they are distinct from those employed by fbi . atf is to investigate allegations of excessive force first and — if warranted — refer them to justice for possible criminal investigation . in contrast , fbi is to refer all allegations of excessive force to justice for possible criminal investigation before investigating the allegations itself . had been reviewed by a designated headquarters unit . our review also showed that atf's investigations of 38 reported shootings involving atf agents firing their weapons at suspects found each to be justified and within the scope of its use - of - force policy . in addition , atf's investigations found that 18 of 25 reported excessive force allegations in three misconduct categories were unsubstantiated . four investigations found evidence of some agent misconduct , two investigations were ongoing at the time of our review , and one was closed without action because atf determined that there was no need for further review . agents found to have engaged in misconduct received written reprimands and / or suspensions . regarding recent declines in the number of firearms dealers , you asked us to ( 1 ) determine the extent and nature of the declines ; ( 2 ) determine what factors contributed to the declines , including whether atf had a policy to reduce the number of dealers ; and ( 3 ) obtain the views of pertinent organizations on the advantages and disadvantages of reducing the number of dealers . since reaching a high point in april 1993 , the number of firearms dealerssharply declined by about 35 percent , from about 260,700 to about 168,400 dealers as of september 30 , 1995 — the lowest number since fiscal year 1980 . this decline occurred nationwide and ranged from 23 percent in montana to 45 percent in hawaii .