i will turn now to each of these observations in more detail . in examining the responses of advisory committee members to our questionnaire , we determined the overall response to each question and , in addition , separately reported the responses of peer review panel members and general advisory committee members where appropriate . the answers the committee members gave to our survey showed that , generally , they believed that their advisory committees were providing balanced and independent advice and recommendations . the committee members also reported that they believed their committees had a clear and worthwhile purpose and that the committees' advice and recommendations were consistent with that purpose and considered by the agencies . these responses are shown graphically in the following two figures , which group together by topic a number of the specific questions that we asked committee members . faca sets out requirements for agencies and advisory committees to follow , and we asked the 19 agencies about their perceptions of how useful or burdensome those requirements were . with regard to the requirements in general , figure 3 shows the range of agencies' responses . the largest number of agencies considered the requirements to be useful . agencies whether faca had prohibited them from receiving or soliciting input on issues or concerns from public groups ( other than from advisory committees ) . most of the agencies — 16 of the 19 — answered no . there has been some question about whether the possibility of litigation over compliance with faca requirements has inhibited agencies from forming new advisory committees . the most frequent response — received from 14 of the 19 agencies — was that this possibility did not inhibit the formation of new committees . as i noted earlier , executive order 12838 established ceilings for each agency on its maximum allowable number of discretionary advisory committees . a majority of the agencies ( 12 ) said that the ceilings did not deter them from seeking to establish new advisory committees . seven agencies , however , said the ceilings did deter them . an agency could request approval from omb to establish a committee that would place it over its ceiling . two of the seven agencies had done so during fiscal years 1995-1997 , and omb approved their requests . although committee members and agencies responding to our questionnaires generally provided a more positive than negative image of faca , their responses also pointed to concerns and issues that the subcommittee may wish to explore in its consideration of faca . we list these concerns in no particular order of priority . about 13 percent of the general advisory committee members said that agency officials had asked their advisory committees on occasion to give advice or make recommendations on the basis of inadequate data or analysis . a majority of the 19 agencies reported that two faca requirements — preparing an annual report on closed advisory committee meetings and filing advisory committee reports with the library of congress — required little labor on their part but offered little value , at least in the agencies' estimation .