postal service . in my testimony , i shall briefly discuss the service's overall performance during fiscal year 1997 , including the service's reported successes and remaining challenges . also , i will discuss work that we have completed since the spring of 1997 , when we last testified at the subcommittee's postal service oversight hearing . much of this work was done at the subcommittee's request and addresses issues related to postal management and reform . in addition , i shall provide information on our ongoing work , which relates primarily to the issues of competition and diversity . first , i would like to briefly discuss the continuation of the service's reported performance successes and mention some areas of concern and challenges that still remain . for the third year in a row , the service has reported increases in net income , certain mail delivery services , overall mail volume , and revenue . net income for fiscal year 1997 was about $1.3 billion , which marks the third straight year that the service has reported net income in excess of $1 billion per year . in fiscal year 1997 , the overall delivery score for the on - time delivery of overnight mail reached a 3-year high of 92 percent , and total mail volume increased to about 191 billion pieces . this volume helped generate more than $58 billion in revenue during fiscal year 1997 , the highest revenue figure reported by the service in the most recent 3 fiscal years . although such performance results appear to be encouraging , other information suggests that some areas of concern and challenges remain . for example , the delivery scores of 2-day and 3-day mail for fiscal year 1997 — reported by the service to be 76 and 77 percent , respectively — were less than the score for overnight mail . in addition , the fiscal year 1997 scores for delivering 2-day and 3-day mail had declined from levels previously reported for fiscal years 1995 and 1996 . such declines may reinforce concerns previously expressed by some postal customers that the service's emphasis on overnight mail delivery has been at the expense of 2-day and 3-day mail delivery efforts . without such linkage , it may be difficult for stakeholders reviewing the plan to understand how the service intends to achieve its goals . i would now like to provide you with a brief summary of work we completed since the spring of 1997 on other issues related to the service's overall management and operations . this work resulted in reports on ( 1 ) cost overruns at the chicago post office , ( 2 ) the procurement of postal uniforms , and ( 3 ) emergency suspensions of operations at post offices . in october 1997 , we reported on the cost overruns that occurred in the construction of the new chicago main post office . we found that based on our review of the events that occurred and an investigation by the postal inspection service , the overruns , which totaled about $133 million , appeared to be due primarily to inadequate planning .