examinations of these organizations . however , gao has not fully assessed the effectiveness of the changes for bank and thrift examination and notes that they have been instituted during favorable economic conditions that have contributed to strong bank and thrift profits . also , several critical tasks remain for the regulatory agencies: ensuring consistency in the supervision and examination policies of multiple regulatory agencies , ensuring staff expertise , and examining increasingly complex banking organizations . chairwoman and members of the committee: we are pleased to be here today to discuss bank and thrift supervision and examination . supervisory and examination procedures today show evidence of lessons learned from the bank and thrift crises of the 1980s and early 1990s . these procedures are the primary basis used by the federal regulatory agencies to assess the risks that banks and thrifts assume and to take actions that are needed to maintain a safe and sound banking system and protect the deposit insurance funds . a combination of regulatory and legislative changes , along with market forces , has expanded the number and scope of activities undertaken by insured depository institutions , particularly the largest ones , and thus the risks that they assume . these expanded activities include offering and / or dealing in a range of nontraditional bank products , such as mutual funds , securities , derivatives , and other off - balance sheet products . the resulting complex institutions represent a major supervisory and regulatory challenge . in keeping with the changes in the banking environment , federal bank and thrift regulators have recently announced that bank examinations will explicitly include an assessment of how effectively banks manage risk and a rating on their sensitivity to risks posed by a variety of market factors . although we have not yet fully assessed the implementation of most of the recent changes to supervisory and examination policy , they appear to address some of our concerns about examinations in the aftermath of bank failures in the 1980s and early 1990s . perhaps the most important — yet unanswered — question to ask in assessing changes in bank and thrift supervision is to what extent improvements in the detection of problems can help ensure that regulators take timely and forceful corrective action to prevent or minimize losses to the deposit insurance funds . describe the history of the bank and thrift crises of the late 1980s and early 1990s and the legislative response to these crises , highlight supervisory and examination weaknesses we have noted in the past and improvement efforts that have been made or are under way , and identify continuing issues . from 1980 to 1994 , record losses were absorbed by the federal deposit insurance funds . in this period , nearly 1,300 thrifts failed , and 1,617 federally insured banks were closed or received fdic financial assistance . the regulators themselves have recognized that their supervisory practices failed to adequately control risky practices that led to numerous thrift and bank failures . banks and thrifts: safety and soundness reforms need to be maintained ( gao / t - ggd - 93-3 , jan. 27 1993 ) . bank supervision: prompt and forceful regulatory actions needed ( gao / ggd - 91-69 , apr .