and totally productive . a committee staff member added that agencies need to have a constant dialogue with congressional staff . finally , an agency official said that all consultation participants must accept that to be useful , the strategic plan must be viewed as a dynamic document , subject to change and open to criticism by all participants . in summary , mr. chairman , both committee staff and agency officials we spoke with recognized that the consultations on strategic planning are important to developing an agency plan that appropriately takes into account the views of congress . however , as is to be expected during the initial stages of a new effort , all participants are struggling to define how the consultation process can work effectively . as i mentioned , the letter from congress to omb should be particularly helpful in this regard . in our discussions with committee staff and agency officials , they noted some general approaches , including engaging the right people , addressing differing views of what is to be discussed , and establishing a consultation process that is iterative , that may contribute to the usefulness of consultations . ultimately , these approaches , along with other practices that may emerge as agency officials and committee staff continue to learn to work together in developing strategic plans , can help create a basic understanding among the stakeholders of the competing demands that confront most agencies and congressional staff , the limited resources available to them , and how those demands and resources require careful and continuous balancing . we look forward to continuing to work with you and other committees on gpra . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . it also helped them focus better on the presentations and discussions taking place during the meetings by eliminating the need to read and respond to the documents at the same time .