sheets . particularly active among nondepository lenders are 12 sblcs that accounted for about 19 percent of 7 ( a ) loans outstanding at the end of 1997 . in this market , sba 7 ( a ) lenders sell their loans to pool assemblers who form pools by combining the loans of a number of lenders and then sell certificates backed by these pools . colson services , sba's fiscal and transfer agent ( fta ) , monitors and handles the paperwork and data management system for all 7 ( a ) guaranteed portions sold on the secondary market . colson also serves as a central registry for all sales and resales of these portions . the firm receives payment from lenders for its secondary market services equal to 12 1 / 2 basis points of the value of certificates for guaranteed portions under colson's management . in 1997 , sba 7 ( a ) secondary market sales of pooled guaranteed portions was approximately $2.6 billion . in contrast to ginnie mae guaranteed mbs that are backed by cash flows from whole loans , 7 ( a ) loans are divided into separate guaranteed and unguaranteed portions for secondary market sales . sba reported that in 1997 over 12,000 7 ( a ) guaranteed portions were sold on the secondary market , about 40 percent of all 7 ( a ) loans approved that year . in recent years , anywhere from a third to almost half of the guaranteed portions of loans originated have been sold on the secondary market . this is in contrast to ginnie mae guaranteed mbs , which represent over 90 percent of outstanding federally insured residential mortgage loans . the guaranteed 7 ( a ) secondary market is smaller and less active , and provides lenders with fewer incentives to sell loans than the federally insured residential mortgage market . at the end of 1997 , about $10 billion in guaranteed portions of 7 ( a ) loans were outstanding , while ginnie mae guaranteed mbs had over $500 billion outstanding . the 7 ( a ) market does not benefit from the incentive for lenders to sell on the secondary market to mitigate interest rate risk , because the 7 ( a ) program consists mainly of variable - rate loans without interest rate caps . almost 90 percent of 7 ( a ) loans made in 1997 were variable - rate loans without interest rate caps . because interest rates are adjusted at least quarterly to reflect market rates , these loans entail almost no interest rate risk . in addition , sba 7 ( a ) loans can consist of loans backed by a variety of items , such as real estate , production inventory , or equipment , and 7 ( a ) loans finance a broad range of businesses . residential mortgages are all backed by residential property . because of the heterogeneous nature of 7 ( a ) loans , analysts are less able to accurately estimate prepayment risks .