is it desirable for fincen to have multiple roles , i.e. if multiple roles are desirable , how should fincen prioritize its resources among these roles ? for example , should domestic responsibilities , including the need to promulgate bsa regulations , or international initiatives have a higher priority ? defined and given proper priority to its missions ? and ( 2 ) does fincen have adequate resources to carry out its missions ? the results act provides a framework for assessing fincen's operations and its ability to meet congressional expectations . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss the various anti - money laundering roles of the treasury department's financial crimes enforcement network ( fincen ) . my statement will outline both the results of recently completed work and preliminary results of ongoing work that we have undertaken at the request of this subcommittee . treasury describes fincen as a network that links the law enforcement , financial , and regulatory communities to make the prevention , detection , and prosecution of money laundering more effective . created in 1990 , fincen's original mission centered on providing direct support to law enforcement agencies that investigate money laundering and other financial crimes . for example , to support an investigation of drug trafficking , fincen accessed various computerized databases to identify and analyze financial transactions that might indicate how the proceeds of crime were concealed . such support still remains fincen's primary mission even though , over time , the agency's responsibilities have become more multifaceted . for example , in may 1994 , treasury significantly expanded fincen's role , giving it responsibility for promulgating regulations under the bank secrecy act ( bsa ) , evaluating violations of bsa requirements and recommending appropriate civil penalties , and leading treasury's efforts to combat money laundering domestically and internationally . as its responsibilities increased , fincen's staffing levels have remained fairly constant . for example , fincen had 156 staff on board in fiscal year 1992 and 162 staff on board in fiscal year 1997 . fincen's fiscal year 1998 budget is about $24 million . of , products and services provided by fincen to the law enforcement community ; ( 2 ) the process for developing and issuing bsa regulations ; ( 3 ) fincen's efforts in assessing civil penalties for bsa violations ; and ( 4 ) the role fincen plays in promoting international awareness of money laundering . we have completed our work and issued a report on the second topic — i.e. , fincen's regulatory process — and our work on the other three topics is still ongoing . for all four topics , i will now briefly summarize the results of our work to date , beginning with our current work on fincen's law enforcement support role . since its inception in 1990 , fincen has expanded the types of products and services it provides to the law enforcement community .