postal service . gao believes that three areas — universal service , the mail monopoly , and ratemaking — will be among the most challenging for the congress to address in any future reform of the u.s . postal service . in the past decade , a number of other countries have restructured postal administrations from entities subject to close governmental control to entities still owned by the government , but subject to less governmental control . gao looked at postal reform efforts of eight other countries: australia , canada , france , germany , the netherlands , new zealand , sweden , and the united kingdom . postal service is much larger , having at least seven times the mail volume , than any of the eight . even so , other countries' experiences in giving postal administrations greater commercial freedom are relevant to current reform issues in the united states . after reforms of other postal administrations , many of them have reported significant improvements in financial performance . in all of the other eight countries , the postal administrations provided certain services widely to their citizens and at uniform rates before reform and continued to provide them following reform . in some countries , changes in universal service practices , such as access to post office services , have been controversial . for example , after its reform , the new zealand post increased a delivery fee for rural service ; this decision proved unpopular and the fee was eliminated in 1995 . all but one ( sweden ) of the eight countries have monopolies over some letter mail . in sweden , full competition for all postal services has been allowed since january 1994 . some of the other countries narrowed the scope of the monopoly following postal reform . the u.s. postal monopoly covers all letter mail , with some key regulatory exceptions being “extremely urgent” letters ( generally next - day delivery ) and outbound international letters . postal service data indicates that , in fiscal year 1995 , at least 80 percent of the postal service's total mail volume was covered by the postal monopoly . all but one ( sweden ) of the eight countries' postal administrations have monopolies over some aspects of the letter mail . generally , the letter monopolies in other countries are defined according to price , weight , urgency of delivery , or a combination of these factors . for example , in canada , the postal monopoly covers letters , with a statutory exclusion for “urgent” letters transmitted by a messenger for a fee that is at least three times canada's regular rate of postage . in germany , the monopoly covers letters priced up to 10 times germany's standard letter rate . the postal monopoly in france covers letters and those parcels weighing less than 1 kilogram ( 2.2 pounds ) . in the united kingdom , the monopoly is defined by price , covering those letters and parcels with postage up to one british pound . australia and new zealand narrowed the scope of their postal monopolies after reform . for example , in australia , the monopoly price threshold was reduced in 1994 from 10 times the basic stamp price to 4 times the price .