procedures . the longer this impasse continues , the greater the likelihood of a failed census . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss the u.s. census bureau's preparations and operational plans for its dress rehearsal for the 2000 census , which is currently under way at three sites: sacramento , ca ; 11 counties in the columbia , sc , area ; and menominee county in wisconsin , including the menominee american indian reservation . to the extent that the dress rehearsal mirrors the actual census , the dress rehearsal could foreshadow how well key census - taking activities might work in the decennial , and thus indicate where additional congressional and bureau attention is needed now to ensure successful results in 2000 . my overall point today is that the dress rehearsal , originally contemplated as a concerted demonstration of a well - defined census design for 2000 , instead will leave a number of design and operational questions unanswered . these unresolved issues led us in 1997 to raise concerns about the high risk of a failed census in 2000 . at your request , my statement focuses on the progress , if any , that the bureau has made since july 1997 , when we reported that the risk of a failed census in 2000 had increased since we originally designated the 2000 census as a high - risk area in february 1997 . specifically , we pay special attention to the challenges the bureau faces in implementing such key census - taking activities as ( 1 ) creating a complete and accurate address list , ( 2 ) increasing the mail response rate through outreach and promotion , ( 3 ) staffing census - taking operations with an adequate workforce , and ( 4 ) carrying out its sampling and statistical estimation procedures . these subjects are covered extensively in our report prepared at the request of the chairman and ranking minority member of the senate committee on governmental affairs , which we are making available today . i also provide my preliminary observations on the status of the bureau's dress rehearsal evaluation program . rehearsal sites , and contacted menominee officials by telephone ; ( 2 ) conducted in - person and telephone interviews with local officials on their experiences in reviewing address lists , promoting the census , andrecruiting and hiring census workers ; and ( 3 ) where applicable , reviewed relevant documents on these activities . information on the bureau's dress rehearsal evaluation program was obtained by conducting a content analysis of the bureau's evaluation proposals and by interviewing cognizant bureau officials . since the bureau has yet to finalize its evaluation plans , our observations should be considered preliminary . the 1990 census was the most costly in history , and it produced data that were less accurate than those from the 1980 census . about 6 million persons were counted twice in the 1990 census , while 10 million persons were missed — for a total of 16 million gross errors in the count . of particular concern was the fact that the 1990 census was more likely to miss minority groups and renters , particularly those living in rural areas .