the plan does not address either issue . some of justice's performance indicators are more output than outcome related . for example , one cited strategy for achieving the goal of ensuring border integrity is to prevent illegal entry by increasing the strength of the border patrol . however , justice's august plan does not provide such linkages . in its august plan , justice pointed out that its fiscal year 1999 annual performance planning and budget formulation activities are to be closely linked and that both are to be driven by the goals of the strategic plan . it also said that the linkages would become more apparent as the fiscal year 1999 annual performance plan and budget request are issued . how justice and the department of the treasury , which have similar responsibilities concerning the seizure and forfeiture of assets used in connection with illegal activities ( eg , money laundering ) will coordinate and integrate their operations ; how ins will work with the bureau of prisons and state prison officials to identify criminal aliens ; and how ins and the customs service , which both inspect arriving passengers at ports of entry to determine whether they are carrying contraband and are authorized to enter the country , will coordinate their resources . along these lines , certain program areas within justice have similar or complementary functions that are not addressed or could be better discussed in the strategic plan . for example , both the bureau of prisons and ins detain individuals , but the plan does not address the interrelationship of their similar functions or prescribe comparable measures for inputs and outcomes . as a second example , the plan does not fully recognize the linkage among justice's investigative , prosecutorial , and incarceration responsibilities . one purpose of the results act is to improve the management of federal agencies . therefore , it is particularly important that agencies develop strategies that address management challenges that threaten their ability to achieve both long - term strategic goals and this purpose of the act . over the years , we as well as others , including the justice inspector general and the national performance review ( npr ) , have addressed many management challenges that justice faces in carrying out its mission . in addition , recent audits under the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( cfo act ) , expanded by the government management reform act , have revealed internal control and accounting problems . justice's draft strategic plan is silent on these issues . contains a new section on “issues and challenges in achieving our goals,” which was not in its february plan . justice prepared a revised plan in august . while this measure may indicate whether agents are spending more time controlling the border , it is not clear how it will help justice assess its progress in deterring unlawful migration . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . the act requires that agencies' plans discuss the types of resources ( eg , human skills , capital , and information technology ) that will be needed to achieve the strategic and performance goals and omb guidance suggests that agencies' plans discuss any significant changes to be made in resource levels .