as a result , the measure could be deleted . third , cftc could restate or delete certain performance measures , because they may have limitations that preclude them from accurately capturing intended performance and may promote unintended consequences . results - oriented performance goals . for example , the enforcement program accomplishment section discusses the effectiveness of its quick - strike ability — the ability to file injunctive actions quickly after detecting fraud — to , among other things , obtain timely injunctive relief and enhance the possibility that customer funds will be recovered . this accomplishment section describes cases , filed within days or weeks of cftc's discovering an illegal activity , that stopped fraud at an early stage and preserved customer funds . cftc's performance measures could be made more results - oriented by replacing measures , such as reports on activities related to bringing injunctive actions and sanctioning violators , with more outcome - related measures , such as the percentage of quick - strike cases filed within a certain number of days of starting an investigation that resulted in sanctions and the percentage of funds recovered . cftc could also learn from the plans of other federal financial regulators that are attempting the transition to results - oriented goals . for example , the national credit union administration is developing new outcome performance goals . one outcome goal of the national credit union administration is to ensure that federally insured credit unions are adequately capitalized . a performance goal is to reduce the percentage of federally insured credit unions that are undercapitalized by 10 percent , from 372 to 335 . cftc's plan could also be improved if performance goals were provided for all activities and performance targets as well as for internal management challenges . currently , the plan has 16 activities for which no performance goals exist . for example , no performance goal exists for the activity of reviewing and overseeing self - regulatory organization audit and financial practices . without a performance goal , it is not clear what performance is expected . the plan could be made more useful by providing additional information on the skills and , if appropriate , technologies used in connection with operational processes to achieve program goals . also , consistent with the results act , cftc's performance plan discusses the resources that will be applied to achieve the agency's performance goals . using tables and graphics , the plan shows the amount of budget funding and the number of full - time equivalent employees that will be needed to achieve each strategic goal and the individual outcome objectives covering each strategic goal . cftc's plan could be further improved by describing the resources required to achieve each performance goal . although required by the results act and omb guidance , cftc's fiscal year 2000 performance plan does not describe the procedures that the agency will use to verify and validate that performance information is sufficiently complete , accurate , and consistent . nor does the plan discuss the extent to which the performance information and the means for collecting , maintaining , and analyzing it are reliable . cftc's performance plan should be expanded to address these requirements .