, not a side effect ) . at least one of these criteria appeared to go beyond the executive order on which it is based . however , that does not appear to have been the case . section 202 of the act generally requires federal agencies ( other than independent regulatory agencies ) to prepare “written statements” containing specific information for any rule for which a notice of proposed rulemaking was published that includes a federal mandate that may result in the expenditure of $100 million or more in any 1 year by state , local , and tribal governments , in the aggregate , or the private sector . umra defines a “mandate” to be an “enforceable duty” that is not a condition of federal assistance and does not arise from participation in a voluntary federal program . for rules requiring a written statement , section 205 requires agencies to consider a number of regulatory alternatives and select the one that is the least costly , most cost - effective , or least burdensome and that achieves the purpose of the rule . other sections of the act focus even more specifically on the interests of state and local representatives . for example , section 203 states that agencies must develop plans to involve small governments in the development of regulatory proposals that have a significant or unique effect on those entities . section 204 requires agencies to develop processes to consult with representatives of state , local , and tribal governments in the development of regulatory proposals containing “significant ederal intergovernmental mandates.” for these rules , the requirements in section 205 regarding the identification and selection of regulatory alternatives were not applicable to these rules . my comments are directed to the agency rulemaking and performance measurement requirements . i will focus most of my comments on two previous executive and legislative branch initiatives that , like section 7 of the bill , were designed to highlight the impact of federal rules on state and local governments . our past work showed the limited effect of those previous initiatives during the period of our review , which suggests a need for this section of the proposed legislation . i will also point out a few similarities and differences between the bill and the executive order . finally , i will briefly comment on the experience of one agency in cooperatively setting the type of goals and performance measures with states in a federal grant program that are contemplated in section 8 of the bill . during the past 20 years , state , local , and tribal governments as well as businesses have expressed concerns about congressional and regulatory preemption of traditionally nonfederal functions and the costs of complying with federal regulations . the executive and the legislative branch have each attempted to respond to these concerns by issuing executive orders and enacting statutes requiring rulemaking agencies to take certain actions when they issue regulations with federalism or intergovernmental relations effects . two prime examples of these responses are executive order 12612 ( “federalism” ) and the unfunded mandates reform act of 1995 ( umra ) . state program officials strongly objected to this federal mandate because they did not have an opportunity to participate in the planning process .