public libraries . in fact , recruiting literature appeared to be more prevalent than materials that promoted the census itself . translating data from completed census forms into a useable format represents another challenge for the bureau . the bureau plans to have data capture centers process a total of about 1 billion pages of census questionnaires in 99 work days beginning in march 2000 . the bureau plans to take advantage of commercial off - the - shelf hardware and software through its contractor lockheed martin , rather than rely on in - house products . during the dress rehearsal , the bureau is testing the accuracy of the data input by the new scanning equipment and software designed to perform this operation . bureau officials reported that this operation met all high - priority processing deadlines , despite experiencing system bugs that will need to be addressed before 2000 . the purpose of the dress rehearsal was to test and debug the system in an operational environment in advance of census 2000 . however , additional load testing is still necessary because the system could not be run during the rehearsal at performance levels that will be needed in 2000 . during the dress rehearsal , the scanning equipment used to electronically record responses off census forms experienced system crashes due to flaws in the software . to deal with this problem , the bureau was forced to cut back the number of scanners in operation at any one time . according to bureau officials , the software subcontractor , is resolving this and other problems through intensive testing , and will have a new version of its software available for further testing in late august . according to bureau officials , another problem related to scanning is the frequency at which the scanners needed to be cleaned of accumulated dust . initially , the bureau had planned to clean the machines every 2 hours . however , dust accumulated faster than expected , which necessitated a 5-minute cleaning after each 15 minutes of use . bureau officials said that poor paper quality appears to be one factor that led to the accumulation of dust . the bureau and the government printing office are studying the problem . computer - generated images — to test the performance of its scanning equipment . bureau officials believe that sufficient time remains to complete more testing , incorporate lessons learned from the dress rehearsal , and make technology enhancements before census 2000 . of the bureau's numerous field operations , two of the largest and most logistically challenging under the bureau's current design are nonresponse follow - up and a procedure called integrated coverage measurement ( icm ) , a survey in which residents in a sample of blocks are interviewed . icm and enumeration data are used in dual system estimation to adjust for coverage errors in the enumeration . as currently planned , the bureau is to reduce its nonresponse follow - up workload for the 2000 census by sampling nonresponding households . by using a sample - based nonresponse follow - up , the bureau would reduce the time necessary to complete this activity .