abuse . irs inspection is responsible for investigating allegations against irs employees who are gs - 14s and below and who do not work in inspection . treasury oig officials advised us that employees at this level are the ones most likely to have direct interaction with taxpayers and are most likely to be subject to allegations involving taxpayer abuse . treasury oig is responsible for investigating allegations against senior level irs officials and irs inspection employees . in the 1996 report on controls to ensure the proper treatment of taxpayers that we prepared at your request , mr. chairman , we noted that officials from both organizations thought that the arrangement was working well . however , more recent information indicates there may now be some concerns among those officials , particularly regarding timely referrals of allegations by both offices . involve the advocate's ( 1 ) organizational independence within irs ; ( 2 ) adequacy of resource commitments to achieve its mission ; and ( 3 ) ability to identify and correct problems with irs processes and systems that adversely affect taxpayers . the new irs commissioner and irs management have expressed a commitment to ensure that taxpayers are treated properly . even so , problems with current management information systems make it impossible to determine the extent to which allegations of taxpayer abuse and other taxpayer complaints have been reported , or the extent to which actions have been taken to address the complaints and prevent recurrence of systemic problems . that is because , as we reported to you in 1996 , information systems currently maintained by irs , treasury oig , and the department of justice do not capture the necessary management information . these systems were designed as case tracking and resource management systems intended to serve the management information needs of particular functions , such as irs inspection's internal security division . none of these systems include specific data elements for “taxpayer abuse” ; instead , they contain data elements that encompass broad categories of misconduct , taxpayer problems , and legal and administrative actions . information contained in these systems relating to allegations and investigations of taxpayer abuse and other taxpayer complaints is not easily distinguishable from information on allegations and investigations that do not involve taxpayers . consequently , as currently designed , the information systems cannot be used individually or collectively to account for irs' handling of instances of alleged taxpayer abuse . officials of several organizations indicated to us that several information systems might include information related to taxpayer abuse allegations — five maintained by irs , one by treasury oig , and two by justice . ( see attachment for a description of these systems. ) also said the system could not be used to identify such instances without a review of specific case files . from our review of data from these systems for our 1996 report , we concluded that none of them , either individually or collectively , have common or comparable data elements that can be used to identify the number or outcomes of taxpayer abuse allegations or related investigations and actions .