we welcome any questions that you may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . but time is running out for completing such a schedule . unless irs obtains this schedule soon , its value as a management tool to help anticipate bottlenecks is diminished . contingency planning was the second risk area we identified in our january 1998 briefing . in part , due to concerns that the same resources that are doing year 2000 conversion work would be needed to do contingency planning , irs officials decided to develop a contingency planning process that would minimize the number of contingency plans that would have to be developed . accordingly , irs' “century date change contingency management plan” calls for developing contingency plans only for those business functions or processes that are supported by application projects that are at risk of not being made year 2000 compliant on schedule . the century date change project office has established criteria to identify such projects . for these projects , irs is to initiate a business function impact analysis . once that analysis is complete , technical and business owners evaluate available alternatives , including using any existing contingency procedures , such as manual procedures , or using an alternative technological solution , such as commercial off - the - shelf software . irs plans to use a similar approach for initiating contingency plans for business functions when the conversion of infrastructure areas such as systems software , external data exchanges , and telecommunications network components fall behind schedule . irs' “century date change contingency management plan” does not address the likelihood that information systems that are converted on schedule may experience system failures . as a result , irs will be ill - prepared to effectively manage all year 2000-induced system failures that could affect core business processes . irs' contingency management plan does not address the possibility that ( 1 ) irs may have overlooked a date dependency during its assessment phase of applications or infrastructure areas or ( 2 ) even if system conversion and replacement efforts are completed on time and fully tested , unexpected system failures may occur . that process incorporates the five phases included in our assessment guide . some of the steps involved in converting existing systems include ( 1 ) correcting millions of lines of application code ; ( 2 ) upgrading thousands of hardware and systems software products for irs' three levels of computing operations — mainframes , minicomputers / file servers , and personal computers , ( 3 ) upgrading telecommunications networks ; and ( 4 ) ensuring that external data exchanges are year 2000 compliant . the other parallel year 2000 efforts are two major system replacement projects — the replacement of the distributed input system ( dis ) and the remittance processing system ( rps ) with the integrated submission and remittance processing ( isrp ) system and the consolidation of the mainframe computer processing operations at 10 service centers to 2 computing centers .