additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . money laundering is a global problem requiring collective international efforts to combat . gao's testimony describes u.s. efforts to deter this activity , including: ( 1 ) u.s. and seven european countries' regulation of financial institutions in regard to money laundering , ( 2 ) u.s. bank regulators' oversight of money - laundering controls at overseas branches of u.s. banks , ( 3 ) u.s. law enforcement agencies' efforts to coordinate their overseas anti - money - laundering activities with host countries' law enforcement agencies , and ( 4 ) u.s. participation in international anti - money - laundering arrangements . u.s. banking regulators' previous domestic anti - money - laundering efforts relied mainly on reporting regulations that require financial institutions to report currency transactions above certain thresholds . current approaches include an increased reliance upon reporting suspicious transactions . one action item called for a working - level conference on money laundering , to be followed by a ministerial conference , to study and agree on a coordinated hemispheric response to combat money laundering . the ministerial conference , held on december 1-2 , 1995 , at buenos aires , argentina , represented the beginning of a series of actions each country committed to undertake in the legal , regulatory , and law enforcement areas . numerous u.s. agencies play a role in combating money laundering . law enforcement agencies within the departments of justice and the treasury have the greatest involvement in domestic and international money - laundering investigations . frb and occ have the primary responsibility for examining and supervising the overseas branches of u.s. banks to ascertain the adequacy of the branches' anti - money - laundering controls . these branches are subject to host countries' anti - money - laundering laws rather than u.s. anti - money - laundering laws . in addition , other u.s. agencies play a role , including the state department , which provides information on international money laundering through its annual assessment of narcotics and money - laundering problems worldwide .