success . the failure to constructively involve staff in an organization's improvement efforts means running the risk that the changes will be more difficult and protracted than necessary . for example , in the fall of 1997 , the nuclear regulatory commission's ( nrc ) office of inspector general surveyed nrc staff to obtain their views on the agency's safety culture . in its june 1998 report , the inspector general noted that the staff had a strong commitment to protecting public health and safety but expressed high levels of uncertainty and confusion about the new directions in regulatory practices and challenges facing the agency . employees who are confused about the direction their agency is taking will not be able to effectively focus on results or make as full a contribution as they might otherwise . one way high - performing organizations can enhance employee involvement and gain agreement on an organization's goals and strategies is by developing partnerships with employee unions . postal service's long - standing challenges in labor - management relations illustrate the importance of having a shared set of long - term goals and strategies agreed upon by managers , employees , and unions . as we have reported , labor - management relations at the postal service have been characterized by disagreements that have , among other things , hampered efforts to automate some postal systems that could have resulted in savings and helped the service reach its performance goals . although there has been some progress , problems persist and continue to contribute to higher mail processing and delivery costs . to help the postal service resolve its problems , we have long recommended that the service and its unions and management associations establish a framework agreement to outline common goals . we have also noted that the results act can provide an effective framework for union and management representatives to discuss and agree upon goals and strategies . employees to handle return processing workload during the annual filing season , irs plans to increase the number of permanent employees and expand their job responsibilities to include compliance work that they can do after the filing season . those employees will have to be cross - trained so that they can handle both their return processing and compliance responsibilities . training is expected to be a key factor in irs' efforts to provide top - quality customer service . further , given the dynamic environment agencies face , employees need incentives , training , and support to help them continually learn and adapt . our 1996 / 97 survey found that about 60 percent or more of the supervisors and managers reported that their agencies had not provided them with the training necessary to accomplish critical , results - oriented management tasks . high - performing organizations also seek to involve and engage employees by devolving authority to lower levels of the organization . employees are more likely to support changes when they have the necessary amount of authority and flexibility - - along with commensurate accountability and incentives - - to advance the agency's goals and improve performance .