corruption . these have included the random assignment and shifting of inspectors from one lane to another and the unannounced inspection of a group of vehicles . however , in the cases we reviewed , these internal controls did not prevent corrupt ins and customs personnel from allowing drug - laden vehicles to enter the united states . in some cases , the inspectors communicated their lane assignment and the time they would be on duty to the drug smuggler , and in other cases , they did not . in one case , for example , an inspector used a cellular telephone to send a prearranged code to a drug smuggler's beeper to tell him which lane to use and what time to use it . in contrast , another inspector did not notify the drug smuggler concerning his lane assignment or the times he would be on duty . in that case , the drug smuggler used an individual , referred to as a spotter , to conduct surveillance of the port of entry . the spotter used a cellular telephone to contact the driver of the drug - laden vehicle to tell him which lane to drive through . the drug smugglers' schemes succeeded in these cases because the drivers of the drug - laden vehicles could choose the lane they wanted to use for inspection purposes . these cases support the implementation of one or more methods to deprive drivers of their choice of inspection lanes at ports of entry . at the time of our review , customs was testing a method to assign drivers to inspection lanes at ports of entry . in 10 of 28 cases , drug smugglers relied on friendships , personal relationships , or symbols of law enforcement authority to move drug loads through a port of entry or past a border patrol checkpoint . in these 10 cases , drug smugglers believed that coworkers , relatives , and friends of customs or immigration inspectors , or law enforcement officials , would not be inspected or would be given preferential treatment in the inspection process . for example , a border patrol agent relied on his friendships with his coworkers to avoid inspection at a border patrol checkpoint where he was stationed . in another case , an inspector agreed to allow her boyfriend to smuggle drugs through a port of entry . the boyfriend used his personal and intimate relationship with the inspector to solicit drug shipments from drug dealers . two deos working together used ins detention buses and vans to transport drugs past a border patrol checkpoint . in two separate cases , former ins employees relied on friendships they had developed during their tenure with the agency to smuggle drugs through ports of entry and past border patrol checkpoints . inspected is such that they may not objectively perform the inspection . nor do they have a written inspection policy for law enforcement officers or their vehicles . for example , our review of the cases determined that , on numerous occasions , ins deos drove ins vehicles with drug loads past border patrol checkpoints without being inspected .