end . any new methods or research approaches developed by one agency could also be useful to others . gao also recognizes that cftc's strategic plan is a dynamic document that the agency intends to refine . improving management in the federal sector will not be easy , but the results act can assist in accomplishing this goal . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to assist the subcommittee in its review of the commodity futures trading commission's ( cftc ) strategic plan . hearings such as this one are an important part of assuring that the intent of the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra or results act ) is met , and we commend you , mr. chairman , for holding this hearing . the consultative process provides an important opportunity for congress and the executive branch to collectively ensure that agency missions are focused , goals are results - oriented , and strategies and funding expectations are appropriate . as you know , the results act required executive agencies to complete their initial strategic plans by september 30 , 1997 , and cftc met this requirement . my testimony today discusses our review of cftc's strategic plan . we specifically determined whether the plan contained each of the six components required by the results act and assessed each component's strengths and weaknesses . we also reviewed the extent to which cftc consulted with stakeholders , including the other federal financial market regulators . finally , we identified challenges that cftc faces in addressing the requirements of the results act . cftc's strategic plan reflects a concerted effort by the agency to address the requirements of the results act . although the plan could be strengthened in some areas , it compares favorably with the plans of other federal financial regulators that we have reviewed . on the basis of our review , we found that cftc's plan contained all of the components required by the results act but that some of the components could be strengthened . we also found that the plan could be improved by additional stakeholder input , including interagency coordination . finally , due to the complex set of factors that determine regulatory outcomes , measuring program impacts presents challenges to cftc in addressing the requirements of the results act , as it does for regulatory agencies in general . however , the use of program evaluations to derive results - oriented goals and to measure the extent those goals are achieved is one key to the success of the process . notwithstanding the need for improvements , we recognize that cftc's strategic plan is a dynamic document that the agency intends to refine . my comments apply to the strategic plan that cftc formally submitted to congress and the office of management and budget ( omb ) in september 1997 . in general , our assessment of cftc's plan was based on knowledge of the agency's operations and programs ; past and ongoing reviews of cftc ; results of work on other agencies' strategic plans and the results act ; discussions with cftc , omb , and subcommittee staff ; and other information available at the time of our assessment .