closed . pays ? attempted . proceed ? rights . mail ( statutory requirement ) . taxpayer rights . ( acs collection ) pay ? for acs ? ( field collection ) case closed . ( field collection ) e. ( field collection ) e. find levy sources . found ? establish ia or oic if taxpayer cannot full pay , if taxpayer cannot pay at all , then cnc . file lien , if appropriate . ( field collection ) information . something ? lien , if appropriate . establish ia or oic . file lien , if appropriate . full ? pay ? enforce collection . issue levies if sources available . are taxes fully paid ? seize assets . are taxes fully paid ? actions until paid or case otherwise closed . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . approved ? cnc . ( acs collection ) d. ( field collection ) e. ( acs collection ) d. case closed . contact . owe ? pay ? sources found . pay ? to proceed ? pay ? case closed . cannot full pay . ia,oic , or cnc considered . processed . establish ia , oic or tolerance ? owe ? amount owed ? c. proceed ? b. is researched . affected by improper actions . the lack of information exists because irs' systems — both manual and automated — have not been designed to capture and report comprehensive information on the use and possible misuse of collection authorities . also , much of the data that are recorded on automated systems cannot be aggregated without a significant investment of scarce programming resources . some information is available in manual records , but — because collection enforcement actions can be taken by a number of different irs offices and records resulting from these actions are not always linked to irs' automated information systems — this information cannot be readily assembled to assess the use of enforcement actions . also , data are not readily available from other potential sources , such as taxpayer complaints , because , in many circumstances , irs does not require that information on the resolution of the complaints be recorded .