counterfeiting is a criminal activity . thus , it is impossible to determine the actual extent of this activity abroad . both treasury and secret service officials agreed that counterfeiting of u.s. currency is a threat to be taken seriously but said that it is not now at a level that poses an economic threat to the u.s. monetary system . treasury department and secret service officials use counterfeit - detection data from the secret service to help assess the extent of counterfeiting . according to the secret service , it supplemented these data with intelligence information and field experience and concluded that counterfeiting of u.s. currency abroad has been increasing . our analysis of detection data raised questions about their usefulness for illustrating either actual counterfeiting activity or recent growth in such activity . foreign law enforcement and financial organization officials we interviewed in seven european countries varied in their degree of concern over the counterfeiting of u.s. currency . foreign law enforcement officials tended to be more concerned about the counterfeiting of u.s. currency than were foreign financial organization officials . information abroad , including providing more counterfeit - detection training ; attempting to increase the secret service presence abroad ( although the secret service has encountered difficulty in obtaining approval ) ; and trying to stop production and distribution of counterfeit currency , including the superdollar , using special task forces and diplomatic efforts . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee: i am pleased to be here today to discuss our observations on the counterfeiting of u.s. currency abroad and recent u.s. efforts to combat this activity . in light of the impending release of the new u.s. currency design and media reports concerning high - quality counterfeits , much public attention has recently focused on the vulnerability of our currency . our currency has become a target of counterfeiters because of its increasing international use and outdated security features . my testimony today will discuss the diverse nature and unknown extent of counterfeiting abroad , as well as the recent efforts of the united states to deter this activity . these efforts include ( 1 ) redesigning the currency , ( 2 ) exchanging more information with foreign law enforcement agencies and financial organizations , ( 3 ) attempting to increase the secret service presence abroad , and ( 4 ) attempting to stop production and distribution of an extremely high - quality counterfeit commonly known as the “superdollar.” my remarks today are based on the work that we performed for representative john spratt , jr. , over the past year and a half on the counterfeiting of u.s. currency abroad . this work is more comprehensively summarized in our report entitled counterfeit u.s. currency abroad: issues and u.s . deterrence efforts ( gao / ggd - 96-11 ) , which was released by representative spratt today .