process . we believe fhfb would be better prepared and assured of its ability to take forceful action if its statute enumerated the authorities granted other gse regulators , such as cease and desist and civil money penalty powers . therefore , we suggest that congress consider granting fhfb the specific enforcement authority provided other gse regulators . mr. chairman , our review of fhfb oversight would not be complete without a consideration of its unique role in some aspects of system business . we remain concerned , as we have noted in the past , that combining the roles of oversight and involvement in system business may undermine the independence necessary for fhfb to be an effective safety and soundness and mission regulator . we recognize that the responsibility for fhfb's involvement in system business is , in part , due to statutory authorities carried over from fhfb's predecessor , the bank board . for example , the bank act gives fhfb authority to issue the system's consolidated obligations and requires that fhfb approve bank dividends and bylaws . fhfb and system officials agree that a regulator should not be involved in the day - to - day operations of banks , but the degree and type of involvement they consider appropriate varies . since 1994 , fhfb has identified and devolved certain business or governance and management activities , within specified limits , to banks' boards . these activities include the authority to establish presidents' salaries and incentive plans , approve affordable housing program applications , determine the compensation of bank directors , and set bank performance targets . management activities identified by as yet to be devolved include the authority to approve dividends , certain general administrative matters , and setting credit policies . although fhfb has delegated some of these functions to the bank boards , we suggest that congress consider ensuring , through legislation , that fhfb not be involved in the business of the system . we are aware of and support the provisions of the legislation pending in the house and senate that would begin to correct some of our concerns about fhfb's involvement in system business . potential to provide central coordination and promotion for the system . nevertheless , fhfb officials view promotion as part of fhfb's role as a regulator . its 5-year strategic plan , which fhfb says is integral to its budget and performance planning , illustrates the prominence of the promotion and coordination roles in agency operations . of the plan's nine objectives , one addresses the examination function , and five address changes fhfb advocates to enhance bank performance , such as expanding the acceptable uses for advances and expanding acceptable collateral on advances to include small business loans . of the other three objectives , two address the devolution effort , and one deals with disseminating public information about fhfb's performance . we identified other examples of the fhfb's promotion and coordination activities during our review . for example , the fhfb chairman coordinates and participates in periodic meetings with bank chairs and vice chairs that include coordinating congressional lobbying efforts .