messrs . chairmen , members of the commission , this ends our prepared statement . we would be pleased to answer any questions . what are the deposit and filing requirements ? our chart provides detail on these issues for federal taxes and provides general information on the application of these issues to state and local taxes . we will discuss each issue in turn , with examples of application on hypothetical small businesses . once a business decides to hire a worker , the first issue to be considered is whether the worker is an employee for the purpose of each different employment tax . major factors affecting this issue for federal taxes are outlined in our chart in the lower left corner . the pivotal question on this point is whether the worker is an employee or an “independent contractor.” the standard “common law” test finds the worker to be an employee if the employer controls both what work is done and how it is performed . the internal revenue service ( irs ) augments this test with guidelines on the factors that can affect the final determination . and exceptions where businesses hiring employees not meeting the common law test are responsible for either fica and futa , or only fica . in effect , the first set of exceptions shifts the burden for tax compliance from the employer to the employee , while the second set puts the burden on the employer . what is the employer's employment tax liability ? these exceptions to the general rules can affect various types of workers: for example , ministers , news vendors under age 18 , certain family members , and homeworkers in a cottage industry . depending on conditions ( as stated specifically by statute ) , these workers may be exempt from income tax withholding , fica , futa , or some combination of the three taxes . as an example , consider a jeweler , operating from her basement as a small manufacturing sole proprietor . pressed by the coming holiday season , the jeweler would like to hire a neighbor to make small metal pieces , working in his own home with his own tools using material furnished by the jeweler . even though this person — termed a “homeworker” in the federal tax code — will most likely not be considered an a common law employee , the jeweler will still find herself liable for fica taxes , both deducted from the homeworker's salary and matched by her business , if she pays the neighbor more than $100 in cash . under the federal tax law , however , she will not be liable for futa taxes . having determined that the worker is an employee covered by employment taxes , the next issue confronted by the employer is what compensation payments are taxable as wages . compensation to an employee may take many forms — pension plans , health and life insurance plans , travel and business expenses , educational assistance , to list a few examples — as well as straight cash hourly wages . arguably , the most difficult aspect of this issue is determining whether the compensation paid to the employee fits the category of nontaxable compensation .