federalism implications . at least one of the agencies' criteria seems to establish a high threshold for preparing an assessment . usda's written guidance on executive order 12612 does not establish any specific criteria that the department's ogc should use to determine whether a particular rule or other policy has sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a federalism assessment . neither has usda's ogc established any written criteria to guide these determinations . usda officials said that ogc attorneys make their own determinations regarding federalism implications in the context of each rulemaking action . the hhs guidance on the executive order lists “threshold criteria” that can be used to determine whether a rule's federalism effects are significant and thus require a federalism assessment . the guidance indicates that a rule should be considered to have significant federalism implications if it ( 1 ) has a direct causal effect on the states ; ( 2 ) primarily relates to the structure and role of states ( eg , not just a reduction in funding of grant programs ) ; ( 3 ) has effects within a reasonably foreseeable time frame ( eg , within the next 5 years ) ; and ( 4 ) has a significant incremental effect ( eg , requiring states to do something that they are not already doing ) . the guidance also says that an assessment must be prepared if an action will directly create significant effects on states even if the action is mandated by law or the department otherwise has no discretion . finally , it says that rules and other policies with either a positive or negative significant effect on the states require a federalism assessment . traditional state responsibilities , or decrease the ability of states to make policy decisions with respect to their own functions” in order to have a “substantial” effect . the rule must affect all or most states , “not simply one state or a small cluster of states.” the rule must have a “direct , causal effect” on the states . if a rule creates federalism effects as a side effect , the guidance says the rule would not trigger the requirement for a federalism assessment . these criteria seem to establish a high threshold for what constitutes “sufficient” federalism implications to require an assessment . for example , the executive order defines “state” to “refer to the states of the united states of america , individually or collectively.” ( emphasis added. ) epa's guidance , on the other hand , indicates that federalism assessment should be prepared only if a regulation or other policy affects all or most states . however , epa's actions appear to be allowable because the executive order does not define what is meant by “sufficient” federalism implications , leaving that determination up to the agencies . section 7 of executive order 12612 indicates that , in implementing executive order 12866 , omb should , to the extent permitted by law , “take action to ensure that the policies of executive departments and agencies are consistent with the principles , criteria , and requirements” of the federalism executive order .