candidates was also correct . veterans were properly placed on all but 1 of the 1,136 certificates that we reviewed from opm and executive agencies . although veterans may receive additional points because of their military service and be highly placed on certificates , they are not assured of selection for jobs . under existing civil service laws and regulations , hiring officials have the option of using a variety of methods to identify and recruit potential candidates for a position . under opm regulations , rifs are accomplished in two phases . first , management determines the number and types of positions that are to be abolished and the “competitive areas” affected by the decision . second , management identifies the employees within a competitive area and their relative status in the competition for retention . employees' retention status and assignment rights to other positions are essentially determined by their tenure , veterans' preference , and length of service , with additional years of service credit provided based on how well they did on their performance ratings . when the identified positions are abolished , incumbents of those positions may have assignment rights to other positions that are not being abolished , depending on their retention status and qualifications . once the initial decisions are made that define the numbers , types , and locations of positions to be abolished , determining the retention status of employees and their exercise of assignment rights is a relatively mechanical process with little flexibility . during a rif , employees are separated from federal employment starting with those having the lowest retention status and continuing with those having increasingly higher retention status until rif separation targets are met . in 1994 , we testified on the impact on certain groups covered by equal employment opportunity laws of rifs that occurred in fiscal year 1991 at three department of defense installations . we testified that the rifs resulted in separations of minorities in numbers disproportionate to their numbers in the workforce at the three locations reviewed . women were separated in disproportionate numbers at two of the locations . in some cases , disproportionate numbers of separations occurred largely because minorities and women did not have the retention factors — tenure , veterans' preference , or performance - adjusted seniority — of nonminorities or men . our analysis of the retention factors for civilian workers employed by the military services at the end of fiscal year 1991 showed that minorities and women ranked lower than their nonminority counterparts in all retention factors , including veterans' preference . we are not taking a position on the proposed legislation . preference - eligible veterans than those without the names of preference - eligible veterans at the top . in three rifs conducted at military installations in fiscal year 1991 , our review showed that those without veterans' preference were much more likely to have lost their jobs than were preference - eligible veterans . similarly , during an october 1995 rif at the usgs , those employees without veterans' preference were much more likely to have lost their jobs than employees with such preference .