other compliance staff to acs . these details are to remain in effect for at least 1 year . irs officials said that they plan to revisit this agreement with the union once irs knows its budget situation for fiscal year 1997 . on the basis of our past filing season reviews , we had several questions going into the 1996 filing season: how will irs' staffing reductions for fiscal year 1996 affect its ability to process returns and assist taxpayers ? as also discussed below , however , there are still several concerns that we will be monitoring during our continuing assessment of filing season activities . specifically , ( 1 ) although telephone accessibility is up , it is still very low ; ( 2 ) irs closed many walk - in sites this year that had provided assistance to taxpayers in the past ; and ( 3 ) scrips is still not meeting its original expectations . in deciding where to make the staffing cuts for fiscal year 1996 , irs wanted to make sure it had enough staff to do its most critical functions — process returns and issue refunds — in a timely manner . available data indicate that irs has been successful in that regard . as of march 15 , 1996 , irs' 10 service centers had processed 71 percent of the paper individual income tax returns they had received ( the same percent as last year ) , and the centers were processing that workload in about the same cycle time as last year ( within an average of 8 to 13 days , depending on the type of individual income tax return filed ) . were unable to verify whether the refund cycle time has changed because the data we use to track refund timeliness were not available at the time we prepared this statement . although irs has apparently been able to process returns and issue refunds this year without any significant problems , staffing cuts in other areas could be affecting its ability to serve taxpayers and identify questionable refund claims . in the taxpayer service area , irs closed 93 walk - in assistance sites , reduced the operating hours of some of the 442 sites that remained open , and eliminated free electronic filing at 195 of the sites . according to irs , the closed sites were selected on the basis of their historical volume of work and their proximity to other walk - in sites . as an indication of the effect of these closures and cutbacks , irs data show that walk - in sites served about 1.7 million taxpayers from january 1 through march 9 , 1996 — about 16 percent fewer taxpayers than were served at the same time last year . walk - in sites provide various free services , including copies of the more commonly used forms and publications , help in preparing returns , and answers to tax law questions . there are other ways taxpayers can obtain those services free , although maybe not as easily . taxpayers needing forms and publications , for example , might find them at their local library or can get them by calling irs' toll - free forms - ordering number .