additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . responsible for ranges from 1 to 37 . the first action plan was issued in february 1999 and has since been updated three times . according to the plan , it is customs' intention to implement all action items included in the plan by 2000 . customs' director for planning is to manage and monitor the plan on an ongoing basis . he told us that items are usually added at the behest of the commissioner . the management inspection division ( part of the office of internal affairs ) is responsible for verifying and validating the items that have been reported as completed , including determining whether the action taken was effective . the action plan of may 7 — the latest version available — shows that 91 of the 203 items had been completed ; 110 were ongoing , pending , or scheduled ; and 2 had no description of their status . overall , use of this kind of management tool can be very helpful in communicating problems and proposed solutions to executives , managers , and the customs service workforce , as well as to other groups interested in customs such as this committee and us . mr. chairman , this completes my statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . the fleet has remained at about 114 since then . the number of customs aviation program onboard personnel decreased , from a high of 956 in fiscal year 1992 to 745 by the end of fiscal year 1997 . customs has been using traditional law enforcement measures to evaluate the aviation program ( eg , number of seizures , weight of drugs seized , number of arrests ) . these measures , however , are used to track activity , not measure results or effectiveness . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . until 1997 , customs also used an air threat index as an indicator of its effectiveness in detecting illegal air traffic . however , customs has discontinued use of this indicator , as well as some other performance measures , because customs determined that they were not good measures of results and effectiveness . having recognized that these measures were not providing adequate insights into whether the program was producing desired results , customs said it is developing new performance measures in order to better measure results . however , its budget submission for fiscal year 2000 contained no new performance measures . the pulsed fast neutron analysis ( pfna ) inspection system is designed to directly and automatically detect and measure the presence of specific materials ( eg , cocaine ) by exposing their constituent chemical elements to short bursts of subatomic particles called neutrons .