additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . litigation was pending in the other 34 cases . in 21 of the 32 cases that have largely been concluded , violators were required to pay some form of civil money penalty . specifically , violators were required to ( 1 ) pay civil fines , ( 2 ) disgorge illegally obtained profits to compensate defrauded investors , or ( 3 ) pay both civil fines and disgorgements . the civil fines that sec imposed ranged from $5,000 to $4.4 million , while the disgorgements ranged from $500 to $4.4 million . in nine other cases that have largely been concluded , a civil money penalty was not imposed on the violators . instead , sec primarily obtained a cease and desist order or permanent injunction to prevent further violations of the securities laws . in the remaining two cases , prison sentences or other criminal convictions were imposed by a state or federal court . according to doj officials we contacted , the department or the fbi would become involved in internet securities fraud cases where there are widespread losses and many victims . we also obtained survey information from the 50 state securities regulatory agencies about state efforts to control internet securities fraud and penalize state securities law violators . nearly one - half of the state agencies reported that they have implemented specific internet securities fraud control programs over the past several years — such as surfing the internet to detect potential frauds . many states have also initiated enforcement actions to penalize individuals who use the internet to violate state securities laws . however , some state agency officials report that state enforcement actions are not always effective because perpetrators prohibited from selling securities in one state can continue to sell securities in other states . in 23 of the 50 states we surveyed , officials from regulatory agencies reported establishing specific programs to control internet securities fraud and penalize violators of state securities laws . in 14 of these 23 state regulatory agencies , the programs generally consisted of one or more persons surfing the internet using word searches , such as “investment,” “finance,” or the name of their state to detect fraudulent activity . other states reported monitoring internet bulletin boards , newsgroups , and chat rooms to identify potential securities frauds . the frequency at which these states reported conducting internet monitoring varied widely among the states , ranging from one - half hour daily to 2 hours weekly to one time per month . regulatory officials from the other 27 state agencies that we contacted said they had not established specific programs to identify and combat internet securities fraud . the officials cited several reasons for not establishing specific programs , such as inadequate technical expertise or , as in two cases , a lack of internet access .