our view remains unchanged . we feel that congressional actions that would reduce this inefficiency , save money , and shorten the time involved in employee redress would be beneficial , provided these actions upheld two fundamental principles: that of fair treatment for federal employees and of an efficiently managed federal government . although the legislation was still being drafted as this statement was being prepared , the subcommittee staff provided us with a narrative outline of the bill . my comments are based on our review of that outline . i will remark briefly on the current redress system , then comment on the following three aspects of the proposed legislation that we feel could have significant implications if enacted: eliminating the “mixed case” scenario , moving toward the private sector model in handling federal sector promoting the use of alternative dispute resolution ( adr ) to reduce the number of formal discrimination complaints . the purpose of the current redress system , which grew out of the civil service reform act of 1978 ( csra ) and related legal and regulatory decisions that have occurred over the past 16 years , is to uphold the merit system by ensuring that federal employees are protected against arbitrary agency actions and prohibited personnel practices , such as discrimination or retaliation for whistleblowing . while one of the purposes of csra was to streamline the previous redress system , the scheme that has emerged is far from simple . today , four independent adjudicatory agencies can handle employee complaints or appeals: the merit systems protection board ( mspb ) , the equal employment opportunity commission ( eeoc ) , the office of special counsel ( osc ) , and the federal labor relations authority ( flra ) . while these agencies' boundaries may appear to have been neatly drawn , in practice the redress system forms a tangled scheme . to begin with , a given case may be brought before more than one of these agencies — a circumstance that adds time - consuming steps to the redress process and may result in the adjudicatory agencies reviewing each other's decisions . moreover , each of the adjudicatory agencies has its own procedures and its own body of case law . each varies from the next in its authority to order corrective actions and enforce its decisions . further , the law provides for additional review of the adjudicatory agencies' decisions — or , in the case of discrimination claims , even de novotrials — in the federal courts . beginning in the employing agency , proceeding through one or more of the adjudicatory bodies , and then carried to its conclusion in court , a single case can take years . even the typical case can take a long time to resolve — especially if it involves a claim of discrimination . among discrimination cases closed during fiscal year 1994 for which there was a hearing before an eeoc administrative judge and an appeal of an agency final decision to the commission itself , the average time from the filing of the complaint with the employing agency to the commission's decision on the appeal was over 800 days . legal fees , and court costs .