this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . agencies' annual performance plans under the results act: an assessment guide to facilitate congressional decisionmaking , version 1 ( gao / ggd / aimd - 10.1.18 , feb. 1998 ) . managing for results: agencies' annual performance plans can help address strategic planning challenges ( gao / ggd - 98-44 , jan. 30 , 1998 ) . managing for results: the statutory framework for performance - based management and accountability ( gao / ggd / aimd - 98-52 , jan. 28 , 1998 ) . the third core question is — to what extent does the agency's performance plan provide confidence that its performance information will be credible ? this question also has two related issues: verifying and validating performance and recognizing data limitations identified in the plan . the answers to the questions are intended to facilitate a complete assessment of agencies' performance plans and address concerns that are likely to be common across a variety of congressional users . in summary , mr. chairman , although agencies have generally met the statutory requirements of the results act in their first cycle of strategic planning , federal strategic planning — and results act implementation in general — is still very much a work in progress . some critical planning challenges remain before the type of performance - based management and accountability envisioned by the results act becomes the routine way of doing business in the federal government . as they develop their annual performance plans , agencies will likely need to revisit and improve upon their strategic planning efforts . the annual performance plans offer the opportunity for congress and the agencies together to sustain the momentum of the implementation of the results act and of performance - based management . we are pleased that congress has turned to us to assist in the implementation of the results act . over the last few years , we have issued a number of products on the key steps and practices needed to improve the management of the federal government . these key steps and practices are based on best practices in private sector and public sector organizations . we look forward to continuing to support congress' efforts to better inform its decisionmaking , improve the management of the federal government , and strengthen accountability . managing for results: building on agencies' strategic plans to improve federal management ( gao / t - ggd / aimd - 98-29 , oct. 30 , 1997 ) . managing for results: critical issues for improving federal agencies' strategic plans ( gao / ggd - 97-180 , sept. 16 , 1997 ) . managing for results: using the results act to address mission fragmentation and program overlap ( gao / aimd - 97-146 , aug. 29 , 1997 ) . managing for results: the statutory framework for improving federal management and effectiveness ( gao / t - ggd / aimd - 97-144 , june 24 , 1997 ) . the government performance and results act: 1997 governmentwide implementation will be uneven ( gao / ggd - 97-109 , june 2 , 1997 ) .