ii ) . the commission referred to these specific recommendations as short - run recommendations — that is , those that the commission thought could be implemented immediately , with little additional resources or no data collection initiatives . these recommendations were to develop a monthly index that would adopt a superlative index formula at the upper level of aggregation in the index , to be called the cpi , and replace the current fixed market basket cpi ; use a geometric means formula at the lower level of aggregation in the cpi ; and expand the use of regression techniques . we based the linkages on concepts that were identified in the recommendations and the performance goals and indicators . performance indicator , by the end of fiscal year short run — recommendations that the commission thought could be implemented immediately , with little additional resources or new data collection initiatives . develop alternative measures of change in living costs . begin research on design issues . ( 3 ) to what extent does the agency's performance plan provide confidence that its performance information will be credible ? for improving cpi quality or how bls will ensure that information it uses to assess actual performance against cpi improvement goals is accurate , complete , and consistent . under the criteria in the results act and related guidance , agency annual performance plans are to contain goals for each of the program activities identified in the agency's budget and should express them in objective , quantifiable , and measurable form to allow comparison between actual and planned performance . agencies can use their discretion in determining their performance goals . agency plans should also contain indicators to be used in measuring or assessing the relevant outputs , service levels , and outcomes of each program activity . in our view , bls' performance goals associated with improving the quality of the cpi , which are shown in appendix i , are linked to its budget and are objective and measurable . as bls notes , the goals are generally expressed as significant milestones expected to be accomplished during the given year . because of the way in which the goals are expressed , bls' performance indicators for accomplishing the milestones are activity or output oriented rather than outcome oriented . bls notes this in its plan and says that , over time , it will show how its indicators relate to desired outcomes , such as improving the accuracy of the cpi . the use of output - oriented goals is allowed under omb's guidance for implementing the results act . the guidance notes that , although outcomes should be used whenever possible , outputs may be used for several reasons , including when outcomes may not be scheduled for achievement in the fiscal year covered by the plan . however , it appears to us that the goals and indicators bls cites in its performance plan are , for the most part , changes to the cpi that bls expects to complete in fiscal year 1999 that are aimed at improving the cpi's quality .