competition . however , commerce also assigned these same entries a “reason code” indicating that these activities are “prohibited from conversion to contract because of legislation.” thus , the information reported does not appear to be consistent . in addition , commerce did not assign any “reason codes” for a substantial number of ftes listed throughout its fair act inventory , so it is not clear how commerce is characterizing these commercial activities . continuing congressional interest in the fair act process is needed in order to maintain serious agency attention to developing and using the fair act inventories . oversight hearings , such as today's hearing , send clear messages to agencies that congress is serious about improving the efficiency and effectiveness of government operations and the effective implementation of the fair act . we look forward to continuing to work with you and other members of congress as your oversight efforts continue . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . for further contacts regarding this testimony , please contact j. christopher mihm at ( 202 ) 512-8676 . individuals making key contributions to this testimony included steven g. lozano , thomas m. beall , susan michal - smith , susan ragland , and jerome t. sandau . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . what supplemental information can be included to increase the usefulness of inventories ? by enacting the fair act , congress has increased the visibility of agencies' commercial activities . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . officials in agencies we spoke to generally found that the a - 76 codes needed additional refinement . officials from the department of commerce noted that the function codes were oriented toward military activities and needed to be augmented to more fully capture the range of activities undertaken by civilian agencies . in response to concerns such as commerce's , omb allows agencies to develop new function codes to better meet their needs . commerce , epa , and gsa are among the agencies that are using additional function codes .