additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . implement an annual examination cycle by early 1998 to cover all enterprise risks . gao noted that without a reassessment of resource requirements and potentially a reallocation of resources to the examinations office , ofheo may not be able to fully implement an annual examination cycle because it has been unable to fully implement a 2-year cycle with existing examination office resources . thus , gao recommended that ofheo include in its reassessment an analysis of the staff resources necessary to adequately carry out alternative examination cycles , such as 1 or 2 years . through such an analysis , ofheo could better ensure a fuller consideration of the trade - offs associated with examination coverage provided versus costs involved and thereby engage in a more informed decisionmaking process . although fannie mae and freddie mac have been consistently profitable in recent years , gao believes it is essential , given the enterprises' outstanding financial commitments of about $1.5 trillion at year - end 1996 , that ofheo implement its safety and soundness responsibilities as quickly as feasible so that any potential long - term financial risks to taxpayers are lowered . mr. chairman and members of the committee: we are pleased to be here today to discuss the operations of the office of federal housing enterprise oversight ( ofheo ) and the status of ofheo's efforts to fulfill its mission of helping to ensure the safety and soundness of the two largest housing government - sponsored enterprises: fannie mae and freddie mac ( the enterprises ) . congress has a long - standing concern that the safety and soundness of the enterprises be maintained so that they can continue to fulfill their public purposes while taxpayers are protected from unnecessary financial risks . beginning in 1998 , ofheo plans to restructure its examination program so that it assesses all enterprise core risks annually . ofheo established an examination plan in september 1994 that provided for a 2-year cycle for the assessment of six “core” risks , such as interest rate and credit , facing the enterprises . although ofheo identified six core risks , the plan stipulated that examiners were to cover these risks in five examinations — four examinations would each cover one core risk while another examination would cover two risks . ofheo's examination plan was similar in substance but not in timing to risk - focused examination plans that the office of the comptroller of the currency and the federal reserve system have established to monitor the activities of large commercial banks .