the inclination to settle . federal officials , in deciding whether or not to settle , must weigh the cost of settling against the potential loss of more taxpayer dollars and the time and energy that would be diverted from the business of government . there is some concern that policies encouraging the contending parties to compromise on the issues may conflict with the mission of the adjudicatory agencies to support the merit principles and may set troublesome precedents or create ethical dilemmas for managers.further , there is concern that settlements may be fundamentally counterproductive , especially in discrimination complaints , where settlement policies may in fact encourage the filing of frivolous complaints . at a time when congress and the administration are considering opportunities for civil service reform , looking in particular to the private sector and elsewhere for alternatives to current civil service practices , organizations outside the executive branch of the federal government may be useful sources for ideas on reforming the administrative redress system . the board's decisions may then be appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit , which has a limited right of review . the other alternative is to bypass the administrative process and file suit in u.s. district court , with the opportunity to appeal the court's decision to the appropriate u.s. court of appeals . the intent of this arrangement is to avoid the opportunity for the “two bites of the apple” — one administrative , one judicial — currently offered executive branch employees . it is too early to tell if the act will accomplish its purpose in this area , but congress may find that once in operation , the new system may be instructive for considering how best to provide employee redress . today , in the face of tight budgets and a rapidly changing work environment , the civil service is undergoing renewed scrutiny by the administration and congress . in the broadest sense , the goal of such scrutiny is to identify ways of making the civil service more effective and less costly in its service to the american people . with so many facets of the civil service under review — including compensation and benefits , performance management , and the retirement system — no area should be overlooked that offers the opportunity for improving the way the government operates . to the extent that the federal government's administrative redress system is tilted toward employee protections at the expense of the effective management of the nation's business , it deserves congressional attention . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . to the extent that the federal government's administrative redress system is tilted toward employee protections at the expense of the effective management of the nation's business , it deserves congressional attention . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o .