process of hiring up to this level . in commenting on our draft report , cops officials also noted that they were recruiting for more than 30 staff positions in a new monitoring component to be exclusively devoted to overseeing grant compliance activities . cops office officials also said that some efforts were under way to review compliance with requirements of the community policing act that grants be used to supplement , not supplant , local funding . in previous work , we reported that enforcing such provisions of grant programs was difficult for federal agencies due to problems in ascertaining state and local spending intentions . according to the cops office assistant director of grant administration , the cops office's approach to achieving compliance with the nonsupplantation provision was to receive accounts of potential violations from grantees or other sources and then to work with grantees to bring them into compliance , not to abruptly terminate grants or otherwise penalize grantees . cops office grant advisers attempted to work with grantees to develop mutually acceptable plans for corrective actions . also , in our 1997 report on grant design , our synthesis of literature on the fiscal impact of grants suggested that each additional federal grant dollar resulted in about 40 cents of added spending on the aided activity . this means that the fiscal impact of the remaining 60 cents was to free up state or local funds that otherwise would have been spent on that activity for other programs or tax relief . in april 1997 , cops office officials said that they were discussing ways to encourage grantees to sustain hiring levels achieved under the grants , in light of the language of the community policing act regarding the continuation of these increased hiring levels after the conclusion of federal support . law enforcement agencies in small communities were awarded most of the cops grants for fiscal years 1995 and 1996 . our work showed that 6,588 grants — 49 percent of the total 13,396 grants awarded — were awarded to law enforcement agencies serving communities with populations of fewer than 10,000 . eighty - three percent — 11,173 grants — of the total grants awarded went to agencies serving populations of fewer than 50,000 . large cities — with populations of over 1 million — were awarded about 1 percent of the grants , but these grants made up over 23 percent — about $612 million — of the total grant dollars awarded . about 50 percent of the grant funds were awarded to law enforcement agencies serving populations of 150,000 or less , and about 50 percent of the grant funds were awarded to law enforcement agencies serving populations exceeding 150,000 , as the community policing act required . in commenting on our draft report , the cops office noted that these distributions were not surprising given that the vast majority of police departments nationwide are also relatively small . the cops office also noted that the community policing act requires that the level of assistance given to large and small agencies be equal .