and tax issues . through its new taxpayer - focused operating divisions , irs is centralizing management of key functions and creating narrower scopes of responsibility . for example , irs estimates that individual taxpayers account for 75 percent of all filers , yet only 17 percent of the tax code is ordinarily relevant to them . by creating a division devoted solely to individual taxpayers , irs is creating a situation in which managers and employees in that division will be able to focus on compliance and service issues related to individual taxpayers and will need expertise in a much smaller body of tax law . creating a simpler , more coherent organization and management structure is an important step , but it does not guarantee good management . irs' managers , at all levels , need to be skilled in results - oriented management , including planning , performance measurement , and the use of performance data in decisionmaking . without these skills , irs cannot be assured that its employees and the agency as a whole are performing as expected with regard to both taxpayer rights and enforcement . our work has shown that ensuring that irs has the capacity it needs in this area will be a challenge . for example , in our recent work on irs seizures , we found that irs did not generate information sufficient for senior managers to use in monitoring the program . irs did not have a fully developed capability to monitor the quality of seizure work in terms of the appropriateness of seizure decisionmaking or the conduct of asset management and sales activity . in addition , collection managers were not systematically provided with information on the type of problems experienced by taxpayers involved in a seizure or on the resolution of those problems . we concluded that irs managers were not collecting the information needed to effectively oversee the program and made recommendations to improve oversight . our point today , however , is that generating and using basic management information needs to be routine among irs managers at all levels and across all taxpayer groups and functions . the organizational and management changes i've described , while significant , will not be sufficient to achieve irs' mission . as an agency still dealing with the repercussions of a performance system that was , for many years , based on enforcement statistics , irs well knows that performance measures can create powerful incentives to influence both organizational and individual behavior . consequently , irs needs to develop an integrated performance management system that aligns employee , program , and strategic performance measures and creates incentives for behavior supporting agency goals , including that of giving due recognition to taxpayers' rights and interests . developing and implementing performance measures are difficult tasks for any organization , but especially for an organization like irs that must ensure both quality taxpayer service and tax law compliance . at the operational level , irs is measuring its progress toward these goals through customer satisfaction surveys and through the business results measures of quality and quantity .