doing so will be important . unless the performance of irs employees is based on incentives that are in accord with the agency's new mission statement and aligned with its organizational measures , managers and front - line workers might find it easy to fall back on measures such as enforcement results and other productivity statistics — measures that have created problems for irs in the past . alternately , if employees come to believe that they should place disproportionate value on customer satisfaction , they might not take enforcement actions , even where appropriate , because the perceived risks of taking action might be seen to outweigh the risks of not taking action . the potential for such a pendulum swing is an additional reason for putting the systems in place expeditiously . and whether the tone of some evaluative statements discourages customer service . if this concern were borne out , irs would need to modify the system to achieve the types of cultural change to which congress and irs' leadership are committed . as irs has recognized , the information systems that it uses to keep records on taxpayers' accounts are fundamentally deficient and thwart irs' ability to provide high - quality customer service . ( 4 ) what are the associated deposit and filing requirements ? the answers to these questions are not always clear - cut . for example , we have identified perennial problems and inconsistencies in irs' administration of common law rules governing whether a worker is an employee for employment tax purposes or is an independent contractor , who is responsible for payment of such taxes . our reviews also have pointed out the complexities in determining whether the compensation paid to the employee fits the category of nontaxable compensation for such payments as fringe benefits . making proper calculations of the periodic tax liability of compensation payments and meeting filing and depositing requirements also can be difficult . for the federal income tax , wages are to be withheld for each payroll period ; and the amount is to be based on the amount of wages and number of allowances claimed by the employee on his or her federal form w - 4 , employee's withholding allowance certificate . for fica , the employer is to deduct a certain percentage of the employee's wages up to a dollar limit and a lesser percentage of wages above that amount . futa is paid at a different rate , but the amount paid can be reduced with credit for payments to state unemployment tax . for example , the type of information we sought presumably would be the type that managers would need to know about small business taxpayers and understand their problems — including the source of the problems . if this kind of information about small businesses is not readily available or in a form suitable for analysis , it will be more difficult for unit managers to devise effective strategies to target resources and improve service . several delinquencies have occurred . confusion may result over what has been paid and what remains due . such confusion may be particularly difficult to resolve if irs and the taxpayer are corresponding over a protracted period .