additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . investors than they are the safety and soundness of a depository institution . therefore , bank and thrift regulators may want to consider the feasibility of segmenting the results of their reviews of compliance with disclosures required by the interagency guidelines , including the results of any secret shopper surveys , from other examination results and of making those results available to the public . such segmentation and disclosure is already required in connection with regulators' assessments of bank and thrift compliance with the community reinvestment act . in summary , the results of our survey and the more recent surveys , indicate that there may be a persistent problem with many banks and thrifts failing to make the basic risk disclosures required under the interagency guidelines . these disclosures are important because they can help investors fully understand the risks of investing in bank mutual funds . banking regulators and some banks and thrifts are taking steps to better ensure that the required disclosures are made . while these actions are positive , other steps , which may have the potential to help increase compliance with these guidelines and better ensure that investors are adequately informed of the risks of their investment decisions , could also be taken . nasd forwarded its revised proposal to sec for approval . sec published the proposal for public comment and received 86 comment letters by the end of the comment period in may 1996 . most of the letters were from banking organizations or bank - affiliated broker - dealers . sec is currently analyzing the comment letters before deciding whether to approve the proposed rules . ensuring that salespersons provide bank customers with appropriate risk disclosures during all mutual fund sales presentations presents a difficult challenge to regulators and to banks and thrifts . over time , this task may become easier as distinctions among financial service providers continue to fade and customers become more aware of the differences between insured and uninsured products . the bank and securities regulators' proposed actions for additional training of investment representatives , requiring testing of employees , and reexamining the interagency guidelines should help improve bank and thrift compliance with disclosures required by these guidelines . however , additional steps , which may have the potential to help improve compliance with the risk disclosure guidelines , could also be taken .