gao estimates . federal workforce restructuring act ceiling . experience has shown that some agencies may need to pare down their workforces more than others as budgets are reduced , programs are dropped , and / or missions are changed . if an agency is unable to meet its workforce reduction goals through attrition alone , which downsizing strategy — buyouts or rifs — generates greater savings ? our study of the costs and savings of buyouts versus rifs concludes that , over a 5-year period , buyouts would generally result in more savings to taxpayers than rifs . this is because buyouts usually result in the separation of employees with higher salaries and benefits than those who are separated through rifs . in these cases , rifs could generate up to 12 percent more in savings over the 5-year period than buyouts . finally , if the employees were separated without bumping and retreating and were not retirement - eligible , the cost of severance pay for the rifed employees would result in buyouts generating up to 10 percent more in net savings than rifs over the 5-year period . these net savings projections are based on the assumption that positions vacated by separating employees would not be refilled by government or contractor personnel . projected savings would be reduced if this occurred . their workforces by reducing management control positions . these positions have not been reduced as a proportion of the workforce as called for by npr . with regard to future workforce reductions , our analysis showed that in terms of absolute numbers — and given historical quit rates — the remaining annual fte employment ceilings called for by the workforce restructuring act probably could be achieved governmentwide through attrition . nevertheless , some agencies may be required to downsize more than others . in such situations , buyouts or rifs may be necessary . in comparing the costs and savings of buyouts and rifs , our analysis showed that buyouts offered greater savings than rifs , except when rifed employees do not bump and retreat and are eligible to retire . this concludes my prepared statement . i would be pleased to answer any questions you or members of the subcommittee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .