irs offices . however , irs recently decided not to continue funding ties through tsm . it is our understanding that any future funding will be done outside of tsm . according to irs , the features of ics and ties will eventually be incorporated into the integrated case processing ( icp ) system , which will also provide irs' compliance function with automated tools for case assignment and tracking . however , as a result of the recent reassessment of tsm , irs has decided to delay that integration until after the year 2000 . in march 1996 , we told the subcommittee on oversight , house committee on ways and means , that additional investments in tsm are at risk given current managerial and technical weaknesses . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . irs plans to do this in several ways . in the near term , demand on irs' customer service centers will be reduced by eliminating unnecessary notices . in that regard , as part of a recent notice reengineering project , irs decided to eliminate certain notices . when the recommendations from the reengineering effort are fully effective , in fiscal year 1997 , irs expects to be issuing almost 46 million fewer notices annually to taxpayers . irs' fiscal year 1997 budget request states that , although traditional enforcement positions ( which include revenue officers ) “comprise the lion's share of irs' enforcement efforts , they also represent on the margin the least efficient use of irs resources.” in that regard , the budget request provides for an increase in staff for irs' telephone collection activities and a decrease in revenue officers — a shift toward the kind of mix that we have advocated in the past . another way to mitigate the effect of fewer - than - expected staff is to improve staff productivity . in that regard , one of irs' efforts to improve compliance involves the automation of certain tasks done by enforcement staff in irs' district offices . these tasks , like many in irs , have for years involved the manual processing of paper , which has resulted in enforcement staff spending significant amounts of time on routine administrative duties . irs has been implementing systems that are designed to ease this burden and help make enforcement staff more productive .