its role under h.r . 716 is unclear . in addition , the bill does not contain language limiting judicial review of management actions taken under its provisions . the possibly unintended effect of subjecting management decisions to judicial review could slow implementation and increase costs due to litigation . in the governments we visited , reliable and complete cost data on government activities were deemed essential in assessing the overall performance of activities targeted for privatization , in supporting informed privatization decisions , and in making these decisions easier to implement and justify to potential critics . most of the governments we surveyed used estimated cost data because obtaining complete cost and performance data , by activity , from their accounting systems was difficult . however , indianapolis , and more recently virginia have used activity based costing ( abc ) to obtain more precise and complete data on the cost of each separate program activity . consistent with current efforts aimed at improving federal financial management . in the past , when competitive contracting has been done at the federal level under the provisions of circular a - 76 , the absence of workload data and adequate cost accounting systems has made the task all the more difficult . given that most agencies do not have cost accounting systems in place at this point , the bill's requirement to use past performance and cost data will be difficult for many federal activities to meet . efforts are under way to develop the type of cost and performance data that would be necessary to compare public versus private proposals , as could occur under the provisions of h.r . the federal accounting standards advisory board ( fasab ) has developed standards that are designed to provide information on the costs , management , and effectiveness of federal agencies . these standards require agencies to develop measures of the full costs of carrying out a mission or of producing products and services . such information , when available , would allow for comparing the costs of various programs and activities with their performance outputs and results . to help agencies meet these standards , the joint financial management improvement program ( jfmip ) plans to issue guidance to facilitate the acquisition and development of managerial cost accounting systems needed to accumulate and assign cost data consistent with governmentwide data . we found that governments we visited needed to develop strategies to help their workforces make the transition to a private - sector environment . such strategies , for example , might seek to involve employees in the privatization process , provide training to help prepare them for privatization , and create a safety net for displaced employees . among the six governments we visited , four permitted at least some employee groups to submit bids along with private - sector bidders to provide public services . all six governments developed programs or policies to address employee concerns with privatization , such as the possibility of job loss and the need for retraining . the bill's findings section states that it is in the public interest for the private sector to utilize government employees who are adversely affected by conversions of functions to the private sector .