contractors . changes to the classification rules could increase the number of unprotected independent contractors . for example , unemployment insurance is nearly universal , covering over 90 percent of american workers . this 60-year old program provides short - term financial support for covered workers who , through no fault of their own , become unemployed . it also helps the unemployed from having to turn to public assistance programs . during economic downturns , payments made to the unemployed may take on added significance , serving a macro - economic role of helping to stabilize the economy . many factors affect this decision . in making the decision , employers may misclassify employees as independent contractors . irs has estimated that 756,000 of 5.15 million employers ( 15 percent ) misclassified 3.4 million employees as independent contractors in 1984 . factors such as costs and confusion over the classification rules can contribute to misclassification . the common law rules for classifying workers are unclear and subject to conflicting interpretations . employers cannot be certain that their classification decisions will withstand challenges by irs . if not upheld , they risk large retroactive tax assessments . being responsible for enforcing these rules and concerned about misclassification , irs has maintained an audit presence . from 1988 through 1995 , irs did 12,983 employment tax examination program audits , recommending $830 million in taxes and reclassifying 527,000 workers . deliberations over any changes to the classification rules may need to consider potential impacts on tax compliance . irs has found that independent contractors compared to employees have much lower income tax compliance and account for a much higher portion of the income tax gap . two approaches that could improve independent contractor compliance within the existing common law rules are ( 1 ) improved information reporting on payments made to independent contractors , and ( 2 ) withholding income taxes from such payments . such approaches could be implemented regardless of changes to the classification rules . although tax compliance could be improved , these approaches could increase to some extent the burdens on independent contractors and employers that use them . aside from tax issues , another important consideration in these deliberations is the body of laws that create a safety net for american workers . such laws generally apply only to employees . if changes to the classification rules lead to more workers being classified as independent contractors instead of as employees , these worker protection laws would cover fewer people . madam chairman and members of the subcommittee: we are pleased to be here to assist the subcommittee in its inquiry into the classification of workers either as employees or independent contractors for federal tax purposes . proper classification of workers has been the subject of several of our reports and congressional testimonies . today , i would like to make 4 points taken from these reports and testimonies . • first , in deciding how to classify workers , employers may misclassify employees as independent contractors . in its most recent estimate on misclassification , irs has estimated that 756,000 of 5.15 million employers ( 15 percent ) misclassified workers as independent contractors in 1984 .