rulemaking process . we focused on the april 1996 through december 1998 time frame because we were able to use our database to identify which rules were “major” under the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act ( sbrefa ) ( eg , those that have a $100-million impact on the economy ) . as a result , we cannot comment on rules issued outside of that time frame . although executive order 12612 does not require agencies to mention the order in the preamble to their final rules or to note in those preambles whether a federalism assessment was prepared , doing so is a clear indication that the agency was aware of and considered the order's requirements . also , if an agency prepared a federalism assessment for a final rule , it would be logical for the agency to describe the assessment in the preamble to the rule . our work showed that executive order 12612 had relatively little visible effect on federal agencies' rulemaking actions during this time frame . to summarize the nearly 3 years of data depicted in figure 1 , agencies covered by the order mentioned it in the preambles to about 26 percent of the 11,414 final rules they issued between april 1996 and december 1998 . many of the final rules that federal agencies issue are administrative or routine in nature , and therefore unlikely to have significant federalism implications . as a result , it is not particularly surprising that agencies would not prepare federalism assessments for many of those rules . however , rules that are “major” under sbrefa and that involve or affect state and local governments would seem more likely to have federalism implications that would warrant preparation of an assessment . however , that does not appear to have been the case . as figure 3 shows , of the 117 major final rules issued by covered agencies between april 1996 and december 1998 , the preambles indicated that only 1 had a federalism assessment . the agencies had previously indicated that 37 of these rules would affect state and local governments , and the preambles to 21 of the rules indicated that they would preempt state and local laws in the event of a conflict . at least one of the four state and local government organizations that we consulted during the review said that federal agencies should have done assessments for most of these 117 major rules . in response , the agencies said that their rules did not have sufficient federalism implications to trigger the executive order's requirements . action would directly create significant effects on states even if the action was mandated by law or the department otherwise had no discretion . the criteria in epa's guidance established a high threshold for what constitutes “sufficient” federalism implications — perhaps explaining why none of the agency's more than 1,900 final rules issued during the april 1996 to december 1998 time frame had a federalism assessment .