to be voided . fps decided that security measures , such as fire suppression and fire detection systems , would be considered separate and apart from the building security upgrade program . as recommended by the doj report , gsa has been working with omb to increase future fbf revenues to more closely approximate its expenditures for the gsa security program at its upgraded level . however , gsa and omb have not yet reached complete agreement on how and when to increase the rent that gsa charges tenant federal agencies so that rental revenues will be sufficient to pay for the costs of gsa's building security program . rent that gsa charges federal agencies for space and services it furnishes is set by the gsa administrator , who is authorized by law to charge agencies for furnished services , space , quarters , maintenance , repair , or other facilities . the law states that the rates and charges shall approximate commercial charges for comparable space and services . the law does not require that gsa's rental charges be based on its actual costs of providing the space and services , which include security . thus , gsa's rental charges are based primarily on gsa's periodic market price appraisals for comparable space , not on gsa's actual costs to provide the space . gsa's practice when determining the amount of rent to charge federal agencies has been to include a charge for security . this fee consists of two components: ( 1 ) the basic service charge of 6 cents per square foot that , coupled with other funds from the fbf , is used for control center operations , criminal investigations , protective services activities , and administration of fps programs ; and ( 2 ) a building - specific fee that is used along with other funds from the fbf to pay for commercial equivalent items , such as contract security guard services , and security alarm systems' installation and maintenance . according to gsa , because gsa's expenditures for security have historically exceeded the amount charged to agencies for security , the fbf has absorbed the excess expenditures . charges billed to tenant agencies by about $540 million . gsa has projected about $260 million in obligations for fiscal year 1998 and has budgeted about $251 million for fiscal year 1999 for building security . gsa projects that its obligations for security will exceed security related revenue by about $228 million in fiscal year 1998 and by about $112 million in fiscal year 1999 . the doj report recommended that gsa consider increasing rents to cover the added costs of upgrading security . gsa is required to obtain omb approval for the rent it charges federal agencies . gsa and omb officials said they were not in a position to increase rents in fiscal years 1996 and 1997 to help pay for increased costs of security because agencies need to know their rent costs at least 2 years in advance to provide sufficient time for annual budget development and approval . gsa requested an increase in rents for fiscal years 1998 and 1999 as part of a comprehensive effort to redesign its system for determining rent charges and fees for services such as security .