specifically , h.r . 2676 and s. 1174 would give irs additional flexibilities relating to performance management , staffing , and the development of demonstration projects . the new performance management system would appear to cover senior executive service ( ses ) members and non - ses employees alike , require that goals and objectives established through irs organizational performance planning be linked to individual or group performance and used to make performance distinctions among employees or groups of employees , require performance appraisals to have at least two performance rating levels at fully successful or above , allow awards of up to 50 percent of salary for a small number of employees who report directly to the irs commissioner , and allow for employee awards based on documented financial savings . it would also require periodic performance evaluations to determine whether employees are meeting all applicable retention standards , and would use the results of employees' performance evaluations as a basis for adjustments in pay and other appropriate personnel actions . opportunity to address some of its long - standing challenges , which include attracting and retaining the talent necessary to modernize its management practices and bring its technology and administrative systems up - to - date . the provisions may also help irs focus its employees on the agency's fundamental responsibility for collecting the proper amount of taxes while , at the same time , providing courteous service to those who must pay the taxes . these workers , while all members of the civil service , are in the “excepted service” and are covered by a variety of alternative merit systems . one of congress' reasons for establishing alternative merit systems for some federal organizations was to give them a measure of freedom from the rules governing the competitive service under title 5 . concerns over the constraints imposed by title 5 have led to proposals such as those already accepted or pending regarding faa , fbi , dod , and irs — proposals that could lead to an even more decentralized civil service . to the extent that agencies such as these gain flexibilities outside of title 5 , congress will need to know whether , in planning and implementing their new approaches , these agencies continue to adhere to the merit principles and other national goals . however , the proposals for irs do not make opm's role in this regard entirely clear . congress has options of clarifying opm's role or taking a more direct hand itself in overseeing irs' new personnel practices . in closing , the proposals in h.r . 2676 and s. 1174 have been developed to provide irs exceptions from various title 5 personnel requirements that irs believes impede its ability to accomplish its mission . in order to take full advantage of the lessons that implementation will yield , congress may find it appropriate to incorporate all of the flexibilities into the demonstration authority provisions of the bills . with appropriate evaluative mechanisms included , this would allow for an informed judgment as to whether these flexibilities should be made permanently available to irs as well as whether they possibly should be extended to other agencies .