evaluations by mail . second , reviewers convened as a panel for discussions and scoring of proposals . biographical data for 60 peer reviewers on panels for the grants that we reviewed showed that they were professionals in the criminal justice field representing geographic regions nationwide . they included academicians ; a judge ; researchers ; and practitioners , such as juvenile justice project directors and program administrators . twenty - eight percent of the peer reviewers in our sample were minorities , and 47 percent were women . after completion of the peer review panels , ojjdp is to do a second internal review of the applications . it is to consider review comments from peer reviewers and other program offices . the ojjdp manager of the discretionary grant program is to make formal recommendations concerning applications to receive funding in a memorandum to the administrator , and the administrator is to make tentative grant selections . the ojp comptroller is to do a financial review of these applications to determine whether the applicant has the necessary resources and integrity to account for and administer federal funds properly , and whether budget and cost data in the application were allowable , effective , and reasonable . final awards are to be made by the ojjdp administrator . according to an ojjdp official , delays in enactment of annual appropriations measures have resulted in difficulties in publishing a program plan according to established time frames . if significant delays occur , it becomes difficult to complete the steps in the grant application , review , and award process before the end of the fiscal year . ojjdp's program plan for fiscal year 1996 was published in the federal register on february 20 , several months later than the official said is the normal time frame for publication . because ojjdp was operating under a continuing resolution , which is a short - term spending measure , funding amounts were not included in the plan . in comparison , the proposed comprehensive plan for fiscal year 1995 was published on december 30 , 1994 , with preliminary funding amounts for each program included . for ongoing projects that had exhausted funds needed to continue operating . the official noted that funding grants in this manner results in additional paperwork . the fiscal year 1996 appropriation was enacted on april 26 , 1996 . the appropriation level , $162 million , was about the same as the fiscal year 1995 level . we compared the peer review processes of nih and nsf to those of ojjdp to note similarities and differences among these agencies . we found the following similarities among peer review processes at ojjdp , nih , and nsf: the decisions of the peer reviewers were advisory ; • written criteria for selecting reviewers promoted balanced review selection in terms of race , gender , and region ; and • reviewers evaluated and scored applications on the basis of written criteria . key differences we found among peer review processes at the three agencies were in the size and structure of peer review panels and in the methods of appointing peer reviewers . nih peer reviewers served on panels for up to 4 years .