does the jurisdiction have kyc policies or guidelines for banks ? does the jurisdiction require banks to report suspicious transactions ? does the jurisdiction have corporate secrecy laws that include criminal sanctions ? does incsr describe supervisory structure of the jurisdiction as weak or nonexistent ? information is for guernsey , one of four islands known as the channel islands . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touch - tone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . for example , do the offshore jurisdictions that have enacted new money laundering laws have the regulatory infrastructure and adequate regulatory and law enforcement personnel to enforce the new laws ? another key question with important implications is how effective are the efforts of international task forces and supervisory groups to combat money laundering . a related question is what needs to be done to ensure that offshore jurisdictions give sufficient emphasis to preventing and detecting money laundering . an equally important , if narrower , question that grows out of the gao work described here is what needs to be done to ensure that offshore jurisdictions allow the u.s. and other foreign governments adequate access to information needed for supervisory and law enforcement purposes . other questions remain , related to the domestic oversight of banking and money laundering — especially with regard to the adequacy of current examination procedures , including knowing your customer . the national money laundering strategy for 1999 marks a new stage in the government's fight against money laundering . a major goal is to enhance regulatory oversight while making it cost - effective , with measurable results . we believe such a goal is worth achieving . u.s. law enforcement and judicial authorities allowed access to individual customer information x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x xcriminal sanctions exist for unauthorized disclosures , but “safe harbor” is provided for specific authorized disclosures to certain entities .