their systems . methods , such as those used by ots and fdic , could be used by the other regulators to inform them about internet banking plans and activities and better enable them to provide tailored risk - management guidance to individual depository institutions when needed . regulators could also use this information to plan the scope and timing of future examinations and to determine the need for additional examiners who have information technology expertise . during our review , most regulators were developing , testing , or implementing new on - line banking examination procedures , including procedures for examinations of internet banking . however , their approaches varied on whether ( 1 ) examinations of new internet banking activities were required or discretionary and , ( 2 ) safety and soundness examiners or information system examiners conducted the examinations . the regulators also varied in their approaches to training . we found that regulators' policies differed in the discretion examiners had to decide whether to examine an institution's new internet banking activity . fdic and ots expected their examiners to review an institution's internet banking activities during the first examination of the institution after it has gone on - line . frs and occ , in contrast , did not require that an institution's new internet banking activities be examined . they permitted their examiners to determine whether they should examine an institution's new internet banking activity . they reasoned that although internet banking is an evolving activity that may warrant scrutiny , its small size , relative to an institution's overall assets in most cases does not present a safety and soundness concern to the bank ; and therefore , examinations of new internet banking activities are considered optional for their examiners . the relatively low costs of providing such services through third - party firms and the desire to remain competitive . in other areas , we found differences in the types of examiners assigned to internet banking examinations . while frs and fdic predominantly relied on their safety and soundness examiners for examinations of internet banking , two other regulators relied entirely or primarily on information systems specialists . occ relied entirely on specialized examiners because it believed the technology - related aspects of internet banking required their expertise . ots relied primarily on information systems specialists for examinations of internet banking services offered by complex or large institutions . we also found that regulators were at different stages of training their examiners to carry out internet banking examinations . at the time of our fieldwork , fdic had largely completed its basic training for its safety and soundness examiners , but it planned additional training for subject matter experts . ots told us that it would be finished training its examiners by the end of the year , and frs said it also expected to complete an initial training program for its safety and soundness examiners by the end of this year . occ had no plans for in - house training of its safety and soundness examiners in on - line banking examinations , because its on - line banking examinations are performed by information system specialists who receive specialized external training .