reorganization . the problems that the new agencies experienced included delays in ( 1 ) obtaining the participation of key agency officials and adequate staffing and office space and ( 2 ) establishing support functions , such as accounting and payroll systems . in our 1981 report , we recommended that future reorganization plans establish a high - level task force or other mechanism to facilitate implementation of the reorganization . in particular , we said that agencies that would lose or gain resources or functions and support agencies , such as omb , the general services administration , and the office of personnel management , should be represented on the task force . in our view , reorganizing statistical agencies would impose similar requirements for successful implementation . under the proposed bill , staff and responsibilities would be moved out of two cabinet departments and into a newly created federal statistical service . this service would need to provide the supporting systems , such as personnel , payroll , and accounting , required for continued operation of census , bea , and bls functions . requiring that the heads of these agencies , appropriate personnel from the departments of labor and commerce , and representatives from omb and other support agencies participate in planning the consolidation should increase the chances that the proposed reorganization would occur while minimizing disruption of the work of the consolidated agencies and their current parent departments . similarly , we have frequently noted that government financial systems need to be strengthened to provide agency leadership with the timely and accurate information needed to control costs , measure performance , and achieve needed management improvements . in too many cases , however , weaknesses in these systems prevented the achievement of these goals . again , ensuring that an effective and reliable financial system is in place should enhance the ability of the proposed administrator of the federal statistical service and other managers of the new agency to accomplish their missions . such a system will be essential if the new service is to be able to comply with standards established by the government performance and results act , the government management reform act , and the chief financial officers act . these three laws are intended to establish a framework for enhancing the management , performance , and operations of federal agencies . in this regard , the subcommittee may wish to require that a chief financial officer be appointed for the federal statistical service . finally , as part of planning for the implementation of the proposed consolidation , it would be important to identify the operating efficiencies and cost savings anticipated , the specific areas from which the savings are to be achieved , the specific steps that need to be taken to produce the desired savings , and the individuals responsible for achieving them . in our opinion , the likelihood of actually making operations more efficient and capturing savings is critically dependent on careful and comprehensive implementation planning . this planning must also take into account the resulting need for realignment of support functions at the departments of commerce and labor . such realignment could be significant .