postal service . my testimony will ( 1 ) focus on the performance of the postal service and the need for improving internal controls and protecting revenue in an organization that takes in and spends billions of dollars each year and ( 2 ) highlight some of the key reform and oversight issues that continue to challenge the postal service and congress as they consider how u.s. mail service will be provided in the future . i will also provide some observations from our ongoing work relating to labor - management relations at the postal service and other areas . my testimony is based on our ongoing work and work that we completed over the past year . first , i would like to discuss both the reported successes and some of the remaining areas of concern related to the postal service's performance . last year , the postal service reported that it had achieved outstanding financial and operational performance . financially , the postal service had the second most profitable year in its history . according to the postal service's 1996 annual report , its fiscal year 1996 net income was $1.6 billion . similarly , with regard to mail delivery service , the postal service continued to meet or exceed its goals for on - time delivery of overnight mail . most recently , the postmaster general announced that , during 1996 , the postal service delivered 91 percent of overnight mail on time or better . additionally , during fiscal year 1996 , the postal service's volume exceeded 182 billion pieces of mail and generated more than $56 billion in revenue . while these results are encouraging , other performance data suggest that some areas of concern warrant closer scrutiny . will bear a uniform rate . in our september 1996 report , we emphasized the importance of recognizing the statute's underlying purpose and determining how changes may affect universal mail service and uniform rates . most important among the potential consequences is that relaxing the statutes could open first - class mail services to additional competition , thus possibly affecting postal revenues and rates and the postal service's ability to carry out its public service mandates . however , at the same time , the american public could benefit through improved service . it will be important to take into account the possible consequences for all stakeholders in deciding how mail services will be provided to the american public in the future . another key reform issue is the future role of the postal service in the constantly changing and increasingly competitive communications market . for example , the use of alternative communications methods such as electronic mail , faxes , and the internet continues to grow at phenomenal rates in the united states and is beginning to affect the postal service markets . at the same time , the postal service's competitors continue to challenge it for major shares of the communications market . according to the postmaster general , the postal service has been losing market share in five of its six product lines . it seems reasonable to assume that these alternative communications methods are likely to be used more and more .