estimate . therefore , as illustrated in figure 1 , changes in irs' estimate can have a highly significant — and even determinative — effect on the governmentwide total . as figure 3 shows , non - irs departments and agencies estimated that , in the aggregate , they had reduced their paperwork burden by more than 23 percent between fiscal years 1995 and 1998 — close to the 25-percent burden - reduction goal envisioned in the pra . however , irs' burden - hour estimate increased by 6.9 percent during this period . that increase offset the estimated reductions in the other agencies and was largely responsible for the relatively minor decline in the governmentwide paperwork burden - hour estimate . also , as i will discuss later , the estimate for the non - irs agencies' reductions was overstated . their aggregate burden to increase by more than 4 percent between fiscal years 1998 and 2000 . however , irs will again lead the way , accounting for more than 85 percent of the governmentwide increase in estimated burden during this period . raised the threshold for which businesses had to maintain receipts to substantiate expenses for travel , entertainment , gifts , and listed property , thereby reducing burden by an estimated 12.5 million hours during fiscal year 1997 ; and required those who file 250 or more of irs form 1042-s ( used by withholding agents to report income and tax withheld from payees ) to do so on magnetic media , thereby producing an estimated burden reduction of 21.1 million hours during fiscal year 1997 . as a result of these and other actions , irs and other parts of the department of the treasury said they had eliminated more than 100 million hours of paperwork burden between fiscal years 1995 and 1998 . however , despite these efforts , irs' overall burden estimate increased by about 400 million hours during this period . the icbs that oira developed during this period indicated that this net increase was because of increased economic activity and new legislation that required irs to establish new information collections . for example , the icb for fiscal year 1999 said the taxpayer relief act of 1997 ( p.l . 105-34 ) significantly increased irs' paperwork burden , much of which was caused by new provisions for the calculation and reporting of taxes owed on capital gains . overall , the icb indicated that the taxpayer relief act had increased burden by more than 92 million hours as of december 1998 . irs officials told us that these factors are outside of the agency's control and have caused the recent increases in its burden - hour estimates . they also said the agency would not be able to reduce its paperwork burden if new statutes requiring information collections continue to be enacted and unless changes are made to the substantive requirements in the current tax code . our july 1998 report examined the way in which oira has carried out some of its responsibilities under the pra . although oira pointed to a number of actions it had taken in each area of its responsibilities that we examined , those actions often appeared to fall short of the act's requirements .