acquiring qualified prp caseworkers has been an issue . providing appropriate training is also an issue . local advocates told us that they had no assurance that the functions would provide prp with qualified staff . it is important that caseworkers and other staff receive adequate training if they are going to be able to help taxpayers resolve their problems and effectively work on advocacy efforts . our survey of irs staff who were doing advocate office work showed that training has been inconsistent throughout the advocate's office and among prp caseworkers . for example , as of june 1 , 1998 , more than half of the prp caseworkers had not completed a formal prp training course for their current position . caseworkers should be trained in both functional responsibilities and prp operations . irs commonly refers to this process as advocacy . the third goal of prp is to represent the taxpayers' interests in the formulation of irs' policies and procedures . irs has a taxpayer advocate in each of its 4 regional offices and has local advocates in its 33 district offices , 30 former district offices , and 10 service centers . the national taxpayer advocate has responsibility for the overall management of prp , and regional and local advocates have responsibility for managing prp at their respective levels . the office of the taxpayer advocate funds the advocate positions ; the staff in advocate offices at all levels ; and other resources for advocate offices . prp assistance to taxpayers who cannot get their problems resolved through normal irs channels is done by employees called caseworkers , who are not part of the advocate's office . they are in irs' functional units — mainly customer service , collection , and examination — in the district offices and service centers . most prp resources , including caseworkers , are funded by the functions , and about 80 percent of the caseworkers report to functional managers - - not local advocates . some offices , however , had a centralized structure in which prp casework was done by employees who were funded by the functions , but reported to the local taxpayer advocate . formerly , regional and local advocates were selected by and reported to the director of the regional , district , or service center office where they worked . however , in response to a requirement in the irs restructuring and reform act of 1998 , regional advocates are now selected by and report to the national taxpayer advocate or his or her designee ; and local advocates are now selected by and report to regional advocates . additionally , last october , irs began moving to a more centralized reporting structure for the caseworkers — in which they would report to local advocates instead of functional management . irs officially assigned those caseworkers who were already reporting to local advocates — about 20 percent of the caseworkers — to local advocate offices . in addition , irs is developing an implementation plan to have the remaining 80 percent of the caseworker positions assigned to local advocate offices this year . our testimony is based on our ongoing work for the subcommittee .