management systems . ins has taken action to address some of its financial management problems , including engaging a contractor to reconcile the fund balance differences with treasury . with respect to ins' financial management systems , the auditor reported that the systems ( 1 ) were not integrated , resulting in significant delays and burdensome reconciliation efforts ; ( 2 ) had significant internal control weaknesses — including computer control problems — affecting the accuracy and reliability of financial information ; and ( 3 ) limited , rather than enhanced , effective decisionmaking . in 1991 , we reported that ins' budget development process , which had evolved with weak controls over expenditures and revenues , significantly impeded ins management's ability to address program weaknesses . in addition , we said that ins did not have fiscal accountability over its resources . its outdated accounting systems , weak internal controls , and lack of management emphasis on financial management had contributed to this situation . as we reported again in 1993 and more recently in 1997,ins' financial management systems' weaknesses made it difficult for the agency to monitor the status of its budget and to make sound budgetary decisions . for example , in march 1995 , ins' budget office projected that the field offices would have about $115 million in surplus funds through the rest of the year . upon subsequent input from ins' field offices , it turned out that the field offices would experience a $5 million shortfall for the remainder of the year . earlier this year , concerned that ins would incur a budget shortfall , the house appropriations committee asked that we examine ins' fiscal condition for fiscal year 1999 . based on discussions with officials from ins , the justice department , and the office of management and budget , and based on our analysis of ins budget documents , we concluded that ins was not experiencing an overall budget shortfall for fiscal year 1999.however , we noted that the hiring policy that ins followed in fiscal year 1998 , and the reduced revenues from ins' examinations fee revenues , contributed to reduced discretionary funding in fiscal year 1999 . cohen act of 1996 , to ensure that the new system did not automate outmoded , inefficient business processes . instead of developing and implementing a risk management plan , as we had recommended , ins tasked its contractor with helping to ensure that risks associated with implementation of the new system would be identified and necessary steps taken to mitigate them . according to ins , it had an urgent need to replace its financial management system , which was over 19 years old and did not have the functionality needed for ins to efficiently manage and account for its resources , and ins believed that this was a prudent way to proceed . in addition to the long - standing management challenges that we identified , program implementation issues at ins have been of continuing concern .