additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . i would be pleased to answer any questions . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . six thought the materials were too vague or did not provide enough information . however , two representatives said that the materials were too voluminous and complex to expeditiously review . the agencies generally responded to those recommendations in the supplementary information sections of the proposed rules . because you will be hearing from those same officials later in this hearing , i will not go into detail about those suggestions . however , their comments centered on some of the same issues raised by the small entity representatives , including the timing of the panels , the materials provided to the representatives , and the manner by which comments are obtained . finally , the small entity representatives with whom we spoke and , to a lesser extent , the agency officials we interviewed offered several suggestions to improve the advocacy review panel process . during the first year of the advocacy review panel requirements' implementation , osha convened a panel for one draft rule and published two other proposed rules for which panels were not held . sba's chief counsel for advocacy agreed with osha's certification that neither of these two proposed rules required an advocacy review panel . as of november 1 , 1997 , epa had convened advocacy review panels for four draft rules . epa also published 17 other proposed rules that were reviewed by oira for which panels were not held because epa certified that the proposed rules would not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities . sba's chief counsel said that epa should have convened panels for 2 of these 17 proposed rules — the rules setting national ambient air quality standards for ozone and for particulate matter . some of the small entity representatives that we interviewed also said that epa should have convened advocacy review panels for these two proposed rules . when panels are held earlier in the process , it is less likely that the materials will be fully developed to provide detailed data and analyses to the small entity representatives .