benefits of the regulatory action . the remaining 14 rules contained neither a cost - benefit analysis nor language in the rule discussing the rules' costs or benefits . oira officials said a cost - benefit assessment was not prepared for these 14 rules because of particular circumstances in each case . they said that some of the rules were simply implementing a detailed statutory or procedural requirement , some were essentially administrative in nature ( eg , harmonizing two existing programs in different agencies ) , one eliminated an outdated requirement , and one was significant only because of its relation to a larger rule . in such cases , oira officials said they do not recommend that agencies conduct a cost - benefit assessment because it would not contribute substantially to decisionmaking . in essence , they said , a blanket requirement that agencies conduct a cost - benefit assessment would not pass a cost - benefit test . the second major issue we were asked to address was whether oira is significantly changing agencies' proposed regulations during the review process . although we found evidence of some oira involvement in all of the regulations we investigated , the data available did not provide sufficient evidence to conclusively determine whether oira - recommended changes were made to all of the regulations . aggregate data compiled by risc indicate that the proportion of regulations that were changed during the time period they were under oira review increased substantially between 1981 and 1996 , but the data do not reveal the source of those changes . oira and agency files and interviews with oira staff indicated that most of the rules that the aggregate data indicated had changed while at oira were changed at least in part because of suggestions or recommendations by oira , and most of those changes appeared significant . however , in many other cases it was unclear what changes had been made to the rules during the review process or whether oira had recommended those changes . despite this lack of documentation , oira and agency officials said oira does affect the development of regulations through discussions that occur before and during the rulemaking process or simply by its presence in that process . independent regulatory agencies . the order authorized omb to review any preliminary or final regulatory impact analysis , notice of proposed rulemaking , or final rule “based on the requirements of this order.” oira's reviews under this executive order were highly controversial , with critics contending that oira exerted too much control over the development of rules and that decisions were being made without appropriate public scrutiny . executive order 12866 requires the oira administrator to “provide meaningful guidance and oversight so that each agency's regulatory actions are consistent with applicable law , the president's priorities , and the principles set forth in this executive order and do not conflict with the policies or actions of another agency.” as was the case under executive order 12291 , the current order does not authorize oira to review rules from independent agencies . these kinds of discussions may not be reflected in documents at either the agencies or oira .