most of those receiving benefits under this provision are women . many individual retirement account proposals do not acknowledge divorcees and survivors as having any specific claim on the individual accounts of their former spouses . under these proposals , the current automatic provision of these benefits would be eliminated . the money in these accounts could become a part of the settlement at the time of a divorce , but the current benefit guarantee to these benefits might be lost . gender - neutral life tables would create cross - subsidies between men and women . however , doing so could protect retired women against a lower living standard that would result simply because they usually live longer than men . the needs of former spouses will also need to be considered in developing individual accounts . while the social security system has benefited women significantly through the spousal benefit and the progressivity of the benefit formula , women generally receive lower social security benefits than men because they work fewer years and earn lower wages . these work and earnings characteristics will affect the relative changes in average benefits for men and women under some reform proposals . in particular , these characteristics will work against women should reforms based on years with covered earnings be enacted . because of women's longer life expectancy , the creation of mandatory individual retirement accounts could also decrease women's benefits relative to men's if women continue to invest more conservatively than men . women might also be disadvantaged if the accumulations in these accounts are paid as a lump sum rather than as a joint and survivor annuity based on gender - neutral life tables . whether reforms include relatively modest modifications to the current system or more major restructurings that could include mandatory individual retirement accounts , some elements of the reform proposals could adversely affect many elderly women . because elderly women are at risk for living in poverty , understanding how various elements of the population will be affected by different changes will be necessary if we are to protect the most vulnerable members of our society . invest less in stocks than men . our analysis , using different data and focusing on individuals in their prime working and saving years , increases the robustness of this conclusion . by investing less in these riskier assets , women benefit less from the potentially greater rates of return that , in the long run , stocks could generate . at the same time , however , they are not as exposed to large losses from riskier assets . while it is true that in the past u.s. stocks have almost always posted higher returns than less risky assets , there is no guarantee that they will always do so . some pension specialists believe that information is a critical factor in helping individuals make the most of their retirement investments . providing investors with information that covers general investment principles and financial planning advice might help both women and men to better manage their investments and close the gap in the average investment returns received by men and women .