additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . do the medical facts alone show that the claimant's impairment meets or equals the medical criteria for an impairment in ssa's listing of impairments ? comparing the claimant's residual functional capacity with the physical and mental demands of the claimant's past work , can the claimant perform his or her past work ? based on the claimant's residual functional capacity and any limitations that may be imposed by the claimant's age , education , and skill level , can the claimant do work other than his or her past work ? as the application proceeds through the five - step process , claimants may be denied benefits at any step , ending the process . steps 1 and 2 ask questions about the claimant's work activity and the severity of the claimant's impairment . if the reported impairment is judged to be severe , adjudicators move to step 3 . at this step , they compare the claimant's condition with a listing of medical impairments developed by ssa . claimants whose conditions meet or are medically equivalent to the listings are presumed by ssa to be unable to work and are awarded benefits . claimants whose conditions do not meet or equal the listings are then assessed at steps 4 and 5 , where decisions must be made about the claimant's ability to perform prior work and any other work that exists in the national economy . to do this , adjudicators assess the claimant's capacity to function in the workplace . evidence , including physician opinions and reported symptoms , such as pain . mental impairment assessments include judgments about the claimant's ability to understand , remember , and respond appropriately to supervision and normal work pressures . for physical impairments , adjudicators judge the claimant's ability to walk , sit , stand , and lift . to facilitate this , ssa has defined five levels of physical exertion ranging from very heavy to sedentary . however , for those claimants unable to perform even sedentary activities , adjudicators may determine that a claimant can perform “less than a full range of sedentary” activities , a classification that often results in a benefit award . our analysis found that differing functional assessments by ddss and aljs are the primary reason for most alj awards . since most dds decisions use all five steps of the sequential evaluation process before denying a claim , almost all dds denial decisions appealed to aljs included such a functional assessment . on appeal , the alj also follows the same sequential evaluation process as the dds and also assesses the claimant's functional abilities in most awards they make . data from ssa's ongoing alj study indicate that aljs are much more likely than ddss to find that claimants have severe limitations in functioning in the workplace ( see table 3 ) .