area . ssa also eliminated the ifa and removed the duplicate consideration of maladaptive behavior from the mental disorders listings . in developing its regulations , ssa concluded that the congress meant to establish a stricter standard of severity than “one marked , one moderate” limitation , for several reasons . the congress eliminated the “comparable severity” standard of disability and the ifa , which was created for evaluating impairments less severe than those in the medical listings . a “one marked , one moderate” standard of severity would have retained one of the standards under which children were found eligible under the ifa , which ssa stated would violate the law . finally , ssa interpreted the conference report to mean that the congress intended the listings to be the last step in the disability determination process for children . although ssa articulated the “two marked or one extreme” severity standard in its regulations , it did not modify its existing listings to specifically incorporate functional criteria that would reflect both the new definition of childhood disability and advances in medicine and science . for example , because of advances in treatment , some impairments no longer have as severe an effect on a child's ability to function as they once did . as a result , some listings are set below the “two marked or one extreme” threshold of severity , and cases are being adjudicated at this less severe level as well as at the “two marked or one extreme” severity level . ssa's office of program and integrity reviews have told us , however , that they would consider this an error . ssa has not identified how many children may have been awarded benefits on the basis of these less severe listings . ssa told us that unreliable coding of the listings used to determine eligibility makes it difficult to quantify the extent of this problem . we do know , however , that some of the listings below the “two marked or one extreme” threshold are for prevalent impairments , including two of six listings for the most common impairment — mental retardation — and three listings for cerebral palsy , one for epilepsy , and one for asthma . other listings below the “two marked or one extreme” threshold include one listing for juvenile rheumatoid arthritis , one for juvenile diabetes , and two for diabetes insipidus . as of june 1998 , ssa had not established a schedule for updating and modifying its listings . ssa's quality assurance statistics on childhood cases show uneven accuracy rates across the states . although nationally the accuracy rate for decisions on new childhood cases and redeterminations exceeds ssa's standard of 90.6 percent , many states fall below the standard . specifically , for decisions made on new childhood cases from june 1997 through february 1998 , 5 states fell below the 90.6-percent accuracy standard for awards , and 9 states fell below the standard for denials . for redeterminations , 10 states fell below the standard for continuances , and 10 states fell below the standard for cessations . most of the errors have been in the documentation ; that is , there was some deficiency in the evidence that formed the basis for the determination .