how can we measure our performance ? how will we use that information to make improvements ? the act forces federal agencies to shift their focus away from such traditional concerns as staffing and activity levels and toward the results of those activities . is included in vba's business plan , also included in va's fiscal year 1999 budget submission . in previous testimony before this subcommittee , we noted that vba's planning process has been evolving . vba first developed a strategic plan in december 1994 , which covered fiscal years 1996 through 2001 . the plan laid out vba's mission , strategic vision , and goals . for example , the vocational rehabilitation and counseling ( vr ) goal was to enable veterans with service - connected disabilities to become employable and to obtain and maintain suitable employment . in addition , a program goal was to treat beneficiaries in a courteous , responsive , and timely manner . however , as va's inspector general noted , vba's plan did not include specific program objectives and performance measures that could be used to measure vba's progress in achieving its goals . in fiscal year 1995 , vba established a new results act strategic planning process that included business process reengineering ( bpr ) . vba began developing five “business - line” plans that corresponded with its major program areas: compensation and pension , educational assistance , loan guaranty , vocational rehabilitation and counseling , and insurance . each business - line plan supplemented the overall vba strategic plan — which vba refers to as its business plan — by specifying program goals that are tied to vba's overall goals . also , each business - line plan identified performance measures that vba intended to use to track its progress in meeting each plan's goals . in vba's fiscal year 1998 budget submission , vba set forth its business goals and measures , most of which were focused on the process of providing benefits and services , such as timeliness and accuracy in processing benefit claims . as with last year's business plan , vba's fiscal year 1999 business plan continues to focus primarily on process - oriented goals and performance measures . what are our goals and how will we achieve them ? vba is , however , developing more results - oriented goals and measures for its five benefit programs . vba officials consider this initial effort , which it hopes to complete by this summer , to be an interim step ; final results - oriented goals and measures will be developed following program evaluations and other analyses , which vba plans to conduct over the next 3 to 5 years . to help achieve its program goals , vba has efforts under way to coordinate with other agencies that support veterans' benefit programs ; these efforts will need to be sustained to ensure quality service to veterans . vba also faces significant challenges in setting clear strategies for achieving the goals it has established and in measuring program performance . for example , vba considers its bpr efforts to be essential to the success of key performance goals , such as reducing the number of days it takes vba to process a veteran's disability compensation claim .