reasonable . this is particularly pertinent to rehabilitation therapy , services that account for 30 percent of snf costs . specifically , medicare places no absolute dollar limits on reimbursements for occupational or speech therapy , and charges for therapy services are not linked through billing codes to the amount of time spent with patients or the treatment provided . in other words , medicare has no easy way to limit the amount it will pay for occupational or speech therapy or to determine whether a charge is for 15 , 30 , or 60 minutes of treatment . absent any benchmarks , and with limited resources available for auditing , it is largely infeasible for medicare contractors to judge whether therapy providers have overstated their costs . last year we reported that medicare had been charged as much as $600 for an hour of therapy services . hcfa has acknowledged the problem and recently estimated that implementing salary equivalency guidelines for speech and occupational therapy , in conjunction with adjusting other salary guidelines , could save $1.4 billion over the next 6 years . to date , however , the salary guidelines have not been established . although occupational therapists in snfs earn on average $23 per hour , we recently found in one contractor's files that more than 25 percent of submitted charges for one unit ( undefined ) of occupational therapy exceeded $195 , and some approached $1,500 per unit . under medicare rules for reimbursing snfs , the problem of overpaying for rehabilitation therapy services becomes compounded . that is , medicare pays snfs a portion of their overhead expenses , based on the percentage of their total medicare - related business . the higher the medicare - related payments to rehabilitation agencies ( or other outside contractors ) , the more medicare business an snf can claim , and the higher the percentage of its overhead that can be charged to the program . further , as noted by the prospective payment assessment commission ( propac ) , snfs may cite high use of ancillary services , such as therapy , to justify an exemption from routine service cost limits , thereby increasing their payments for routine ( bed , board , nursing ) services . allowing payment problems to continue unchecked results in billions of dollars of unnecessary spending . hcfa has been aware of the rehabilitation therapy overcharging problem since 1990 . in 1993 hcfa began studies to develop averages for therapists' salaries . its most recent analysis is expected to be completed some time this summer . given the usual time involved in the federal notification and publication requirements for changing medicare prices , salary equivalency guidelines — which are key to medicare's determination of reasonable costs — are unlikely to be implemented before the middle of 1997 at the earliest . this situation is consistent with hcfa's past experience of taking years to adjust excessively high payment rates . it took almost 3 years to lower the price of an item it paid up to four times more for than consumers paid at the local drug store .