the enrollment count . the authority decided , however , that the inadequacies that led to the restructuring of the public school system would make auditing the school year 1996-97 count counterproductive . in short , the reform act's audit requirement was not met . because the enrollment count will become the basis for funding dcps and is even now an important factor in developing dcps' budget and allocating its resources , we recommended in our report that the congress consider directing dcps to report separately in its annual reporting of the enrollment count those students fully funded from other sources , such as head start participants and tuition - paying nonresidents ; above and below the mandatory age for compulsory public education , such as those in prekindergarten or those aged 20 and above ; and for whom district residency cannot be confirmed . we also recommended that the dcps chief executive officer / superintendent do the following: clarify , document , and enforce the responsibilities and sanctions for employees involved in the enrollment count process . clarity , document , and enforce the residency verification requirements for students and their parents . institute internal controls in the student information database , including database management practices and automatic procedures and edits to control database errors . comply with the reporting requirement of the district of columbia school reform act of 1995 . we further recommended that the district of columbia financial responsibility and management assistance authority comply with the auditing requirements of the district of columbia school reform act of 1995. checks and balances , no aggressive central monitoring , and few routine reports were in place . in addition , he said that virtually no administrative sanctions were applied , indicating that the submitted reports were hardly reviewed . the authority shared dcps' view that many findings and recommendations in our report will help to correct what it characterized as a flawed student enrollment count process . its comments did , however , express concerns about certain aspects of our report . the authority was concerned that we did not discuss the effects of the authority's overhaul of dcps in november 1996 . it also commented that our report did not note that the flawed student count was one of the issues prompting the authority to change the governance structure and management of dcps . in the report , we explained that we did not review the authority's overhaul of dcps or the events and concerns leading to the overhaul . dcps has made some changes in response to our recommendations . for example , it dropped the enrollment card . dcps has proposed modifications to the board of education's rules governing residency to strengthen these rules . the proposed modifications would strengthen the residency rules in several ways by stating that at least three proofs of residency “must” be submitted , rather than “may be” submitted , as current rules state ; specifying and limiting documents acceptable as proofs ; eliminating membership in a church or other local organization operating in the district of columbia as an acceptable proof ; and strengthening penalties for students who do not comply . dcps staff told us that these proposed changes are now under consideration by the authority .