behavior . some caseworkers in los angeles and cook counties said that shorter time frames for holding a permanency planning hearing may be appropriate in terms of the foster child's need for a permanent living arrangement . however , they also said that the likelihood of reunifying these children with their parents when permanency decisions must be made earlier may be significantly reduced when substance abuse is involved . in their view , the prospects of reunifying these families may be even worse if the level of services currently provided to them is not enhanced . in our ongoing work , we have found that states and localities are responding to the need for timely permanency for foster children through programmatic initiatives and changes to permanency laws . most of these initiatives and changes to permanency laws are very new , so there is little experience to draw upon to determine whether they will help achieve timely exits from foster care for cases involving parental substance abuse . furthermore , some of these initiatives and changes are controversial and reflect the challenge of balancing the rights of parents with what is in the best interest of the child , within the context of a severely strained child welfare system . for example , california and illinois have enacted statutory changes that specifically address permanency for foster care cases involving parental substance abuse . the illinois legislature recently enacted new grounds for terminating parental rights . under this statute , a mother who has had two or more infants who were prenatally exposed to drugs or alcohol can be declared an unfit parent if she had been given the opportunity to participate in treatment when the first child was prenatally exposed . california has enacted new statutory grounds for terminating family reunification services if the parent has had a history of “extensive , abusive , and chronic” use of drugs or alcohol and has resisted treatment during the 3-year period before the child entered foster care or has failed or refused to comply with a program of drug or alcohol treatment described in the case plan on at least two prior occasions , even though the programs were available and accessible . while such laws may help judges make permanency decisions when the prospects for a parent's recovery from drug abuse seem particularly poor , these changes are not without controversy . some caseworkers and dependency court attorneys in los angeles and cook counties expressed concerns that a judge may closely adhere to the exact language in the statutes without considering the individual situation , and may disregard the extent to which progress has been made toward recovery during the current foster care episode . states and localities are undertaking programmatic initiatives that may also help to reconcile the goals of family reunification and timely exits from foster care , which may conflict , particularly when parental substance abuse is involved . new permanency options are being explored as are new ways to prevent children from entering foster care in the first place . we previously reported on tennessee's concurrent planning program that allows caseworkers to work toward reunifying families , while at the same time developing an alternate permanency plan for the child if family reunification efforts do not succeed .