the problem . despite 3 decades of federal efforts , the number of areas hhs has classified as underserved using these systems has not decreased . these questions would be addressed in annual performance plans that define each year's goals , link these goals to agency programs , and contain indicators for measuring progress in achieving these goals . using information on how well programs are working to improve access in communities , program managers can decide whether federal intervention has been successful and can be discontinued , or if other strategies for addressing access barriers that still exist in communities would provide a more effective solution . the results act provides an opportunity for hhs to make sure its access programs are on track and to identify how efforts under each program will fit within the broader access goals . the results act requires that agencies complete multi - year strategic plans by september 30 , 1997 , that describe the agency's overall mission , long - term goals , and strategies for achieving these goals . once these strategic plans are in place , the results act requires that for each fiscal year , beginning fiscal year 1999 , agencies prepare annual performance plans that expand on the strategic plans by establishing specific performance goals and measures for program activities set forth in the agencies' budgets . these goals are to be stated in a way that identifies the results — or outcomes — that are expected , and agencies are to measure these outcomes in evaluating program success . establishing performance goals and measures such as the following could go far to improve accountability in hhs' primary access programs . the rural health clinic program currently tracks the number of clinics established , while the medicare incentive payment program tracks the number of physicians receiving bonuses and dollars spent . to focus on access outcomes , hhs will need to track how these programs have improved access to care for medicare and medicaid populations or other underserved populations . success of the national health service corps and health center programs has been based on the number of providers placed or how many people they served . to focus on access outcomes , hhs will need to gather the information necessary to report the number of people who received care from national health service corps providers or at the health centers who were otherwise unable to access primary care services available in the community . survey , to measure progress toward this goal by counting the number of people across the nation who do and do not have a usual source of primary care . for those people without a usual source of primary care , the survey categorizes the reasons for this problem that individual programs may need to address , such as people's inability to pay for services , their perception that they do not need a physician , or the lack of provider availability . although hhs officials have started to look at how individual programs fit under these national goals , they have not yet established links between the programs and national goals and measures . such links are important so resources can be clearly focused and directed to achieve the national goals .