nationwide . finally , the congress needs the ability to look across all programs designed to help a given target group to assess how the programs are working together and whether the overall federal effort is accomplishing a mission such as preventing substance abuse among youths . in addition , for specific oversight purposes , congressional decisionmakers sometimes want specific kinds of information . for example , this task force has indicated that two types of information would be particularly useful to its mission: knowing which federal education programs target which groups and knowing what characterizes successful programs . some information is available about prek - 12 programs that do not appear to be achieving the desired results and others that appear to be successful . secretary riley , for example , has testified that the department will be doing more to disseminate the latest information on what works in education . our clearest evidence about a lack of positive effect from federal expenditures comes from one of the largest programs: title i . title i of the elementary and secondary education act is the largest federal elementary and secondary education grant program . it has received much attention recently because of an education department report showing that , overall , title i programs do not ultimately reduce the effect of poverty on a student's achievement . for example , children in high - poverty schools began school academically behind their peers in low - poverty schools and could not close this gap as they progressed through school . in addition , when assessed according to high academic standards , most title i students failed to exhibit the reading and mathematics skills expected for their respective grade levels . obtaining and analyzing information to manage and evaluate programs requires significant resources . the study concluded that students in high - poverty schools were the least able to demonstrate the expected levels of academic proficiency . strategies in several areas: school violence , substance abuse prevention,and school - to - work transition . in 1995 , we also prepared an overview of successful and unsuccessful practices in schools and workplaces . our reviews identified several important program characteristics: strong program leadership , linkages between the program and the community , and a clear and comprehensive approach . the department of education also has contracts for evaluating what works . for example , the prospects study — in addition to providing the data on the overall limited effect of title i — analyzed the five high - performing , high - poverty schools in its sample of 400 schools . although the number of schools is too small for conclusive generalizations , the study described the characteristics of these schools as “food for thought” for future research on successful programs . these schools had an experienced principal ; low teacher and pupil turnover ; an emphasis on schoolwide efforts that seek to raise the achievement of every student ; a greater use of tracking by student ability ; a balanced emphasis on remedial and higher order thinking in classroom involvement ; and higher parent support and expectations than low - performing , high - poverty schools . significant information gaps exist , however , about both programs and their outcomes .