subcommittee . va's new management and veterans integrated service network ( visn ) structure clearly values efficiency and customer service . in addition , legislation was enacted ( 1 ) expanding eligibility for va health care ( p.l . 104-262 ) , ( 2 ) making it easier for va to contract for and sell services to the private sector ( p.l . should va remain primarily a direct provider of veterans' health care or become a virtual health care system in which it contracts with private sector providers rather than operating its own facilities ? to what extent should the va system address the unmet needs of uninsured veterans and those with service - connected disabilities ? decisions regarding these and other questions will have far - reaching effects on veterans , taxpayers , veterans facilities and the va employees working in them , and private providers . because of the historic inefficiency of the va system , the changes currently taking place provide many opportunities for the va health care system to contribute toward deficit reduction while still improving services to current users . limiting the system to current users , however , could facilitate declines in hospital use and lead ultimately to closure of va hospitals . exceedingly difficult . va will have to attract an ever - increasing proportion of the veteran population if it is to keep its acute care hospitals open . va's fiscal year 1998 budget submission outlines its strategy for preserving its hospitals: it wants to increase its users by 20 percent in order to make more efficient use of existing va facilities . the new users va is targeting generally have other health care options available to them . the cost of maintaining va's direct delivery infrastructure limits va's ability to ensure similarly situated veterans equal access to va health care . va's interest in providing services to veterans in the discretionary care category at va hospitals and outpatient clinics is likely to limit its ability to provide services to low - income and service - connected veterans through the use of contract care . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be happy to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittee might have . for more information on this testimony , call jim linz , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7110 . greg whitney also contributed to this statement . va health care: improving veterans' access poses financial and mission - related challenges ( gao / hehs - 97-7 , oct. 25 , 1996 ) . va health care: opportunities for service delivery efficiencies within existing resources ( gao / hehs - 96-121 , july 25 , 1996 ) . va health care: challenges for the future ( gao / t - hehs - 96-172 , june 27 , 1996 ) . veterans' health care: facilities' resource allocations could be more equitable ( gao / hehs - 96-48 , feb. 7 , 1996 ) . vocational rehabilitation: va continues to place few disabled veterans in jobs ( gao / hehs - 96-155 , sept. 3 , 1996 ) . veterans' benefits: effective interaction needed within va to address appeals backlog ( gao / hehs - 95-190 , sept. 27 , 1995 ) .