i can call him at any time . the pastor of my church has also counseled me . at the college i attended , a director of the disabled talks to my professors and tells them about my condition so that they can take this into account when assigning work and evaluating my performance . ada has helped because i believe that they would not have hired me because of my problems . psychotherapy and group therapy been helpful . also , medication has been helpful . my psychotherapist has gone out of his way to help me . equipment , and ada provisions were useful . in general , similar proportions of respondents with physical impairments and those with psychiatric impairments cited these factors as helpful to being employed . however , people with physical impairments found coworkers and the trial work period more helpful than did those with psychiatric impairments . our study results are generally consistent with published research regarding factors associated with employment for people with disabilities . for instance , many of the respondents we talked to reported a high motivation to work , were educated beyond high school , or were in their thirties or forties . for many , work seemed to be economically advantageous because they were earning at least moderate - level wages and receiving very few program benefits — such as housing assistance and food stamps — that are contingent upon low earnings . consistent with other research , medical interventions , technology , accommodations , and social support were found to facilitate return to work . unlike other studies , transportation appears to be neither a strong facilitator for nor an impediment to employment . however , this may be due to the fact that our respondents were selected from major metropolitan areas . based on our discussions with beneficiaries , di program incentives for reducing risks associated with attempting work appear to have played a limited role in beneficiaries' efforts to become employed . although the trial work period was considered helpful by 31 respondents , several indicated it had shortcomings . for instance , they indicated the amount signifying a “successful” month of earnings ( $200 ) was too low , an all - or - nothing cutoff of benefits after 9 months was too abrupt , and having only one trial period did not recognize the cyclical nature of some disabilities . respondents' mixed views of the design of the trial work period suggest that while they value a transitional period between receiving full cash benefits and losing some benefits because of work , they might be more satisfied with a different design . finally , over one - fifth were unaware of the trial work period and therefore may have unknowingly been at risk of losing cash benefits . threshold for determining continued eligibility . using the deduction could make it easier for a beneficiary to continue working while on the rolls without losing benefits . moreover , 42 respondents were unaware of the option to purchase medicare upon leaving the rolls .