the encore ! program in port charlotte , florida , serves single parents , displaced homemakers , and single pregnant women . encore ! 's 6-week workshop and year - round support prepare participants for skill training . it is primarily funded by a federal grant under the perkins act and is strongly linked with the charlotte vocational technical center ( vo - tech ) . the center for employment training ( cet ) in reno , nevada , focuses on three specific service - related occupations and serves mainly hispanic farmworkers . participants may receive subsidized training from sources such as pell grants , jtpa state funds , and the jtpa farmworker program , as well as grants from the city of reno . focus: hope , in detroit , michigan , also serves inner - city minorities but emphasizes development of manufacturing - related skills . its primary funding source in 1994 was a state economic development grant . strive ( support and training results in valuable employment ) , in new york city's east harlem , primarily serves inner - city minorities and focuses on developing in clients a proper work attitude needed for successful employment rather than on providing occupational skills training . strive is privately funded through a grant from the clark foundation , which requires a two - for - one dollar match from other sources , such as local employers . projects also differ in other ways , such as the way project staff interact with clients — customizing their approach to what they believe to be the needs of their participants . for example , strive's approach is strict , confrontational , and “no - nonsense” with the east harlem men and women in their program . in contrast , encore ! takes a more nurturing approach , attempting to build the self - esteem of the women , many of them victims of mental or physical abuse , who participate in the program in rural florida . one important feature of these projects' common strategy is ensuring that clients are committed to participating in training and getting a job . each project tries to secure client commitment before enrollment and continues to encourage that commitment throughout training . project staff at several sites believed that the voluntary nature of their projects is an important factor in fostering strong client commitment . just walking through the door , however , does not mean that a client is committed to the program . further measures to encourage , develop , and require this commitment are essential . all the projects use some of these measures . some of the things that projects do to ensure commitment are ( 1 ) making sure clients know what to expect , so they are making an informed choice when they enter ; ( 2 ) creating opportunities for clients to screen themselves out if they are not fully committed ; and ( 3 ) requiring clients to actively demonstrate the seriousness of their commitment . to give clients detailed information about project expectations , projects use orientation sessions , assessment workshops , and one - on - one interviews with project staff .