this concludes my testimony . i would be happy to answer any questions . for more information on this testimony , please call jane ross , director , at ( 202 ) 512-7215 . other major contributors include assistant directors chris crissman and cindy fagnoni and evaluators ken stockbridge and ann lee . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . ssa has overall responsibility for the ssi program . to be eligible for ssi , individuals must be 65 years old , blind , or disabled . to be considered disabled , adults must be unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity because of a physical or mental impairment expected to result in death or last at least 12 months . individuals cannot have income greater than the maximum benefit level , which is about $5,600 per year in 1996 , or own resources worth more than $2,000 , subject to certain exclusions , such as a home . individuals must also be u.s. citizens or immigrants lawfully admitted for permanent residence or noncitizens “permanently residing under color of law” ( prucol ) . in 1996 , the maximum federal ssi benefit is $470 per month for an individual and $705 for a couple with both spouses eligible ; these benefit rates are adjusted annually for cost - of - living increases . this monthly benefit is reduced on the basis of various factors: recipients' incomes ; living arrangements , such as living with family ; and other sources of support , including social security benefits . as a result of these adjustments , the average monthly federal benefit in 1995 was $334 . the congress , ssa , and several states have begun efforts to prevent or detect fraudulent ssi claims involving translators . federal legislation has made ssi fraud a felony and has given ssa access to information from the immigration and naturalization service and the centers for disease control and prevention . ssa established a task force in april 1993 on translators that has suggested initiatives such as developing and managing a translator database . also as a result of this task force , ssa's san francisco regional office is periodically reviewing the disability status of possibly fraudulent cases involving translators . in addition to these efforts , we have recommended that ssa implement a more comprehensive , programwide strategy for keeping ineligible applicants from ever being accepted on the ssi rolls . ssa could require that its own bilingual staff or contractors conduct interviews with non - english - speaking applicants and explore the use of videoconferencing technology to maximize the use of ssa bilingual staff .