women . the authors estimated that , after 35 years of participation in the plan at historical yields and identical contributions , the difference in investment behavior between men and women can lead to men having a pension portfolio that is 16 percent larger . social security provisions and pension plan provisions differ in several ways ( see app . i for a summary ) . under social security , the basic benefit a worker receives who retires at the normal retirement age ( nra ) is based on the 35 years with the highest covered earnings . the formula is progressive in that it guarantees that higher - income workers receive higher benefits , while the benefits of lower - income workers are a higher percentage of their preretirement earnings . as under social security , divorced spouses can also receive part of the retired worker's pension benefit if a qualified domestic relations order is in place . however , the retired worker's pension benefit is reduced in order to pay the former spouse . the three alternative proposals of the social security advisory council would make changes of varying degrees to the structure of social security . the key features of the proposals are summarized in appendix ii . the maintain benefits ( mb ) plan would make only minor changes to the structure of current social security benefits . the major change that would affect women's benefits is the extension of the computation period for benefits from 35 years to 38 years of covered earnings . currently , earnings are averaged over the 35 years with the highest earnings to compute a worker's social security benefits . if the worker has worked less than 35 years , then some of the years of earnings used in the calculation are equal to zero . extending the computation period for the lifetime average earnings to 38 years would have a greater impact on women than on men . although women's labor force participation is increasing , the social security administration forecasts that fewer than 30 percent of the women retiring in 2020 will have 38 years of covered earnings , compared with almost 60 percent of men . the individual accounts ( ia ) plan would keep many features of the current social security system but add an individual account modeled after the 401 ( k ) pension plan . behavior and longevity . expected changes in women's labor force participation rates and increasing earnings will reduce but probably not eliminate these differences . over their lifetimes , men and women differ in many ways that have consequences for how much they will receive from social security and pensions . women make up about 60 percent of the elderly population and less than half of the social security beneficiaries who are receiving retired worker benefits , but they account for 99 percent of those beneficiaries who receive spouse or survivor benefits . a little less than half of working women between the ages of 18 and 64 are covered by a pension plan , while slightly over half of working men are covered .