mr . chairmen , that concludes my prepared statement . at this time , i will be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittees may have . for information on this testimony , please call charles a. jeszeck , assistant director , at ( 202 ) 512-7036 ; or linda w. stokes , evaluator - in - charge , at ( 202 ) 512-7040 . to what extent is labor addressing any identified weaknesses in the process ? could permit the use of fraudulent or inaccurate data in the setting of prevailing wage rates . first , verification of wage and fringe benefits data is largely limited to telephone contacts . second , limited computer capabilities hinder labor's ability to detect erroneous data . third , a lack of awareness about the appeals process may limit its effectiveness . if these weaknesses allow erroneous data to be used , the result may be in either of two directions: if the wage rate is set too low , construction workers may be paid less than the amount to which they are entitled ; if the rate is set too high , the government may pay excessive construction costs . labor has developed some short - and long - term initiatives to improve the prevailing wage determination process . in addition , it has agreed to implement recommendations we made in our report , which will increase confidence that the wage rates are based on accurate data . the davis - bacon act requires workers on federal construction projects valued in excess of $2,000 to be paid , at a minimum , wages and fringe benefits that the secretary of labor determines to be prevailing for corresponding classes of workers in the locality where the contract is to be performed . the act covers every contract to which the united states or the district of columbia is a party for construction , alteration , or repair of public buildings or public works . labor's wage and hour division ( whd ) , within labor's employment standards administration ( esa ) , has responsibility for administering the davis - bacon act . approximately 50 staff in the washington , d.c. , headquarters and in six regional offices are involved in the wage determination process . two other labor offices are sometimes involved in the administration of davis - bacon: labor's administrative review board hears appeals of prevailing wage determinations , and the office of the solicitor provides legal advice and assistance to labor personnel relative to the act and represents whd in davis - bacon wage determination cases before the administrative review board . also improved labor's ability to administer the wage determination process . despite these changes , however , we reported in 1994 that data verification problems still existed . in setting prevailing wages , labor's task is to determine and issue prevailing wage rates in a wide range of job classifications in each of four types of construction ( building , residential , heavy , and highway ) in more than 3,000 counties or groups of counties . it also needs to update these wage determinations frequently enough that they continue to represent the prevailing wages .