hcfa has concurred with our recommendation . it has indicated that when the ongoing research on medical records reviews and modeling are complete and it receives the studies , it will review the results to determine if it can support a better performance standard . hcfa's continuous monitoring of the developments in approaches to identifying potential organ donors is important . because the demand for organs surpasses the supply , opos are required by law to conduct and participate in systematic efforts to acquire all usable organs from potential donors . as we have reported , unless hcfa measures opo performance according to the number of potential donors , the agency cannot determine opos' effectiveness in acquiring organs . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . opos must meet service area and other requirements . as of january 1 , 1996 , each opo had to meet at least one of the following service area requirements: 1 . it must include an entire state or official u.s. territory . it must either procure organs from an average of at least 24 donors per calendar year in the 2 years before the year of redesignation , or it must request and receive an exception to this requirement . if it operates exclusively in a noncontiguous u.s. state , territory , or commonwealth , the opo must procure organs at the rate of 50 percent of the national average of all opos for both kidneys procured and transplanted per million population . if it is a new entity , the opo must demonstrate that it can procure organs from at least 50 potential donors per calendar year . in addition , an opo must be a nonprofit entity and meet other requirements for the composition of its board , its accounting , its staff , and its procedures . to ensure the fair distribution and safety of organs , opos must have a system to equitably allocate organs to transplant patients . in addition , opos must arrange for appropriate tissue typing of organs and ensure that donor screening and testing for infectious diseases , including the human immunodeficiency virus , are performed .