approach to program management . however , several of ssa's initiatives are now in the early planning or implementation stages , or require the passage of new legislation before they can move forward . in other areas , ssa's actions have been insufficient . thus , it is important that ssa sustain and expand its efforts to address problem areas and strike a balance between meeting the needs of ssi recipients and fiscal accountability for its programs . ssi provides cash benefits to low - income aged , blind , or disabled people . those who are applying for benefits on the basis of age must be at least 65 years old and financially eligible for benefits ; those who are applying for disability benefits must qualify on the basis of financial and medical criteria . to qualify for benefits financially in fiscal year 1998 , individuals could not have income greater than the maximum monthly ssi benefit of $494 ( $741 for a couple ) or have resources that exceeded $2,000 ( $3,000 for a couple ) . to be qualified as disabled , applicants must be unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity because of an impairment expected to result in death or last at least 12 months . the process ssa uses to determine an applicant's financial eligibility for ssi benefits involves an initial determination when someone first applies and periodic reviews to determine whether the recipient remains eligible . ssi recipients are required to report significant events that may affect their financial eligibility for benefits , including changes in income , resources , marital status , or living arrangements — such as incarceration or moving into a nursing home . to verify that the information provided by a recipient is accurate , ssa generally relies on matching data from other federal and state agencies , including internal revenue service 1099 information , department of veterans affairs benefits data , and state - maintained earnings and unemployment data . when staff find discrepancies between income and assets claimed by a recipient and the data from other agencies , they send notices to ssa field offices to investigate further . to determine a person's medical qualifications for ssi as a disabled person , ssa must determine the individual's capacity to work as well as his or her financial eligibility . to determine whether an applicant's impairment qualifies him or her for benefits , ssa uses state disability determination services ( dds ) to make the initial assessment . once a recipient begins receiving benefits , ssa is required to periodically conduct continuing disability reviews ( cdr ) to determine whether a recipient's disabling condition has improved . to a significant extent , an agency's culture emanates from and is shaped by top management officials who are charged with establishing the priorities and performance goals that drive day - to - day program operations . thus , over time , what is regularly emphasized , measured , and rewarded by agency management becomes ingrained in the immediate workload priorities of line managers and field staff . if agency priorities are not adequately balanced , serious program vulnerabilities may arise . 98-369 ) , ssa was limited to offsetting a maximum of 10 percent of a recipient's total monthly income .