funding . in texas , for example , all charter schools received an equal amount of fiscal year 1996 grant funds ( $26,785 ) , even though enrollment at these schools varied greatly — from 90 students in one school to 180 students in another . the charter schools in our survey that received start - up grants used these funds most often to help pay for school equipment and curriculum materials , technology , and facilities renovation or leasing . several charter schools used these funds for multiple purposes . ( see table 2. ) operators of charter schools we surveyed that did not receive grant funds told us that their schools were either ( 1 ) ineligible for grants under their state guidelines , ( 2 ) unsuccessful in competing for a grant , or ( 3 ) did not apply for a grant . schools ineligible for funds included schools that were no longer considered start - up operations or had previously received funds and did not qualify under state guidelines . some charter school operators told us that although they applied for start - up grants , their applications were scored lower than other schools' and , as a result , did not receive awards . finally , a few charter school operators said that they did not apply for start - up grants because they were uninterested , did not need funds , or did not know that funds were available . education , these funds are expected to provide , on average , about $639 per student for services provided to the nearly 6 million eligible students aged 3 through 21 , plus an additional $650 per student to provide services for approximately 575,800 eligible preschool children aged 3 through 5 . despite concerns about issues related to the funding of charter schools raised during the 1997 congressional hearings , most charter school operators we surveyed who had applied for title i and idea funds received them . overall , about two - fifths of the charter schools we surveyed received title i funds for the 1996-97 school year . survey results indicated that slightly more than one - third of charter schools operating under the independent model and almost one - half of the schools operating under the dependent model received title i funds . table 3 shows the number of charter schools surveyed that received title i funds by funding model . about two - fifths of the charter schools we surveyed did not apply for title i funds . charter school officials who did not apply cited reasons such as ( 1 ) a lack of time to do so , ( 2 ) their school was ineligible for funds and therefore they did not apply , or ( 3 ) they found that applying for these funds would cost more than the funding would provide . of those schools that applied for title i funds , two - thirds , or 16 of 25 , reported receiving funds . title i funding for these schools ranged from $96 to $941 per poverty student ; the average amount was $466 per poverty student and the median amount was $413 .