these methods can be characterized as passive or active . passive surveillance relies on laboratory and hospital staff , physicians , and other relevant sources to take the initiative to provide data to the health department , where officials analyze and interpret the information as it comes in . under active surveillance , public health officials contact people directly to gather data . for example , health department staff could call clinical laboratories each week to ask if any samples of s. pneumoniae tested positive for resistance to penicillin . active surveillance produces more complete information than passive surveillance , but it takes more time and costs more . infectious diseases surveillance in the united states depends largely on passive methods of collecting disease reports and laboratory test results . consequently , the surveillance network relies on the participation of health care providers , private laboratories , and state and local health departments across the nation . even when states require reporting of specific diseases , experts acknowledge that the completeness of reporting varies by disease and type of provider . surveillance usually begins when a person with a reportable disease seeks care and the physician — in an effort to determine the cause of the illness — runs a laboratory test , which could be performed in the physician's office , a hospital , an independent clinical laboratory , or a public health laboratory . reports of infectious diseases generated by such tests are often sent first to local health departments , where staff check the reports for completeness , contact health care professionals to obtain missing information or clarify unclear responses , and forward the reports to state health agencies . at the state level , state epidemiologists analyze data collected through the disease reporting network , decide when and how to supplement passive reporting with active surveillance methods , conduct outbreak and other disease investigations , and design and evaluate disease prevention and control efforts . they also transmit state data to cdc , providing routine reporting on selected diseases . many state epidemiologists and laboratory directors provide the medical community with information obtained through surveillance , such as rates of disease incidence or prevailing patterns of antimicrobial resistance . federal participation in the infectious diseases surveillance network focuses on cdc activities — particularly those of the national center for infectious diseases ( ncid ) , which operates cdc's infectious diseases laboratories . cdc analyzes the data furnished by states to ( 1 ) monitor national health trends , ( 2 ) formulate and implement prevention strategies , and ( 3 ) evaluate state and federal disease prevention efforts . cdc routinely provides public health officials , medical personnel , and others information on disease trends and analyses of outbreaks . cdc also offers an array of scientific and financial support for state infectious diseases surveillance , prevention , and control programs . public health and private laboratories are a vital part of the surveillance network because only laboratory test results can definitively identify pathogens . in addition , test results are often an essential complement to a physician's clinical impressions . according to public health officials , the nation's 158,000 laboratories are consistent sources of passively reported information for infectious diseases surveillance .