employment . neither do they allay the fear of losing medical coverage and other federal and state assistance that beneficiaries who return to work may face . studies have identified the risk of losing medical coverage as a major barrier to beneficiaries' returning to work . beneficiaries who work and continue to earn countable income above certain amounts will eventually lose medical coverage even though they have not necessarily improved medically or obtained affordable coverage elsewhere . finally , vr has played a limited role in the di and ssi programs , in part because of restrictive state vr policies and limits on alternatives to providers in the state vr system . beneficiaries are generally uninformed about the availability of vr services and are given little encouragement to seek them . moreover , the effectiveness of state vr services in securing long - term financial gains has been mixed at best . in contrast to ssa's disability programs , which have changed little over the years , some firms in the private sector are developing new approaches to manage the size and composition of their caseloads . known as disability management , these approaches embody a proactive strategy for controlling disability costs by helping employees with disabilities return to work as soon as possible . disability managers in the u.s. private sector spend money on return - to - work efforts because they believe such efforts are sound investments that reduce disability - related costs . studies have estimated that the full cost of disability to employers ranges from about 6 to 12 percent of payroll . such costs include insurance premiums , cash benefits , rehabilitation benefits , and medical benefits paid through workers' compensation and employer - sponsored disability insurance programs . companies may also incur additional expenses for training and using temporary workers and retraining employees with disabilities when they return to work . when businesses help workers with disabilities return to the workplace , they are able to reduce some of these costs . vocational rehabilitation program: client characteristics , services received , and employment outcomes ( gao / t - pemd - 92-3 , nov. 12 , 1991 ) . social security: little success achieved in rehabilitating disabled beneficiaries ( gao / hrd - 88-11 , dec. 7 , 1987 ) . social security: state vocational rehabilitation agencies' reimbursement for the disabled ( gao / hrd - 87-36br , feb. 3 , 1987 ) . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 .