doing so , however , can be costly . for example , a recent study has estimated that placing one networked computer laboratory in each school nationwide would cost $11 billion up front and $4 billion in annual operating costs . other districts like these may need to continue depending mainly on special local bonds and levies , state assistance , and federal grants for initially buying and replacing equipment and on their operating budgets for other technology needs . lack of staff for seeking and applying for funding and the difficulty of funding technology support staff were major concerns of officials in all the districts we studied . too few staff to maintain equipment and support technology users in the schools could lead to extensive computer downtime , teacher frustration , and , ultimately , to reduced use of a significant technology investment . the technology program in each of the five districts we visited had not yet secured a clearly defined and relatively stable funding source , such as a line item in the operating budget or a part of the state's education funding formula . as a result , district officials for the foreseeable future will continue trying to piece together funding from various sources to maintain their technology programs and keep them viable . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . we selected these districts to provide insight into what districts may be experiencing as they try to fund their technology programs . we identified these districts by asking state education officials to suggest candidates that have had interesting experiences . in addition , we asked the officials to exclude districts that had benefited from extraordinary assistance such as those receiving the major portion of their funds from a company or individual . the districts we studied are davidson county schools , a rural district in north carolina ; gahanna - jefferson public schools , a suburban district northeast of columbus , ohio ; manchester school district , the largest district in new hampshire ; roswell independent school district , which serves a city of 50,000 in southeast new mexico ; and seattle public schools , a large and ethnically diverse district in the state of washington . in summary , the five districts we studied used a variety of ways to fund their technology programs . funding sources included money from district operating budgets , special technology levies and bonds , state and federal funds , and private and other contributions . districts typically had one primary source supplemented with a combination of several others . for example , two districts used special levies or bonds for over half of their technology funding as well as other sources such as their operating budgets and federal funds . officials we spoke with cited a number of barriers they faced in obtaining the needed funds for their technology programs . four types of barriers seemed to be common to several districts . first , technology was just one of a number of competing needs and priorities such as upkeep of school buildings . second , local community resistance to higher taxes limited districts' ability to raise more revenue .