sores all over his body . smelled like feces . and ( was ) unable to walk or take care of himself . i personally feel he was not being properly cared for.” the state eventually determined that the nursing home had harmed the resident , but only after categorizing this complaint as not needing an investigation until the next on - site inspection which was more than 4 months after receipt of the complaint . further , we found that states often did not conduct investigations within the time frames they assigned complaints , even though some states frequently placed complaints in priority categories that would increase the time available to investigate them . some of these complaints , despite alleging serious risk to resident health and safety , remained uninvestigated for several months after the deadline for investigation . for example , maryland met its time frames for only 21 percent of complaints assigned to the 10-workday category and 69 percent of complaints assigned to the 45-workday category . michigan met its time frames in about one - fourth of cases . washington , which assigned most complaints to the category requiring a visit within 10 workdays , met its time frames in slightly more than half ( 55 percent ) of all complaints . not fed for nearly 2 days and was hospitalized with dehydration , pressure sores , and an infection ; a resident whose condition deteriorated , including losing 10 percent of her body weight in 2 months , and who suffered from poor hygiene ; and a resident who was improperly transferred and suffered two fractured legs . in detroit , a nursing home had four pending complaints that had not been investigated for between 2 and 8 months and that alleged neglect and abuse of residents . these allegations included a resident who died after the home allegedly failed to send her to the hospital promptly and who the hospital's physician determined was dehydrated and malnourished ; a resident with an uncared - for cut that became infected and resulted in heel amputation ; an unattended resident who was found outside the home with injuries from a fall ; and a resident who was verbally abused by a staff member . failure by states to investigate complaints promptly can delay the identification of serious problems in nursing homes and postpone needed corrective actions . as a result of delayed investigations , situations in which residents are harmed are permitted to continue for extended periods . for example , we found a complaint in michigan alleging inadequate care for pressure sores and fractures due to falls that was not investigated for over 7 months . when the state did investigate , it found that the nursing home had a pattern of deficiencies of inadequate care that actually harmed residents . on the basis of of our analysis of nationwide survey data , we found that more than one in four nursing homes had serious and often repeated deficiencies that resulted in immediate jeopardy or actual harm to residents . while hcfa's initiation of actions typically brought homes into at least temporary compliance , they were often ineffective in ensuring that homes maintained compliance over time with federal standards .