eligible . in addition , ssa's spending to date and estimates of future processing costs suggest that it will be able to complete its current 7-year plan with the funds the congress has authorized , although its revised plan will not be available until november 1997 . key issues , however , such as deciding which beneficiaries should undergo a full medical review — a lengthy and costly process — are still unresolved but will determine how quickly and at what cost ssa can become current on its cdr workload . ssa's disability programs provide cash benefits to people with long - term disabilities . the di program provides monthly cash benefits and medicare eligibility to severely disabled workers ; ssi is an income assistance program for blind , disabled , or aged people whose income and resources fall below a certain threshold . the law defines disability for adults for both programs as the inability to engage in substantial gainful activity because of a severe physical or mental impairment that is medically determinable and has lasted or is expected to last at least 1 year or result in death . for children seeking ssi disability benefits , the impairment must meet the duration requirement and result in marked and severe functional limitations . both the di and ssi programs are administered by ssa and state disability determination services ( dds ) . ddss receive their funding from ssa and make disability decisions in accordance with ssa's policies and procedures . they process initial disability applications , assess beneficiaries' potential for medical improvement , set due dates for cdrs , and conduct full medical reviews . legislation , ssa scheduled beneficiaries for medical reviews only if medical improvement was expected . as a result of the 1980 law , ssa began increasing the number of cdrs in fiscal year 1981 , using age , benefit amount , and medical characteristics as selection criteria . this resulted in the selection of a disproportionate number of young people with mental impairments for cdrs , as shown in table 1 . many of these cases were terminated because they did not meet new strict mental disability criteria that had been implemented after they had been put on the rolls . in response to this situation , the congress enacted a law in 1984 establishing the medical improvement review standard , which prohibits benefit termination unless ssa can show that the beneficiary's medical condition has improved since the last medical decision and that this improvement relates to the individual's ability to work . as a result , ssa declared a moratorium on conducting cdrs until the new medical improvement standard was implemented by regulation in late 1985 . since enactment of the new standard , the cessation rate for cdrs has declined greatly . ssa's regulations require cdrs every 6 to 18 months for di beneficiaries expected to improve medically and at least once every 3 years if medical improvement is considered possible . for di beneficiaries whose impairments are judged to be permanent , the regulation requires cdrs once every 5 to 7 years . until 1993 , all cdrs were labor - intensive full medical reviews .