this concludes my testimony . i would be happy to answer any questions . social security reform: implications for women's retirement income ( gao / hehs - 98-42 , dec. 31 , 1997 ) . many had lost their savings . social security was created to help ensure that the elderly would have adequate retirement incomes and would not have to depend on welfare . it would provide benefits that workers had earned because of their contributions and those of their employers . when social security started paying benefits , it responded to an immediate need to bolster the income of the elderly . the social security benefits that early beneficiaries received significantly exceeded their contributions , but even the very first beneficiaries had made some contributions . initially , funding social security benefits required relatively low payroll taxes because very few of the elderly had earned benefits under the new system . increases in payroll taxes were always anticipated to keep up with the benefit payments as the system matured and more retirees received benefits . virtually from the beginning , social security was financed on this type of pay - as - you - go basis , with any single year's revenues collected primarily to fund that year's benefits . the congress had rejected the idea of advance funding for the program , or collecting enough revenues to cover future benefit rights as workers accrued them . many expressed concern that if the federal government amassed huge reserve funds , it would find a way to spend them . over the years , both the size and scope of the program have changed , and periodic adjustments have been necessary . in 1939 , coverage was extended to dependents and survivors . for example , since men and women typically have different earnings histories , life expectancies , and investment behaviors , reforms could exacerbate differences in benefits that already exist . an individual savings approach that permits little redistribution would on average generate smaller savings balances at retirement for women , who tend to have lower earnings from both employment and investments , and these smaller balances would need to last longer because women have longer life expectancies . the balance between income adequacy and individual equity also influences how much risk and responsibility are borne by individuals and the government . workers face a variety of risks regarding their retirement income security . these include individually based risks , such as how long they will be able to work , how long they will live , whether they will be survived by a spouse or other dependents , how much they will earn and save over their lifetimes , and how much they will earn on retirement savings . workers also face some collective risks , such as the performance of the economy and the extent of inflation . different types of retirement income embody different ways of assigning responsibility for these risks . social security was based on a social insurance model in which the society as a whole through the government largely takes responsibility for all these risks to help ensure adequate income .