deciding who will be served through the programs . since none of the states in our study has sufficient resources to serve all families who meet the federal eligibility criteria , these states are targeting subsidies to certain groups of eligible families , while attempting to balance the needs of welfare and nonwelfare families . in addition , although the seven states have many initiatives under way to expand their supply of child care providers , the outcomes of their efforts are not yet known . moreover , it is too soon to know what kinds of child care states and parents will rely on as more parents are expected to support themselves through work . states' efforts to increase the number of children receiving child care services while at the same time ensuring safe care for children will deserve attention as welfare reform evolves . mr. chairman , this concludes my formal remarks . i will be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . than were previously available under afdc . as a result , some states are using tanf funds to fund child care subsidies . for example , while wisconsin expanded its child care funding by 38 percent between state fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , the increase came from federal , not state , funding sources . even though the seven states we reviewed are expanding their programs , they are still unable to provide child care subsidies to all families meeting federal eligibility criteria who might benefit from such assistance . in fact , a recent urban institute study estimated that only about 48 percent of the potential child care needs of low - income families would be met if states maximized federal dollars available under welfare reform . because they cannot serve all eligible families , states have devised strategies to target subsidies to subsets of the eligible population . subsidized child care programs too expensive for higher - income eligible families .