relevant to their studies . in addition to limiting access to certain individuals for specific purposes , some organizations have encrypted or encoded patient information . researchers at one integrated health system , for example , work with information that has been encoded by computer programmers on the research team — the only individuals who have access to the fully identifiable data . in conducting collaborative research , the organizations that we contacted tend to use special data sets and contracting processes to protect medical information . for example , one mco , which conducts over half of its research with government agencies and academic and research institutions , transfers data in either encrypted or anonymized form and provides detailed specifications in its contracts that limit use of the data to the specific research project and prohibit collaborators from re - identifying or transferring the data . generally , company policies define the circumstances under which personally identifiable information may be disclosed and the penalties for unauthorized release of confidential information . most company policies permit access only to the information that is needed to perform one's job ; 8 of the 12 organizations also require their employees to sign agreements stating that they will maintain the privacy of protected health information . each organization that we contacted said it uses disciplinary sanctions to address employee violations of confidentiality or failure to protect medical information from accidental or unauthorized access , and an intentional breach of confidentiality could result in employee termination — which may be immediate . but they also pointed out that few employees have been terminated , and when they have , the incidents were not related to the conduct of research . the organizations that we contacted said they use a number of electronic measures to safeguard their electronic health data . most reported using individual user authentication or personal passwords to ensure users access only the information that they need ; some also use computer systems that maintain an electronic record of each employee who accesses medical data . these organizations may also use other technical information system mechanisms , including firewalls , to prevent external access to computer systems . in addition to electronic security , officials at some of the organizations told us they use various security measures to prevent unauthorized physical access to medical records - based information , including computer workstations and servers . personally identifiable information is often an important component of research using medical records , and the companies we met with furnished many examples of useful research that could not have been conducted without it . because our study focused on only a limited number of companies — in particular , those that were willing to share information about corporate practices — it is difficult to judge the extent to which their policies may be typical , nor do we know the extent to which their policies are followed . nevertheless , most of the organizations we surveyed do have policies to limit and control access to medical information that identifies individuals , and many of them have adopted techniques , such as encryption and encoding , to further safeguard individual privacy .