accessibility and quality of care . in addition , the networks are planning to develop and implement additional efficiency initiatives over the next 5 years . but va faces several challenges before completing its transformation . of these , va's decisions concerning existing infrastructure may be the most significant and contentious . for example , va has spent hundreds of millions of dollars over the last decade constructing and renovating inpatient capacity . some of this capacity is no longer needed because of its decreasing reliance on inpatient services . meanwhile , va continues to serve veterans in other locations , using aged and deteriorating buildings that will require billions of additional dollars to renovate or replace . for example , in chicago , where va has four major hospitals , we recommended that va close one and meet veterans' needs using the other three . va has chosen instead to have a consultant study the issue further . as a result , va is forgoing ( 1 ) savings of about $20 million per year in maintenance and operating costs and ( 2 ) better services for veterans by not closing one of the four hospitals . va appears to be experiencing a similar situation with hospitals in several other locations , such as boston . va's decisions regarding its infrastructure are complicated by several other challenges , including ongoing transformations of va's affiliations with medical schools , medical research activities , and dod medical contingency activities . since 1946 , 130 va facilities have affiliated with 105 medical schools to provide educational opportunities for 55,000 individuals and research or employment opportunities for over 3,000 faculty and others . currently , most va facilities are affiliated with a single nearby medical school , making it easy for residents , students , faculty , and researchers to fulfill their obligations at both locations . va's inpatient population provides an important focus for educational and research activities . va's transformation of its care from an inpatient to an outpatient focus along with its consolidation of such services in fewer hospitals is causing va and medical schools to rethink their affiliation arrangements . it seems inevitable that a medical school will need to share inpatient educational and research opportunities with other schools at a single va facility . medical schools , however , seem reluctant to share at this time , which constrains va's ability to effectively address its infrastructure dilemma . despite initial misgivings , veterans now seem satisfied with this change . in long beach , va has proposed to renovate excess inpatient space in one building in order to transfer clinical and administrative services from an older , deteriorated building and then demolish that building , thereby saving maintenance and future renovation costs . at most locations , however , va appears reluctant to aggressively address this infrastructure dilemma — to the detriment of veterans . have made limited use of va facilities . currently , va has agreed to make about 28 percent of its operating beds available to dod within 72 hours of notification . as with the medical school affiliations , va's transformation is also causing va and dod to rethink their medical contingency arrangements , which they plan to do in earnest in the near future .