bba - mandated changes . finally , the need to modernize its multiple automated claims processing and other information systems , a task complicated by the year - 2000 computer challenges , is competing with other ongoing responsibilities . hcfa has proposed that the department of health and human services seek legislative relief by delaying implementation of certain bba provisions — those requiring major computer system changes that also coincide with year - 2000 computer renovations . according to hcfa's computer contractor , simultaneously pursuing both bba implementation and year - 2000 system changes risks the failure of both activities and threatens hcfa's highest priority — uninterrupted claims payments . the contractor advised hcfa to seek relief from competing requirements , which could allow the agency to focus instead on year - 2000 computer system renovations . the bba provisions to be delayed by the computer renovations include updates to the october 1999 inpatient hospital pps rate and the january 2000 physician fee schedule , hospital outpatient pps limits on outpatient therapy services , and billing changes for snfs . the appendix lists other bba mandates that are being postponed . the new pps rates , which cover both services previously billed by the snf and by certain outside providers . without this provision , it may be more difficult to adequately monitor whether bills for snf residents are being submitted appropriately . bba establishes a new medicare+choice program , which will significantly expand the health care options that can be marketed to medicare beneficiaries beginning in the fall of 1998 . in addition to traditional medicare and hmos , beneficiaries will be able to enroll in preferred provider organizations , provider - sponsored organizations , and private fee - for - service plans . consistent presentation is important because beneficiaries may rely on plans' benefit summaries when comparing coverage and out - of - pocket cost information . federal employees and retirees can readily compare benefits among health plans in the federal employees health benefits program because the office of personnel management requires that plan brochures follow a common format and use standard terminology . it is encouraging that hcfa wants to accelerate a similar requirement for medicare+choice plans . in the fall of 1999 , hcfa expects to require health plans to use standard formats and terminology to describe covered services in the summary - of - benefits portion of the marketing materials . comparative data on quality and performance are a key component of the information campaign mandated by bba and an essential underpinning of quality - based competition . recognizing that the measurement and reporting of such comparative data is a “work in progress,” the act directed broad distribution of such information as it becomes available . before implementation of the prospective per diem system , snfs were required to certify that each beneficiary met these criteria . with the new payment system , the method for establishing eligibility for coverage will also change . facilities will assign each patient to one of the case - mix groups on the basis of an assessment of the patient's condition and expected service use , and the facility will certify that each patient is appropriately classified .