capacity . in addition , current law guarantees that no state will have to pay more than half of the total costs of its medicaid program , meaning states with higher income receive a higher federal share than they otherwise would . this has contributed to disparities among states in coverage of population groups and services as well as in federal funding . the administration's proposal would not address these disparities . to the extent there is congressional interest in lessening them , we have previously indicated that any distribution formula should include ( 1 ) better and more direct measures than per capita income for both the incidence of poverty and states' ability to finance program benefits , ( 2 ) adjustors for geographic differences in the cost of health care , and ( 3 ) a reduced guaranteed federal minimum match . in regard to state flexibility , the administration has proposed changes in three areas: managed care programs , long - term care programs , and the boren amendment . currently , states must obtain waivers of certain federal statutory requirements in order to implement large - scale managed care programs and to provide home - and community - based services as alternatives to nursing facility care . the administration has proposed eliminating the need for a waiver for such programs . in addition , the boren amendment , which places certain requirements on how states can set reimbursement rates for hospitals and nursing facilities , would be repealed . medicaid's restrictions on states' use of managed care reflect historical concerns over access and quality . for example , the so - called 75 / 25 rule that stipulates that , to serve medicaid beneficiaries , at least 25 percent of a health plan's total enrollment must consist of private paying patients , was intended as a proxy for quality because private patients presumably have a choice of health plans and can vote with their feet . a second provision , allowing medicaid beneficiaries to terminate enrollment in a health plan at almost any time , aims to provide them with a similar capacity to express dissatisfaction over the provision of care . the administration's proposal would replace these requirements with enhanced quality monitoring systems . states' cost - containment efforts . however , the experience of states with medicaid managed care programs underscores the importance of adequate planning and appropriate quality assurance systems . if states are granted more direct control to aggressively pursue managed care strategies , the importance of continuous oversight of managed care systems to protect both medicaid beneficiaries from inappropriate denial of care and federal dollars from payment abuses should not be overlooked . we have also reported on the successful use by states of home - and community - based care services as an alternative to nursing facilities . states we contacted in the course of this work have expanded the use of such services as part of a strategy to help control rapidly increasing medicaid expenditures for institutional care . states have told us that when implementing these programs , they value the control they have under a waiver but not under the regular program over the amount of home - and community - based services provided .