data systems . they also cited the need for specialists in contracting , facilities management , and telecommunications . many senior and midlevel managers and experienced technical staff have retired in recent years or are eligible to retire soon . almost 40 percent of the organization has turned over in the past 5 years . many were said to have spent their entire careers focused on a particular aspect of the medicare program . a common concern in our discussions was the erosion of experienced staff to perform a variety of tasks , such as writing regulations and developing payment systems . managers cited the loss of experienced staff as a problem for developing and implementing the various prospective payment systems mandated by bba . they also noted that developing one new payment system would have been manageable , but losses of expert staff make it difficult to implement multiple new payment systems concurrently . for example , experienced staff are needed to perform such technical tasks as those we mentioned in our october statement before this subcommittee , including collecting reliable cost and utilization data to compute the new prospective payment rates , developing case mix adjusters , auditing cost reports to avoid incorporating inflated costs into the base rates , and monitoring to guard against providers' skimping on services to increase profits . our focus group participants emphasized that it will be difficult to replace its experienced staff in the short term . although hcfa is planning to hire new people , the time typically needed for recruiting , hiring , and orienting new employees is considerable . managers commented that new employees , although highly educated and motivated , sometimes need extensive on - the - job training to replace lost expertise . in july 1997 , hcfa restructured its entire organization . the new design reflected the agency's intent to , among other things , ( 1 ) combine activities to redirect additional resources to the growing managed care side of the program , ( 2 ) acknowledge a shift from hcfa's traditional role as claims payer to a more active role as purchaser of health care services , and ( 3 ) establish three components focused on beneficiaries , health plans and providers , and medicaid and other activities conducted at the state level . it also established technical and support offices to assist these components . ( see hcfa's organization chart in app . in announcing the planned reorganization , the administrator explained that as medicare has evolved over the years , new programs and projects were layered onto existing structures . over time , he noted , this became cumbersome and confusing . many managers we spoke with considered the reorganization to be theoretically sound . some also told us that it was long overdue , because hcfa's structure encouraged work on narrow issues within self - contained groups — an approach that did not benefit from the expertise existing across the agency . however , a consensus of focus group participants and high - level officials believed that the timing of the reorganization's implementation is unfortunate . they explained that they are currently facing full agendas with tight deadlines , which add to the stresses associated with any organizational change .