( see fig . between fiscal years 1980 and 1995 , va facilities underwent some fundamental changes in workload . the days of hospital care provided fell from 26 million in 1980 to 14.7 million in 1995 ; number of outpatient visits increased from 15.8 million to 26.5 million ; and the average number of veterans receiving nursing home care in va - owned facilities increased from 7,933 to 13,569 . ( see fig . for example , the albuquerque medical center increased its price for basic lithotripsy services to nonveterans by over 125 percent . the new price could generate over $300,000 a year in additional revenues for the hospital . by verifying veterans' reported income , va expects to generate about $46 million in copayment revenues between january 1 , 1996 , and june 30 , 1997 . in a september 1992 report , we found that va had not taken advantage of the opportunity to verify veterans' incomes through the use of tax records . through our own match against tax records , we identified over 100,000 veterans who may have owed copayments . in 1994 , va began routinely using such data to determine veterans' copayment status . although cost savings can and are being realized , the va health care system lacks overall incentives to further increase efficiency . unlike private sector hospitals and providers , va facilities and providers bear little financial risk if they provide ( 1 ) expensive medically inappropriate care or ( 2 ) services not covered under a veteran's va benefits . unlike private health insurance , where the insurance company bears most of the risk , the veteran , rather than va , bears most of the financial risk for veterans' health benefits . however , when va facilities are given an incentive , such as the desire to fund new programs , they appear to be able to identify opportunities to achieve savings through efficiency improvements . private insurers increasingly require their policyholders to obtain prior authorization from an independent utilization review firm before the insurers will accept liability for the hospital care . frequently , this authorization also sets a limit on the number of days of care the insurer will cover without further authorization regarding the medical necessity of continued hospitalization . because compliance with these requirements directly affects their revenues , private sector hospitals pay close attention to them . similarly , the medicare program has , since 1982 , paid hospitals a fixed fee based on the patient's diagnosis . the fixed fee is based on the national average cost of treating the patient's condition . if the hospital provides the care for less than the medicare payment , it makes a profit . but if the hospital keeps the patient too long , is inefficient , or provides unnecessary treatments , then it will suffer a loss . this creates a strong incentive in the private sector to discharge medicare patients as soon as possible . those same financial incentives to increase efficiency and provide care in the most cost - effective setting are largely absent in the va system .