however , p.l . 93-43 shifted authority to va for all national cemeteries except arlington national cemetery and the u.s. soldiers' and airmen's home national cemetery . since the state cemetery grants program's inception in 1978 , fewer than half of the states have established veterans' cemeteries , primarily because , according to ncs officials , states must provide up to half of the funds needed to establish , expand , or improve a cemetery as well as pay for all equipment and annual operating costs . furthermore , the director of the state cemetery grants program told us that few states , especially those with large veteran populations , have shown interest in legislation that va proposed in its 1998 and 1999 budget submission in order to increase state participation . this proposed legislation would increase the federal share of construction costs from 50 to 100 percent and permit federal funding for up to 100 percent of initial equipment costs . in fact , according to the director , state veterans' affairs officials said they would rather have funding for operating costs than for construction . ncs officials told us they will continue to evaluate locations for additional national cemeteries in the future , based on demographic needs . however , according to ncs officials , va currently has no plans to request construction funds for more than the four new cemeteries , which will be completed by the year 2000 . officials said that even with the new cemeteries , interment in a national or state veterans' cemetery will not be “readily accessible” to all eligible veterans and their family members . according to ncs officials , the majority of areas not served will be major metropolitan areas with high concentrations of veterans , such as atlanta , georgia ; detroit , michigan ; and miami , florida . the average columbarium interment cost would be about $280 , compared with about $345 for in - ground cremains burial and about $655 for casket burial . our analysis also showed that the service delivery period would be extended the most using columbarium interment . for example , using columbarium interment in a total of 1 acre of land could extend the service delivery period by about 50 years , while in - ground cremains interment would extend the service period about 3 years and casket burials about half a year . while historical data imply that the majority of veterans and eligible dependents prefer a casket burial , ncs national data show that the demand for cremation at national cemeteries is increasing . for example , veterans choosing cremation increased about 50 percent between 1990 and 1996 , and ncs officials expect demand for cremation to continue to increase in the future . the incidence of cremation also continues to increase in the general population . the program has also provided grants to state veterans' cemeteries for expansion and improvement efforts . as the veteran population ages , ncs projects the demand for burial benefits to increase .