( app . i provides a more detailed list of requirements for burial at arlington and at other national cemeteries. ) be full by 2025 , given the expected burial rates , unless the cemetery is expanded . since 1980 , arlington has offered inurnment of cremated remains in its columbarium complex , which currently contains about 20,000 niches , with an additional 30,200 niches either planned or under construction . although the secretary of the army and the president do not have explicit legal authority to grant exceptions to the eligibility requirements now in effect for burial at arlington , there is a legal basis for the army's long - standing assertion of that authority . in 1973 , the congress , in the national cemeteries act ( p.l . 93-43 ) , expressly preserved the existing functions , powers , and duties of the secretary of the army with respect to arlington while , at the same time , repealing the prior law that specified who was eligible for burial at national cemeteries . this left no explicit legal restrictions on the secretary's authority over burials at arlington ; the secretary could decide on criteria for admission as well as on waivers . the committees , in reporting on the bill , said that a provision giving va explicit authority to grant waivers for the national cemeteries under its jurisdiction would be analogous to “similar authority” already residing with the secretary of the army regarding arlington . department of the army officials have , on several occasions since 1967 , examined the issue of the secretary's and the president's legal authority for granting waivers and have acknowledged that no explicit authority exists . in 1976 , the army general counsel stated that “it would be desirable to specifically recognize this authority” in legislation pertaining to arlington . in 1983 and 1984 , the army general counsel recommended that legislation be proposed to give the secretary ( and , by extension , the president ) such authority . the general counsel advised the secretary that “public recognition of your explicit authority to approve exceptions to burial eligibility policy represents sound administrative practice.” concern about this provision and mentioned “possible problems of drawing the general public's attention to exception authority.” because of these concerns , the secretary decided not to pursue a change in official army policy , according to a memorandum from the military assistant in the office of the assistant secretary of the army . army officials told us that , in february 1997 , they submitted a legislative proposal that would have explicitly defined both the secretary's authority to grant waivers as well as some broad categories of individuals who could be considered for waivers . however , these officials explained that this was done as a technical drafting service and that they did not necessarily support such legislation . according to these officials , no action was taken by the congress on this legislation . most waiver requests have been handled through an internal army review process involving officials responsible for the administration of arlington . but this process has not been established through formal rule - making , and access to and knowledge of the process may vary widely among those inquiring about burial at arlington .