benefits awarded at that age . some of the individuals with low income and assets who are awarded di may also qualify for ssi disability benefits . another incentive for individuals to apply to the di program is that participants are eligible for medical coverage under medicare 2 years after di benefits begin . thus , individuals awarded di benefits before age 63 get extra medicare coverage that they would otherwise not be eligible for until age 65 . therefore , if medicare eligibility was raised along with the era and nra , individuals would have an incentive to try to attain di benefits . an additional medical coverage issue is that individuals who are dually eligible for di and ssi benefits are also generally eligible to receive medicaid , which will increase costs to this program . raising retirement ages would change some of the disincentives that currently keep people from applying for di benefits at age 62 . data from ssa show that the current structure of social security reduces claims for new di participators aged 62 to 64 . figure 1 shows a steady increase in the rate of new disability awards from ages 53 to 61 . the rate of new awards then drops substantially at age 62 and falls further through age 64 . di participation is likely discouraged at ages 62 to 64 because of the application process and restrictions on earnings . there is a 5-month waiting period after the onset of the disability until someone can apply for benefits , and the application process is lengthy and complex . in comparison , the application process for social security retirement benefits is more straightforward , given that the applicant meets the coverage and age requirements . in addition , di benefits are generally subject to a greater reduction than social security retirement benefits if beneficiaries have any earnings . also , di benefits are offset by worker's compensation benefits , while social security retirement benefits are not . if the era was raised to 65 and the nra to 70 , then the incentives that apply to social security retirement benefits would be applicable at age 65 rather than age 62 . the hiring of older workers . the researchers who found this negative correlation speculated that it is the result of the age discrimination in employment act ( adea ) , which mandates that firms must offer workers with similar experience the same level of benefits . since younger employees are less costly to insure , firms will prefer them . as noted earlier , some of these new di participants would be dually eligible for ssi and medicaid benefits , which would impose additional costs . the potential tenure with an employer is another obstacle to hiring older workers because of recruitment and training costs . recruitment involves job advertising costs and interview time . newly hired employees may also require significant training to perform their new job . if these costs are substantial , they can serve as barriers to hiring older workers . firms would be more likely to invest in younger workers because they have the potential to remain with the firm for a longer period , which reduces the average costs of recruitment and training .