standard . ssa is taking steps to improve decisional accuracy by training its adjudicators and quality assurance staff in areas ssa has found to be problematic . moreover , it will be reviewing a larger sample of new childhood claims to identify problems unique to these cases so that it can issue policy clarifications and additional guidance as necessary . under our mandate to report on the implementation of the legislation , we will continue to monitor the accuracy and consistency of decisions on childhood cases . ssa's disability programs face several challenges . the agency's disability claims process is time - consuming and expensive , but the agency's efforts to redesign the process are disappointing . moreover , ssa's disability caseloads for its di and ssi programs have grown by nearly 65 percent in the past decade ; ssa has not developed a plan that sufficiently addresses actions needed to help beneficiaries fully develop their productive capacities , and few people have left the rolls to return to work . despite these systemic problems , however , ssa recently has been making progress in reducing its continuing disability review ( cdr ) backlogs . making disability decisions is one of ssa's most demanding and administratively complex tasks , and ssa has struggled to keep pace with applications for disability benefits and appeals of disability decisions . disability claimants often wait more than a year for a final decision . to manage the disability caseload growth , increase efficiency , and improve service to its customers , ssa began a major effort in 1993 to redesign the way it makes disability decisions . the agency developed an ambitious plan for change that included testing and implementing 26 key initiatives over a period of 6 years . in december 1996 , we reported that ssa was already one - third of the way through the 6-year period but had made little progress with testing and implementing the initiative . we identified a number of problems: ssa had delayed testing and project development , expanded the scope and complexity of certain initiatives , changed executive leadership , and risked losing stakeholder support . in that report , we recommended that ssa ( 1 ) focus on the initiatives most likely to reduce claims - processing time and administrative costs and ( 2 ) combine those initiatives in an integrated process and test them at a few sites before full - scale implementation . responding to these concerns and those of other stakeholders , ssa revised its redesign plan in february 1997 . it developed a scaled - down plan that focused on testing and implementing eight key initiatives . however , the new strategy retained plans to first test certain initiatives individually at a large number of sites nationwide . on the basis of our ongoing work , we have determined that the success of ssa's scaled - down plan may also be threatened . ssa continues to experience delays in testing or implementing initiatives — anywhere from 2 months to 3 years . more importantly though , test results for the first two initiatives are disappointing . as tested , they will not result in dramatic improvements in efficiency and quality of claims processing .