results . va officials indicated that , based on consultations with staff from the house and senate veterans' affairs committees , which included input from gao , the draft strategic plan would be revised to make it clearer , more complete , and more results - oriented . the august 15 , 1997 , version reflects significant progress in these areas . instead of presenting four overall goals , three of which were process - oriented , va has reorganized its draft strategic plan into two sections . the first section , entitled “honor , care , and compensate veterans in recognition of their sacrifices for america,” is intended to incorporate va's results - oriented strategic goals . the second section , entitled “management strategies,” incorporates the three other general goals , related to customer service , workforce development , and taxpayer return on investment . in addition , va has filled significant gaps in the discussions of program goals . the largest gap in the june 1997 draft was the lack of goals for four of the five major veterans benefit programs . the current plan includes goals for each of these programs , stating them in terms of ensuring that va benefit programs meet veterans' needs . finally , the reorganized draft plan increases the emphasis on results . the june 1997 draft appeared to make such process - oriented goals as improving customer service and speeding claims processing equivalent to more results - oriented goals such as improving veterans' health care . in the august 1997 version , the process - oriented goals remain but have been placed in their own process - oriented section supplementing the plan's results orientation . at the same time , va believes that the process - oriented portions of the plan are important as a guide to va's management . it considers customer service very important because va's focus is on providing services to veterans and their families . the assistant secretary for policy and planning , in written comments on a draft of our july 1997 letter , stated that va continues to believe “that processes and operations are important to serving veterans and [va] will continue to place appropriate emphasis on the areas of customer service , workforce development , and management issues.” va also contends that the results act does not preclude process - oriented goals from its strategic plan . we agree that many of the process issues va raises are important to its efficient and effective operation and can be included in va's strategic plan as long as they are integrated with the plan's primary focus on results . perhaps the most significant deficiency in va's draft strategic plan , in both the june 1997 and current versions , is the lack of results - oriented goals for major va programs , particularly for benefit programs . while discussions of goals for benefit programs have been added to the current version , they are placeholders for results - oriented goals that have not yet been developed .