pps rates . historical data on utilization and cost of services form the basis for calculating the “normal” episode of care and the cost of services , so it is important that those data are adequate for that purpose . our work and that of the hhs inspector general has found examples of questionable costs in home health agency cost reports . for example , we reported in august 1995 on a number of problems with contractor payments for medical supplies such as surgical dressings , which indicate that excessive costs are being included and not removed from home health agency cost reports . also , the inspector general found substantial amounts of unallowable costs in the cost reports of a large home health agency chain , which was convicted of fraud on the basis of these findings . earlier this year , we suggested that it would be prudent for hcfa to audit thoroughly a projectable sample of home health agency cost reports . the results could then be used to adjust hcfa's cost database to help ensure that unallowable costs are not included in the base for setting prospective rates . in response to a presidential directive , hcfa is planning to audit about 1,800 home health agency cost reports over the next year , about double the number that it otherwise would have audited . if these audits are thorough and the results are properly used , this effort could represent a significant step toward improving hcfa's home health cost database . a good cost database could be a considerable aid to hcfa in calculating the initial payment rates under pps . medical review of 80 high - dollar claims it had previously processed . the intermediary found that it should have denied 46 of them in whole or in part . also , operation restore trust , a joint effort by federal and several state agencies to identify fraud and abuse in medicare and medicaid , found very high rates of noncompliance with medicare's coverage conditions . for example , in a sample of 740 patients drawn from 43 home health agencies in texas and 31 in louisiana that were selected because of potential problems , some or all of the services received by 39 percent of the beneficiaries were denied . about 70 percent of the denials were because the beneficiary did not meet the homebound definition . although these are results from agencies suspected of having problems , they illustrate that substantial amounts of noncovered care are likely to be reflected in hcfa's home health care utilization data . because of these problems , it would also be prudent for hcfa to conduct thorough on - site medical reviews , which increase the likelihood of identifying whether patients are eligible for services , of a projectable sample of agencies to give it a basis on which to adjust utilization rates for purposes of establishing a pps . we are not aware that such a review is under way or planned . a pps for home health should enable medicare to give agencies increased incentives to control costs and to slow the growth in program payments .