data . in our review of 62 programs for which the economically disadvantaged individuals were eligible , we found that less than half of the programs obtained data on whether or not participants obtained jobs after they received services . to its credit , labor has collected much basic information , including outcome data , on its major employment training programs , such as job corps and other programs funded under jtpa . it has also conducted some evaluations to assess the impact of its programs . however , our reviews have shown that existing performance measures and studies still do not provide the kind of information that would provide confidence that funds are being spent to the greatest advantage of participants . one of our recommendations was that osha work with the general services administration and the interagency committee on debarment and suspension on policies and procedures regarding how safety and health records of federal contractors could be shared to help agency awarding and debarring officials in their decisionmaking . labor recently told us that some discussions have occurred between osha and the interagency committee , but final decisions have not been reached on any new policies and procedures . prevailing wage rates that are , in fact , higher than those prevailing in the area — thus artificially inflating federal construction costs . labor has acknowledged weaknesses in its wage determination process that call into question the integrity and accuracy of some of its wage determinations . for this reason , it requested funds to develop , evaluate , and implement alternative reliable methodologies or procedures that would yield accurate and timely wage determinations at a reasonable cost . labor's fiscal year 1997 budget request included $3.7 million for that purpose . the conference report accompanying the department's appropriation requested that we review these implementation activities to determine whether they will achieve their goals . we will do so and report our findings to the appropriation committees , as requested , when labor has completed its work . labor took some actions that we recommended in our may 1996 report as a short - term solution to reduce its vulnerability to the use of fraudulent or inaccurate data in the wage determination process . these actions , including increased verification of information provided by employers , will at least reduce some of the vulnerabilities of the existing process . the larger challenge facing labor , however , is to examine and substantially improve the overall process . provisions will make it much easier for workers to change jobs and maintain health care coverage . and , according to labor , millions more who have been unwilling to leave their job for a better one out of concern that they would lose their health care coverage would also benefit . the congress set a very short timeframe for implementing these protections: although the act was only signed into law on august 21 , 1996 , the regulations to carry out the portability provisions must be issued by april 1 , 1997 . labor is working with the department of health and human services and the treasury department to meet that date because these provisions — called “shared provisions” — involve overlapping responsibilities of the three departments .