examples of these are included in our report . the deficiencies that state surveyors identified and documented only partially capture the extent of care problems in california's homes , for several reasons . first , some homes can mask problems because they are able to predict the timing of annual reviews or because medical records sometimes misrepresent the care provided . in addition , state surveyors can miss identifying deficiencies because of limitations of the methods used in the annual review — methods established in hcfa guidance on conducting surveys — to identify potential areas of unacceptable care . one problem masking the extent of poor care involves the scheduling of standard surveys . the law requires that a standard survey be unannounced and that it be conducted roughly every year . because many california homes were reviewed in the same month — sometimes almost the same week — year after year , homes could often predict the timing of their next survey and prepare to reduce the level of problems that may normally exist at other times . at two homes we visited , we observed that the homes' officials had made advance preparations — such as making a room ready for survey officials — indicating that they knew the approximate date and time of their upcoming oversight review . after we discussed these observations with california dhs officials , they acknowledged that a review of survey scheduling showed that the timing of some homes' surveys had not varied by more than a week or so for several cycles . dhs officials have since instructed district office managers to schedule surveys in a way that will reduce their predictability . surveys to make them less predictable and maximize the element of surprise . noncompliant homes that are not classified in the immediate jeopardy or poor performer categories do not meet hcfa's criteria for immediate referral for sanctioning , even though some may have seriously harmed residents . hcfa policy permits granting a grace period to this group of noncompliant homes , regardless of their past performance . between july 1995 and may 1998 , california's dhs gave about 98 percent of noncompliant homes a grace period to correct deficiencies . dhs surveyors can overlook significant findings because the federal survey protocol they follow does not rely on an adequate sample for detecting potential problems and their prevalence . together , these factors can mask significant care problems from the view of federal and state regulators . hcfa needs to reconsider its forgiving stance toward homes with serious , recurring violations . federal policies regarding a grace period to correct deficiencies and to accept a home's report of compliance without an on - site review can be useful policies , given resource constraints , when applied to homes with less serious problems . however , regardless of resource constraints , hcfa and dhs need to ensure that their oversight efforts are directed at homes with serious and recurring violations and that policies developed for homes with less serious problems are not applied to them .