start . my statement is also based on the preliminary results from an ongoing study that we are conducting at your request on how hhs ensures that head start programs are accountable for complying with laws and regulations and for achieving program purposes . “achieving program purposes” refers to ( 1 ) whether the head start program has achieved outcomes such as differences in head start participants' growth and development and ( 2 ) whether the program has an impact . we define impact as differences in outcomes , such as improved school readiness or health status , caused by head start participation . implicit in this definition is that differences in outcomes would not have occurred without program participation . in summary , head start has , through the years , provided a comprehensive array of services and , as envisioned by the results act , has in recent years substantially strengthened its emphasis on determining the results of those services . its processes still provide too little information , however , about how well the program is achieving its intended purposes . hhs has developed a performance assessment framework that effectively links program activities with the program's overall strategic mission and goal . ( 2 ) how well is head start structured to meet the needs of program participants in today's social context , which differs significantly from that of 30 years ago ? this framework also includes measurable objectives for how the program will be implemented and what outcomes will be achieved . hhs has new initiatives that will , in the next few years , provide information not previously available on outcomes such as gains made by children and their families while in the program . currently , however , these initiatives are limited to assessing outcomes at the national level , not at the local agency level . in addition , we are not convinced that these initiatives will provide definitive information on impact , that is , on whether children and their families would have achieved these gains without participating in head start . although obtaining this kind of impact information would be difficult , the significance of head start and the sizeable investment in it warrant conducting studies that will provide answers to questions about whether the program is making a difference . number of other programs . these social trends raise questions about how well head start is structured to meet participants' needs and , if changes are needed , what those changes should be . for example , the predominantly part - day , part - year structure of head start programs may not be as suited to meeting the participants' needs as it was in the past . moreover , a lack of information about the array of community programs available and about actions local head start agencies have already taken hinders decisionmakers' ability to respond to these trends . head start was created in 1965 as part of president johnson's war on poverty .