after they retire . the accounts could thereby contribute to overall retirement security , not just retirement income security . not all proposals for individual accounts clearly delineate how these accounts would be administered , but those that do vary in three key areas: ( 1 ) who would manage the information and money flow needed to maintain a system of individual accounts , ( 2 ) how much choice and flexibility would individuals have over investment options and access to their accounts , and ( 3 ) what mechanisms would be used to pay out benefits upon retirement . decisions in these areas would have a direct effect on system complexity and who would bear the costs and additional responsibilities of an individual account system as well as on the adequacy and certainty of retirement income for future retirees . each of the decisions discussed above could have a significant effect on the costs of managing and administering individual accounts , and it will be important to consider their effect on the preservation of retirement income . administrative costs would depend upon the design choices that were made . the more flexibility allowed , the more services provided to the investor , and the more investment options provided , the higher the administrative costs would be . for example , offering investors the option of frequently shifting assets from one investment vehicle to another or offering a toll - free 1-800 number for a range of customer investment and education services could significantly increase administrative costs . moreover , in addition to decisions that affect the level of administrative costs , other factors would need to be carefully considered , such as who would bear the costs and how they would be distributed among large and small accounts . because individual accounts would be highly visible to individuals and would represent “their money. the congress faces significant challenges in restoring sustainable solvency to social security . we have a historic opportunity to meet these challenges because of the strength of our economy and future budget surpluses . we also have a historic responsibility — a fiduciary obligation , if you will — to leave our nation's future generations a financially stable system . i believe it is possible to craft a solution that will protect the social security benefits of the nation's current retirees while ensuring that the system will be there for future generations ; and perhaps the answer does not lie solely in one approach or the other — defined benefit or defined contribution . bridging the gap between these approaches is not beyond our ability . gao and i stand ready to provide the information and analysis that can help the congress meet this challenge in a way that can exceed the expectations of all generations of americans . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o .