i will be happy to answer your questions . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . representative sample of physician practices . however , the feasibility of completing such an enormous data collection task within reasonable time and cost constraints is doubtful , as evidenced by hcfa's unsuccessful attempt to survey 5,000 practices . after considering this option and the limitations of survey data already gathered by other organizations , hcfa decided to use expert panels to estimate the relative resources associated with medical procedures and convened 15 specialty - specific clinical practice expense panels ( cpep ) . each panel included 12 to 15 members ; about half the members of each panel were physicians , and the remaining members were practice administrators and nonphysician clinicians such as nurses . hcfa provided national medical specialty societies an opportunity to nominate the panelists , and panel members represented over 60 specialties and subspecialties . gathering data directly from a limited number of physician practices would , however , be a useful external validity check on hcfa's proposed practice expense revisions and would also help hcfa identify refinements needed during phase - in of the fee schedule revisions . hcfa staff believed that each of the cpeps developed reasonable relative rankings of their assigned procedure codes . however , they also believed that the cpep estimates needed to be adjusted to convert them to a common scale , eliminate certain inappropriate expenses , and align the panels' estimates with data on aggregate practice expenses . while we agree with the intent of these adjustments , we identified methodological weaknesses with some and a lack of supporting data with others . hcfa staff found that labor estimates varied across cpeps for the same procedures and therefore used an adjustment process referred to as “linking” to convert the different labor estimates to a common scale . practice expenses are also expected to vary significantly . for example , a general practice physician in a solo practice may have different expenses than a physician in a group practice . for most physician practices , the total of supply , equipment , and nonphysician labor expenses is probably readily available .