additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . required medical supplies are also covered . services must be furnished under a plan of care prescribed and periodically reviewed by a physician . part - time or intermittent basis . as long as the care is reasonable and necessary , there are no limits on the number of visits or length of coverage . medicare does not require copayments or deductibles for home health care except for durable medical equipment . hcfa , the agency within hhs responsible for administering medicare , uses six regional claims processing contractors ( which are insurance companies ) to process and pay home health claims . these contractors — called regional home health intermediaries ( rhhi ) — process the claims submitted by the 10,000-strong home health agencies , which are paid on the basis of the costs they incur up to predetermined cost limits . rhhis are responsible for ensuring that medicare does not pay home health claims when beneficiaries do not meet the medicare home health criteria , when services claimed are not reasonable or necessary , or when the volume of services exceeds the level called for in an approved plan of treatment . they carry out these responsibilities through medical reviews of claims . hhs' office of the inspector general has emphasized the importance of medical reviews . then in 1989 , coverage rules relaxed following a court case brought in 1988 that challenged hcfa's interpretation that individuals had to satisfy both the part - time and intermittent criteria to qualify for the home health benefit ( duggan v. bowen ) . the benefit also allowed maintenance therapy when therapy services were required to simply maintain function ; previously , patients had to show improvement from such services to be covered . hcfa was obliged to revise its coverage guidelines to allow individuals to qualify by satisfying either criterion , which , as we reported in 1996 , enabled home health agencies to increase the frequency of home visits . the requirements were also changed so that patients qualified for skilled observation by a nurse or therapist if a reasonable potential for complications or possible need to change treatment existed . the skilled observation , in turn , qualified the beneficiary for home health aide visits . medicare home health benefit: congressional and hcfa actions begin to address chronic oversight weaknesses an individual does not have to be bedridden . the condition of these patients should be such that there exists a normal inability to leave home , and , consequently , leaving their homes would require a considerable and taxing effort . if the patient does in fact leave the home , the patient may nevertheless be considered homebound if the absences from the home are infrequent or for periods of relatively short duration or are attributable to the need to receive medical treatment . in our interviews for the 1996 study , hcfa and intermediary officials said that few denials were made on the basis that the beneficiary was not homebound .