constitutes only a summary of the . the contract between hcfa and the [mco] must be consulted to determine the exact terms and conditions of coverage . hcfa officials responsible for medicare contracts , however , said that if a beneficiary were to request a copy of the contract , the agency would not provide it due to the proprietary information included in an mco's contract proposal . furthermore , an mco is not required to provide beneficiaries with copies of its medicare contract . mco officials with whom we spoke differed in their responses about whether their organizations would provide beneficiaries with copies of their medicare contracts . some mcos we reviewed provided detailed benefit information only after beneficiaries had enrolled . the information packages distributed by several mcos we reviewed stated that beneficiaries would receive additional , detailed descriptions of plan benefits , costs , and restrictions following enrollment . in addition , four mcos did not provide 1998 benefit details until several months after the new benefits took effect . in fact , one mco did not distribute its detailed benefit information until august — 8 months after the benefit changes had taken effect . the membership literature we reviewed varied considerably in terminology , depth of detail , and format . these variations are similar to those that we encountered in previous reviews undertaken for this committee and greatly complicated benefit package comparisons . the lack of clear and uniform benefit information likely impedes informed decisionmaking . hcfa officials in almost every region noted that a standard format for key membership literature , along with clear and standard terminology , would help beneficiaries compare their health plan options . to illustrate this problem , we identified the location in each mco's plan literature where enrollees would find answers to basic questions regarding coverage of the three benefits we studied . this information was often difficult to find ; enrollees would have to read multiple documents to answer the basic coverage questions . for example , to understand the three plans' prescription drug benefits , we had to review 12 different documents: 2 from plan a , 5 from plan b , and 5 from plan c. ( see fig . medicare+choice: hcfa actions could improve plan benefit and appeal information plan documents contradict one another as to whether the plan will cover a nonformulary drug . it was also not easy to know where to look for the information . for example , the answer to our question about whether a plan used a drug formulary was found in plan a's summary of benefits , in plan b's medicare prescription drug rider , and in plan c's contract amendment . plan c's materials required more careful review to answer the question because the membership contract indicated the plan did not provide drug coverage . however , an amendment — included in the member contract as a loose insert — listed coverage for prescription drugs and the use of a formulary .