examples can be found in eta and osha . management information that would allow it to monitor its performance in meeting the program's statutory and regulatory deadlines . without information on the extent and cause of missed time periods , eta cannot ensure that agricultural employers have workers when they are needed . osha provides an example of the questionable reliability of some of labor's data . as we reported in december 1996 , osha , in its integrated management information system ( imis ) , does not always appropriately characterize or fully capture information on settlement agreements it has reached with employers , nor does it always change inspection data in a timely manner to reflect the terms of a settlement agreement . as a result , information regarding the number or type of violations and penalty amounts associated with a particular inspection can be distorted or inaccurate because it may not include reductions in penalties that occur as part of the settlement process . in addition , the depiction within its database of the relationship between a fatality or injury and the violations detected can be misleading . not only do unreliable data limit effective management of osha's programs ; they can also affect the private sector because , unlike some other government - maintained databases , osha's imis database is publicly accessible . academia relies on its accuracy in conducting policy research , while some private sector employers use its data in their commercial activities . for example , a database information service company based in maplewood , new jersey , offers standard reports and customized searches of labor's data to assist both public and private sector organizations with screening companies before contracting with them for products or services . in our work on job corps — administered by eta — we also found that reported information did not provide an accurate picture of program activities and results . our survey of employers who were reported as hiring job corps participants showed that about 15 percent of the job placements in our sample were potentially invalid: a number of employers reported that they had not hired students whom labor had reported placed with their businesses , and other employers of job corps participants identified by labor could not be found . many of the programs are administered by state and local agencies with federal funding and oversight , such as eta's job training partnership act ( jtpa ) programs . for example , as we reported in september 1996 , we found a lack of consistency among labor and other agencies administering employment - focused programs for the disabled . those that collected data on program outcomes — such as data on whether participants got jobs and kept them , what wages they received , and whether they received employee benefits such as health insurance — used different definitions for key data . they also had different eligibility criteria , paperwork requirements , software , and confidentiality rules that limited comparisons of program performance . the need for consistent data is particularly significant given the challenges labor faces in meeting the goals of workforce development within the context of an uncoordinated system of multiple employment training programs operated by numerous departments and agencies .