the department has a history of management problems . in our 1993 review of the department , we identified operational deficiencies such as lack of management vision , lack of a formal planning process , poor human resource management , and inadequate commitment to management issues by the department leadership . in addition , financial and information management were serious problems throughout the department , and not confined to postsecondary programs . further , recent legislation — goals 2000: educate america act , the school - to - work opportunities act , and the student loan reform act — requires strong management improvements to support sound implementation . two questions arise: does the department of education know if its programs are working ? and does the department have the resources to manage its funds and provide the needed information and technical assistance ? the department is responsible for funding over $22 billion in elementary and secondary programs , including title 1 , special education , vocational education , adult education , and safe and drug free schools . a major challenge facing the department is ensuring that these programs are providing the intended outcomes . to do this the department's programs must have clearly defined objectives and complete , accurate , and timely program data . $7.7 billion appropriated in fiscal year 1997 . its purpose is to promote access to and equity in education for low - income students . the congress modified the program in 1994 , strengthening its accountability provisions and encouraging the concentration of funds to serve more disadvantaged children . although the department has asked for $10 million in its fiscal year 1998 budget request to evaluate the impact of title 1 , it has only just begun a small study of selected school districts to look at targeting so that necessary mid - course modifications can be identified . the ultimate impact of the 1994 program modifications could be diminished if the funding changes are not being implemented as intended . as another example , we found in our work on the programs funded under the adult education act that the state grant program , which funds local programs intended to address the educational needs of millions of adults , had difficulty ensuring that the programs met these needs . the lack of clearly defined program objectives was one of the reasons for the difficulty . the broad objectives of the state grant program give the states flexibility to set their own priorities but , as some argue , they do not provide states with sufficient direction for measuring results . amendments to the act required the department to improve accountability by developing model indicators that states could adopt and use to evaluate local programs . however , experts disagree about whether developing indicators will help states to define measurable program objectives , evaluate local programs , and collect more accurate data . recently , we have been examining two of the most basic elements of education — the financing systems that undergird public education and the buildings within which education takes place .