current va users . to date , the 12 access points have enrolled nearly 5,000 veterans . at your request , we have reviewed va's efforts to establish access points and will provide you with a report this summer . today , we would like to discuss some legal , financial , and equity - of - access issues facing va managers as they strive to establish new access points . finally , we will highlight several options to address these issues . our comments today are based on visits to 3 va hospitals that operate 6 new access points ; interviews with 115 veterans now using them ; and discussions with officials of the other 6 hospitals that are now operating new access points . we also reviewed a wide range of records and documents provided by these facilities . we have discussed the results of our work with the deputy under secretary for health as well as other va officials and representatives of veterans' service organizations . in summary , in establishing new access points , va has identified what could be a cost - effective way to enhance the availability of health care for current users , especially those residing in underserved areas . doing this , however , has raised some important issues that va has not yet adequately addressed . for example , va is not adhering to statutory limitations that govern what services va may provide and who may be served . as a result , veterans are receiving more services than current statutes allow . also , creating hundreds of new access points may attract more veterans than network and hospital directors can finance within their existing budgets . empowering local hospital directors to establish new access points provides an opportunity to ensure that similarly situated veterans are afforded equal access to va care . however , access inequities may continue , given that directors are establishing new access points without clear , consistent criteria for targeting new locations and populations to be served . historically , the congress has limited va's authority to provide medical care to veterans , expanding it in a careful and deliberate manner . va hospital directors are likely to face an evolving series of financial challenges as they establish new access points . in the short term , hospitals must finance new access points within their existing budgets ; this will generally require a reallocation of resources among hospitals' activities . over the longer term , va hospitals may incur unexpected , significant cost increases to provide care to veterans who would otherwise not have used va's facilities . these costs may , however , be offset somewhat if access points allow hospitals to serve current users more efficiently . so far , va hospitals have successfully financed access points by implementing local management initiatives , unrelated to the access points , which allow the hospitals to operate more efficiently . for example , one hospital director estimated that he had generated resources for new access points by consolidating underused medical wards at a cost savings of $250,000 . to date , most directors have concluded that it was more cost - effective to contract for care in the target locations than operate new access points themselves .