their use is done by medicare . moreover , snfs can cite high ancillary service use to justify an exception to routine service cost limits , thereby increasing routine service payments . between 1990 and 1996 , the number of hospital - based snfs increased over 80 percent , from 1,145 such agencies to 2,088 . hospitals can benefit from establishing a snf unit in a number of ways . hospitals receive a set fee for a patient's entire hospital stay , based on a patient's diagnosis related group ( drg ) . therefore , the quicker that hospitals discharge a patient into a snf , the lower that patient's inpatient hospital care costs are . we found that in 1994 , patients with any of 12 drgs commonly associated with posthospital snf use had 4 to 21 percent shorter stays in hospitals with snf units than patients with the same drgs in hospitals without snf units . additionally , by owning a snf , hospitals can increase their medicare revenues through receipt of the full drg payment for patients with shorter lengths of stay and a cost - based payment after the patients are transferred to the snf . rapid growth in snf and home health expenditures has been accompanied by decreased , rather than increased , funding for program safeguard activities . for example , our march 1996 report found that part a contractor funding for medical review had decreased by almost 50 percent between 1989 and 1995 . as a result , while contractors had reviewed over 60 percent of home health claims in fiscal year 1987 , their review target had been lowered by 1995 to 3.2 percent of all claims ( or even , depending on available resources , to a required minimum of 1 percent ) . we found that a lack of adequate controls over the home health program , such as little intermediary medical review and limited physician involvement , makes it nearly impossible to know whether the beneficiary receiving home care qualifies for the benefit , needs the care being delivered , or even receives the services being billed to medicare . also , because of the small percentage of claims now selected for review , home health agencies that bill for noncovered services are less likely to be identified than was the case 10 years ago . similarly , the low level of review of snf services makes it difficult to know whether the recent increase in ancillary use is medically necessary ( for example , because patient mix has shifted toward those who need more services ) or simply a way for snfs to get more revenues . finally , because relatively few resources are available for auditing end - of - year provider cost reports , hcfa has little ability to identify whether home health agencies or snfs are charging medicare for costs unrelated to patient care or other unallowable costs . because of the lack of adequate program controls , it is quite possible that some of the recent increase in home health and snf expenditures stems from abusive practices . the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( p.l .