this comparison may be misleading , however . plans differ in how they calculate the dollar amount of drugs used by beneficiaries . some plans use retail prices to compute this amount . rates of complaints to hcfa from hmo enrollees can also indicate relative satisfaction levels . some states and large purchasers routinely publish plan rankings based on complaint rates . this information would be relatively simple for hcfa to compile and publish . although some hcfa offices track the complaints they receive , no hcfa office publishes hmo - specific complaint rate statistics . hcfa's initial efforts to assess beneficiaries' satisfaction with individual medicare hmos may be seriously flawed . recently , hcfa sponsored a survey of hmo members , known as the consumer assessment of health plans study . hcfa intends to release the results later this year to help beneficiaries compare the plans' ability to satisfy their members . shortcomings in the survey's sampling methodology , however , will greatly limit the usefulness of the results and preclude accurate comparisons . the consumer assessment study includes only beneficiaries who have remained in the same health plan for at least 12 months . beneficiaries who left dissatisfied or left for other reasons are excluded . a survey of only those beneficiaries who are satisfied enough to remain enrolled in their health plans may yield biased results . however , hcfa has not systematically analyzed or published medicare hmos' disenrollment rates . nor has hcfa yet surveyed beneficiaries who disenrolled from hmos to learn why some plans have relatively high disenrollment rates . relative disenrollment rates may serve as broad indicators of hmo enrollee satisfaction even though they cannot pinpoint the causes of disenrollment . they cannot distinguish , for example , disenrollment caused by quality or service problems from disenrollment caused by price or value competition . nonetheless , beneficiaries who are considering joining a managed care plan and know relative disenrollment rates may want to seek explanations for plans' high disenrollment rates . i am basing these remarks on our ongoing work for this committee . in 1995 , we recommended that hcfa publish hmos' disenrollment rates . hcfa took no action on our recommendation , even though the agency already collects , for plan payment purposes , the data necessary to calculate disenrollment rates . i will also discuss the findings from our recent report on hmo disenrollment rates and how data that hcfa already collects , but does not publish , may be useful to beneficiaries . in summary , hcfa has begun making certain plan - specific information available to beneficiaries . for example , in march of this year , hcfa posted summary information on health plans' premiums , out - of - pocket costs , and benefits on the internet . hcfa is also working to provide a printed version of this information directly to beneficiaries and meet other bba information dissemination requirements . these efforts , however , do not address the problem beneficiaries face in trying to carefully evaluate their health plan choices using the plans' summaries of benefits and other marketing materials . these materials are a major source of health plan information .