additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . neither type of withdrawal is reported to the oig . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . because of the amount of communication and coordination that is needed at the state and federal levels , the referral and exclusion process is complex . nevertheless , we believe that more attention must be paid to a system that works to protect beneficiaries from substandard care and helps ensure the integrity of federal health programs . although the oig believes its initiatives and the potential for additional investigative resources will help remedy weaknesses in the long term , we believe that the oig could take immediate action in several areas that would substantially improve its effectiveness . for example , the oig could provide more guidance for oig field staff and the states to facilitate the prompt preparation of case files — including required documentation — for oig decisions . most of the other states we visited told us they do not allow providers to withdraw from their programs to avoid formal sanction . although new york sometimes allows providers to withdraw from its program , state medicaid officials told us these cases are reported to the oig , the state licensing board , and others . certain providers new york suspects of abuse , however , are terminated but not reported to the oig . we were informed by new york officials that state program regulations permit either the provider or state medicaid agency to terminate a provider's participation in the program upon 30 days' written notice . according to state officials , this practice has been used primarily against pharmacies that the state suspected were heavily involved in dispensing drugs with a street market . as a result , the state agency has been able to deal quickly with pharmacies that it believed were involved in drug diversion . like voluntary withdrawals in illinois , however , these cases are not reported to the oig . the oig widely disseminates information on excluded providers through monthly reports and periodic cumulative listings to various state and federal agencies so that they , too , will remove these providers from their programs . we found , however , that for several reasons states sometimes have difficulty identifying and excluding providers who appear on the lists . first , the states have difficulty identifying individuals — such as nurses , pharmacists , or physicians — who are employed by hospitals , nursing homes , pharmacies , and health maintenance organizations that bill the program under the entities' billing number .