messrs . chairmen , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions you or members of the subcommittees may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . essentially , impact evaluations are the only way to answer the question , “is this program making a difference ? ” impact evaluation is a form of program evaluation that assesses the net impact of a program by comparing its outcomes with an estimate of what would have happened without the program . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . this form of program evaluation is used when external factors are known to influence the program's outcomes ; it isolates program contributions from other factors that may affect the achievement of program objectives . the most reliable way to determine program impact is to compare a group of head start participants with an equivalent group of nonparticipants . the preferred method for establishing that the groups are equivalent at the outset is to randomly assign participants to either a head start group or a comparison group , although other methods are valuable for estimating a program's net impact . in 1997 , we reported the results of our work on identifying what existing studies suggest about head start's impact . to conclude that impact has been demonstrated , one would expect to see either ( 1 ) a sufficient number of reasonably well - designed individual studies whose findings could appropriately be combined to provide information on national impact or ( 2 ) at least one large - scale evaluation using a nationally representative sample . after locating and screening 600 studies and consulting with many early childhood researchers and officials at the head start bureau , we identified only 22 studies that met the criteria for inclusion in our analysis . other early childhood programs for low - income families has been growing . thus , the congress needs to know with some certainty whether the federal investment in head start is making a difference . in commenting on our earlier report , hhs said that the existing research on head start's impact was substantial and that the department's strategy to expand this research was appropriate for determining both the program's impact and its quality . hhs also indicated plans to evaluate the feasibility of conducting impact studies such as we recommended . hhs supported its claim that the existing research was substantial by noting the findings from a 1985 research synthesis of studies conducted in the 1960s and 1970s and two more recent studies . we disagreed , however , that findings drawn from studies more than 20 years old adequately support claims about the current program's impact . as noted , the current head start program operates in an environment that has changed in the last 20 years , when other , non - head start comprehensive early childhood services were not as available .