additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . dually eligible individuals are medicare beneficiaries first . according to the level of support provided by medicaid , the dually eligible population is divided into two major groups: ( 1 ) those receiving medicare cost - sharing support and additional medicaid health care benefits ( “full - benefit” individuals ) and ( 2 ) those receiving help from medicaid only to cover out - of - pocket costs after payment by medicare . collectively , both groups of dually eligible beneficiaries represent about 16 percent of the medicare population but 30 percent of medicare expenditures . similarly , they account for about 17 percent of the medicaid population but 35 percent of medicaid expenditures . states vary dramatically in the proportion of medicare beneficiaries also enrolled in their medicaid programs . according to one source , in 1993 , two states' medicaid programs covered more than 20 percent of their medicare beneficiary populations , whereas eight states' medicaid programs covered fewer than 7 percent of their states' medicare beneficiaries . these differences may reflect variation across states in demographic composition , state eligibility criteria , outreach efforts , and data reporting practices . for medicaid primarily because they are “categorically eligible” — that is , they are eligible for such cash assistance programs as supplemental security income ( ssi ) — or because they are “medically needy,” which means they have incomes or assets above the levels that would make them eligible for cash assistance but their medical expenses relative to their incomes are so substantial that states qualify them for assistance . a much smaller group of medicare beneficiaries — an estimated 562,000 in 1995 — receives medicaid coverage for certain medicare financial obligations and includes two subgroups . dual eligibles are among the most vulnerable medicare beneficiaries . in fiscal year 1996 , medicare covered an estimated 38 million beneficiaries at a cost of $197 billion . medicaid is a health insurance program financed and administered by both the federal government and the states . its beneficiaries include poor children and their parents as well as low - income elderly , blind , and disabled individuals . in addition to covering primary and acute care , medicaid covers outpatient prescription drugs and long - term care both in the home and in nursing facilities . medicaid , however , is not 1 , but over 50 separate programs . although federal law mandates coverage of certain medical services and population groups , it also permits states to choose whether to cover additional services or low - income population groups . thus , under medicaid , the populations served and benefits provided vary across states . the percentage of medicaid expenditures covered by the federal government also varies by state , depending on the state's per capita income , with a range from 50 to 83 percent . in 1996 , the federal government paid 57 percent of the aggregate medicaid costs of about $160 billion , which provided health care coverage for about 37 million beneficiaries .