copayments . third , va facilities could further reduce the number of otc products available to veterans on an outpatient basis . finally , the congress could expand copayment requirements . va physicians prescribed otc products for veterans more than 7 million times in fiscal year 1995 , accounting for almost one - fifth of all prescriptions . va pharmacies filled these otc prescriptions over 15 million times , about one - fourth of all prescriptions filled . va physicians prescribed more than 2,000 unique otc products . va pharmacies classify these products into three groups: medications such as antacids , medical supplies such as insulin syringes , and dietary supplements such as ensure . medications account for about 73 percent of the 15 million otc prescriptions filled , medical supplies for 26 percent , and dietary supplements for less than 1 percent . va's network and facility directors have considerable freedom in developing operating policies , procedures , and practices for va physicians and pharmacies . they and the pharmacies have taken a number of different actions to limit the number of otc products available through the pharmacies and the quantity of products veterans can receive . however , little uniformity in the application of limits is evident . in general , each facility has a pharmacy and therapeutics committee that decides which otc products to provide based on product safety , efficacy , and cost effectiveness . these products are listed on a formulary and va physicians are generally to prescribe only these products . of the 2,000 unique otc products dispensed systemwide , individual pharmacies generally handled fewer than 480 , with the number of otc products ranging between 160 and 940 products . medical supplies account for the majority of unique products , with pharmacies generally dispensing fewer than 10 types of dietary supplements . however , three facilities' formularies excluded dietary supplements . the volume of otc products dispensed also varied among facilities . overall , otc products accounted for about 25 percent of all prescriptions filled systemwide . but otc products represented between 7 percent and 47 percent of all prescriptions dispensed at individual facilities . of note , fewer than 100 products were involved in more than 80 percent of the 15 million times that otc products were dispensed . the most frequently dispensed otc products include ( 1 ) medications such as aspirin , acetaminophen , insulin , and stool softener ; ( 2 ) dietary supplements including sustacal and ensure ; and ( 3 ) supplies such as alcohol prep pads , lancets , and chemical test strips . facilities have sometimes restricted physicians' prescriptions of otc products to veterans with certain conditions or within certain eligibility categories . for example , 115 facilities restricted dietary supplements to veterans who required tube feedings or received approval for the supplement from dieticians . for medical supplies , a facility provided certain supplies only to patients who received them when hospitalized and another provided diapers only to veterans with service - connected conditions . one facility provided otc medications only to veterans with service - connected disabilities . facilities have sometimes restricted the quantities of otc products that pharmacies may dispense .