( see fig . about 8.3 percent of veterans have compensable service - connected disabilities . surprisingly , veterans who served during peacetime are almost twice as likely to have service - connected disabilities as veterans of the korean war and only slightly less likely to have service - connected disabilities than vietnam - era veterans . ( see fig . these savings would then be used to pay for the increased outpatient workload generated by the patients diverted to outpatient care . there is , however , little evidence to suggest that eligibility reform alone will result in significant numbers of veterans being diverted to outpatient care . expanding the number of veterans in the mandatory care category while retaining current resource constraints might force rationing of care to veterans in the mandatory care group . this suggests that va physicians are more likely to “stretch” the outpatient benefit to provide crutches to veterans with broken legs than to admit the veteran to the hospital for that purpose . eligibility reform proposals introduced during the past year would eliminate the restrictions on veterans' access to outpatient care . in doing so , however , the proposals would likely generate significant new demand for va outpatient care services . in addition , the bills generally do not address the other provisions in current law that contribute to inappropriate use of va health care resources and uneven access to health care services . ( see table 2. ) each of the four major bills introduced during the past year would create a uniform benefit package by eliminating the obviate - the - need restriction on coverage of outpatient care . the bills would make all 26 million veterans eligible for comprehensive outpatient services . in addition , the four bills would expand the number of veterans in the mandatory care category for comprehensive outpatient care from about 465,000 to 9 million to 11 million veterans . eliminating the obviate - the - need restriction on access to ambulatory care would simplify administration of health care benefits because va physicians would no longer need to determine whether a patient would likely end up in the hospital if he or she was not treated . eliminating the restriction would also promote greater equity by reducing the inconsistencies in eligibility decisions . under the va proposal , about 1.8 million veterans currently eligible for limited outpatient care would be placed in the highest - priority group for comprehensive care . the va proposal would also place veterans with noncompensable service - connected disabilities ( estimated to number about 1.2 million ) above low - income veterans with no service - connected disabilities in the priority ranking of veterans in the mandatory care category . only after the needs are met for the top three priority categories could va fund care for low - income veterans . we are concerned that sufficient funds might not be available to fulfill va's safety net mission after meeting the expanded demands for care of higher - priority veterans .