additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . what have been the consequences for retail pharmacies of changes in this process ? what general strategies are retail pharmacies undertaking or proposing to respond to an increasingly competitive environment ? our information is based on a review of the literature on drug pricing , interviews with representatives of the groups involved , and several gao reports related to drug pricing . these reports examine the effect of the medicaid drug rebate law on prices , the role of pbms in the health care industry , and efforts to control drug costs by the largest federal employee health plan . in summary , the actions taken by health insurers to contain prescription drug costs have had important implications for retail pharmacies.specifically , the insurers' consolidation of purchasing power and ability to increase market share for manufacturers' drugs has allowed them and their representatives to often obtain drug discounts beyond those available to retail pharmacies . further , in instances in which insurers and pbms contract with pharmacies to provide drugs and services to plan members , the plans have been able to control reimbursement rates to pharmacies for those drugs and services . while these developments have helped health insurers control their pharmacy benefit costs , they have also created an anxious environment for retail pharmacists . in response , the pharmacists have adopted a number of steps to become more competitive and have taken legal and legislative action to try to ensure that they can obtain the same discounts as managed care plans and other large purchasers . our analysis of federal legislation directed at reducing medicaid drug costs , the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( obra 1990 ) , indicates that the law's effect may well have resulted in higher outpatient drug costs to many large purchasers . in an era of great concern over health care costs , the potential of any legislation to increase costs must be considered . in an earlier era , when there was less concern over the costs of health care , the process by which drugs reached patients was relatively simple . the patient went to a doctor , who , if convinced that the malady could be helped with medication , would prescribe a drug that the patient could obtain at the local pharmacy . if the patient's health insurance had a prescription drug benefit , the patient would be reimbursed for the purchase ; if not , the patient would cover the costs out - of - pocket . the decisions regarding which drug would be prescribed were often left to physicians , while those regarding drug cost typically involved manufacturers and retail pharmacies . further , the health insurer was usually not centrally involved in either decision . today , the ways in which drugs are prescribed and paid for are considerably more complex . to a great extent , this complexity has been introduced in direct response to concerns with the rapid growth in health care expenditures .