abuse . finally , ssa is at risk of paying some ssi recipients benefits for too long because it has not adequately addressed their special vocational rehabilitation needs nor developed an agencywide strategy for helping recipients who can enter the workforce . the congress has recently made several changes that address program eligibility issues and increase the frequency of ssa's continuing eligibility reviews . ssa has also begun addressing its program vulnerabilities and has made the prevention of fraud and abuse a part of its plan for rebuilding public confidence in the agency . however , our concerns about underlying ssi program vulnerabilities and the level of management attention devoted to these vulnerabilities continue . as part of our high - risk work , we are continuing to evaluate the underlying causes of long - standing ssi problems and the actions necessary to address them . ssi provides cash benefits to low - income aged , blind , or disabled people . currently , the aged ssi population is roughly 1.4 million and the blind and disabled population more than 5.2 million . those who are applying for benefits on the basis of age must be age 65 or older and be financially eligible for benefits ; those who are applying for disability benefits must qualify on the basis of two criteria: financial and disability eligibility . to qualify for benefits financially , individuals may not have income greater than the current maximum monthly ssi benefit level of $484 ( $727 for a couple ) or have resources worth more than $2,000 ( $3,000 for a couple ) . to be qualified as disabled , applicants must be unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity because of an impairment expected to result in death or last at least 12 months . the process ssa uses to determine an applicant's financial eligibility for ssi benefits involves an initial determination when someone first applies and periodic reviews to determine whether the recipient remains eligible . ssi recipients are required to report significant events that may affect their financial eligibility for benefits , including changes in income , resources , marital status , or living arrangements , such as incarceration or residence in a nursing home . to verify that the information provided by a recipient is accurate , ssa generally relies on matching data from other federal and state agencies , including internal revenue service form 1099 information , department of veterans affairs benefits data , and state - maintained earnings and unemployment benefits data . when ssa staff find discrepancies between income and assets claimed by a recipient and the data from other agencies , they send notices to ssa field offices to investigate further . to determine a person's qualifications for ssi as a disabled person , ssa must determine the individual's capacity to work as well as his or her financial eligibility . to determine whether an applicant's impairment qualifies him or her for ssi benefits , ssa uses state disability determination services ( dds ) to make the initial assessment . once a recipient begins receiving benefits , ssa is required to periodically conduct continuing disability reviews ( cdr ) to determine whether a recipient's condition remains disabling .