market . many consumers also do not fully understand the eligibility criteria that apply and as a result may risk losing their right to coverage . issuers of health coverage believe certain hipaa provisions are burdensome to administer , may create unintended consequences , or may be abused by consumers . for example , although issuers generally appear to be complying with the requirement to provide certificates of creditable coverage to enrollees who terminate health coverage , many continue to suggest that issuing these certificates to all enrollees is unnecessary and costly . issuers also fear that hipaa's guaranteed renewal provision could cause those eligible for medicare to pay for redundant coverage and could also hinder carriers' ability to sell products to children and other targeted populations . and certain protections for group plan enrollees may create an opportunity for consumer abuse , such as the guarantees of credit for prior coverage , which could give certain enrollees an incentive , when they need medical care , to switch from low - cost , high - deductible coverage to more expensive , low - deductible coverage . state insurance regulators have encountered difficulties implementing and enforcing hipaa provisions where federal guidance lacks sufficient clarity or detail , such as that pertaining to nondiscrimination and late enrollee requirements in the group market , and to risk - spreading for products available to hipaa eligibles in the individual market . while acknowledging that in some areas more guidance is needed , federal officials noted that the congress allowed the regulations to be issued before a notice and comment period , given the need to draft many complex regulations within tight statutory deadlines . federal regulators face an unexpectedly large role under hipaa , which could strain hhs' resources and weaken its oversight . in states that do not pass legislation implementing hipaa provisions , hhs is required to take on the regulatory role . for at least five states that reported they did not pass implementing legislation by the end of 1997 , hhs must perform that role . since it may have similar responsibility for several other states that have not enacted such legislation or reported on it , the full extent of hhs' regulatory role under this law is not yet known . some implementation challenges may soon recede ; others are hypothetical and may not materialize . as federal agencies issue more guidance and states and issuers gain more experience with hipaa , concerns about the clarity of its regulations may diminish . whether unintended consequences will occur is as yet unknown , in part because sufficient evidence has not accumulated . however , two substantive concerns are likely to persist . first , in federal fallback states , premiums for group - to - individual guaranteed access coverage are likely to remain high unless regulations with more explicit risk - spreading requirements are issued at the federal or state level or states adopt other mechanisms to moderate these rates . second , hhs' ability to meet its growing oversight role may prove inadequate given the current level of resources , particularly if more states cede regulatory authority to the federal government .