we will focus on this option . for example , many public pension plans currently offer a lower retirement age and higher retirement income benefit than social security . social security , on the other hand , offers complete inflation protection , full benefit portability , and dependent benefits , which are not available in many public pension plans . costs would likely increase for those states and localities that wanted to keep their enhanced benefits for newly hired employees . alternatively , states and localities that wanted to maintain level spending for retirement would likely need to reduce some pension benefits . regardless , mandating coverage for public employees would present legal and administrative issues that would need to be resolved . for example , states and localities could require up to 4 years to design , legislate , and implement changes to current pension plans . the 1935 social security act mandated coverage for most workers in commerce and industry , which at that time comprised about 60 percent of the workforce . state and local government employees were excluded because they had their own retirement systems and there was concern over the question of the federal government's right to impose a tax on state governments . subsequently , the congress extended mandatory social security coverage to most of the excluded groups , including state and local employees not covered by a public pension plan . the congress also extended voluntary coverage to state and local employees covered by public pension plans . since 1983 , however , public employers have not been permitted to withdraw from the program once they are covered . ssa estimates that 96 percent of the workforce , including 70 percent of the state and local government workforce , is now covered by social security . social security provides retirement , disability , and survivor benefits to insured workers and their dependents . insured workers are eligible for full retirement benefits at age 65 and reduced benefits at age 62 . social security retirement benefits are based on the worker's age and career earnings , are fully indexed for inflation after retirement , and replace a relatively higher proportion of the final year's wages for low earners . social security's primary source of revenue is the old age , survivors , and disability insurance portion of the payroll tax paid by employers and employees . the payroll tax is 6.2 percent of earnings each for employers and employees , up to an established maximum . ssa estimates that 5 million state and local government employees , excluding students and election workers , are not covered by social security . ssa also estimates that annual wages for noncovered employees total about $132.5 billion . seven states — california , colorado , illinois , louisiana , massachusetts , ohio , and texas — account for more than 75 percent of the noncovered payroll . a 1995 survey of public pension plans found that police , firefighters , and teachers are more likely to occupy noncovered positions than other employees . specified benefit rate for each year of service and the member's final average salary over a specified time period , usually 3 years .