additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . this disparity has triggered numerous investigations . congressional investigations , for example , discovered evidence of fraud and abuse by proprietary school owners . the congress found that some proprietary schools focused their efforts on enrolling educationally disadvantaged students and obtaining federal funds rather than on providing meaningful training or education . the congress also concluded that the regulatory oversight system of title iv programs provided little or no assurance that schools were educating students efficiently or effectively . students who enroll in occupational education programs , obtain grants , and incur significant debt often risk being unable to find work because they have been trained for fields in which no job demand exists . proprietary school students are particularly vulnerable in this situation because , according to current research , unlike university graduates , they are less likely to relocate outside of their surrounding geographic region . the department's inspector general ( ig ) recently estimated that about $725 million in title iv funds are spent annually to train cosmetology students at proprietary schools , yet the supply of cosmetologists routinely exceeds demand . for example , in 1990 , 96,000 cosmetologists were trained nationwide , adding to a labor market already supplied with 1.8 million licensed cosmetologists . for that year , according to the bureau of labor statistics , only 597,000 people found employment as cosmetologists , about one - third of all licensed cosmetologists . in texas , the ig also found that , not surprisingly , the default rate for cosmetology students exceeded 40 percent in 1990 . several recommendations emanating from these findings were included in the 1992 amendments to hea . the title iv regulatory structure includes three actors — the department of education , states , and accrediting agencies — known as the “triad.” because of concern about federal interference in school operations , curriculum , and instruction , the department has relied on accrediting agencies and states to determine and enforce standards of program quality . hea recognizes the roles of the department , the states , and the accrediting agencies as providing a framework for a shared responsibility for ensuring that the “gate” to student financial aid programs opens only to those institutions that provide students with quality education or training worth the time , energy , and money they invest . the department plays two roles in gatekeeping . first , it verifies institutions' eligibility and certifies their financial and administrative capacity . in verifying institutional eligibility , the department reviews documents provided by schools to ensure their compliance with state authorization and accreditation requirements ; eligibility renewal is conducted every 4 years . in certifying that a school meets financial responsibility requirements , the department determines whether the school can pay its bills , is financially sound , and that the owners and employees have not previously been convicted of defrauding the federal government . in certifying that institutions meet administrative requirements , the department determines whether institutions have personnel resources adequate to administer title iv programs and to maintain student records .