the time . furthermore , some of cpsc's data sets have a known upward or downward bias because of the way the data were constructed . for example , when estimates of incidents are based only on investigated or reported cases , two potential biases are likely to be introduced into the analysis: ( 1 ) the estimates are likely to be biased downward by nonreporting and ( 2 ) the incidents reported tend to be the more severe ones . in only 53 percent of applicable cases did cpsc's analysis inform the reader of known limitations inherent in the data being used for cost - benefit analysis . fewer precautions in response to a change in a product's safety features . for example , in establishing a standard for child - resistant packaging that was also “senior - friendly,” cpsc considered that because child - resistant medicine bottles can be difficult to open , a grandparent might leave the cover off the bottle , creating an even greater risk than would exist with the original cap . although cpsc considered such factors in some cases , only 49 percent of its analyses reflected potential risk - risk trade - offs . cpsc has not established internal procedures that require analysts to conduct comprehensive analyses and report them in sufficient detail . for example , according to cpsc staff , the agency has little written guidance about what factors should be included in cost - benefit analyses , what methodology should be used to incorporate these factors , and how the results should be presented . staff also told us that cpsc analyses are not generally subject to external peer review . such reviews can serve as an important mechanism for enhancing the quality and credibility of the analyses that are used to help make key agency decisions . in our report , we recommend that the chairman direct agency staff to develop and implement procedures to ensure that all cost - benefit analyses performed on behalf of cpsc are comprehensive and reported in sufficient detail , including providing measures of precision for underlying data , incorporating information on all important costs and benefits , and performing sensitivity analysis . to help minimize the possibility that a product might be unfairly disparaged , in section 6 ( b ) of the consumer product safety act , the congress imposed restrictions on cpsc's disclosure of manufacturer - specific information . before cpsc can release any information that identifies a manufacturer , it must take “reasonable steps” to verify the accuracy of the information and to ensure that disclosure is fair ; notify the manufacturer that the information is subject to release ; and give the manufacturer an opportunity to comment on the information . these restrictions apply not only to information the agency issues on its own — such as a press release — but also to information disclosed in response to a request under the freedom of information act . section 6 ( b ) also requires cpsc to establish procedures to ensure that releases of information that reflect on the safety of a consumer product or class of products are accurate and not misleading , regardless of whether the information disclosed identifies a specific manufacturer .