not applicable . states with charter legislation but no charter schools . states included in our survey with number of schools operating in each . states and the district of columbia not included in our survey . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . access these funds . for example , the business administrator at a charter school we visited told us that it took numerous visits and phone calls to district officials to understand the allocation processes and procedures , as well as to negotiate what he thought was an equitable share of federal funding for his school . district officials we spoke with noted that because their school district had approved and issued several charters to individual schools with varying degrees of fiscal autonomy , working out allocation issues has taken some time . district officials noted that they have limited time and resources to use in developing new policies and procedures for charter schools , especially because the number of charter schools and their student populations constitute a very small portion of their overall operations . in some cases , charter school officials noted that they did not receive funds because they failed to meet federal or district qualifying requirements . education notifies them of funding opportunities and application requirements . charter school operators in other states told us that they received technical assistance from local school districts , while other charter school operators employed consultants to assist them . charter schools are public schools that operate under a state charter ( or contract ) specifying the terms under which the schools may operate . they are established under state law , do not charge tuition , and are nonsectarian . state charter school laws and policies vary widely with respect to the degree of autonomy provided to the schools , the number of charter schools that may be established , the qualifications required for charter school applicants and teachers , and the accountability criteria that charter schools must meet . since 1991 , 29 states and the district of columbia have enacted laws authorizing charter schools .