administrative overhead . payments for ancillary services , such as physical , occupational , or speech therapy , however , were virtually unlimited . these unchecked ancillary service payments have been a major contributor to significant increases in daily reimbursements to snfs . because providing more of these services generally triggered higher payments , facilities had no incentive to deliver services efficiently or only when necessary . the bba called for phasing in a pps for snf care beginning after july 1 , 1998 , to bring program spending under control . design , implementation , and impact issues: under the pps , snfs receive a payment for each day of care provided to a medicare beneficiary . the payment , called a per diem rate , is based on the average daily cost of providing all medicare - covered snf services , as reflected in facilities' 1995 costs . since not all patients require the same amount of care , the per diem rate is “case - mix” adjusted to take into account the nature of each patient's condition and expected care needs . facilities that can care for beneficiaries for less than this case - mix - adjusted per diem amount will benefit financially , whereas snfs with costs higher than the adjusted per diem rate will be at risk for the difference between their costs and the payments . the snf pps is expected to control medicare spending because the per diem rate covers all services , so snfs have an incentive to provide services efficiently and judiciously . moreover , since payments vary with patient needs , the pps is intended to ensure access to these services . we are concerned , however , that the design of the case - mix adjuster preserves the opportunity for providers to increase their compensation by supplying potentially unnecessary services . as stated , the snf pps divides beneficiaries into case - mix groups to reflect differences in patient needs that affect the cost of care . each group is intended to define clinically similar patients who are expected to incur similar costs . an adjustment is associated with each group to account for these cost differences . a facility then receives a daily payment that is the same for each patient within a group . since the payments do not vary with the actual costs incurred , a snf has an incentive to reduce the costs of caring for the patients in each case - mix group . level of services required for placement in a particular group . this reduces the average cost for the snf's patients in that case - mix group but does not reduce the medicare payments for these patients . thus , expected medicare savings may not be achieved . we are also concerned that the data underlying the snf rates overstate the reasonable costs of providing services and may not appropriately reflect costs for patients with different care needs . most of the cost data used to set the snf rates were not audited . of particular concern are therapy costs , which are likely inflated because there have been few limits on these payments .