program weakness . staff and managers were particularly concerned that recipients were not reporting changes in their living arrangements that could result in lower ssi payments . when determining ssi eligibility , ssa's claims processors are required to apply a complex set of policies designed to document individuals' living arrangements and any additional support they may be receiving from others . for many years , ssa's quality reviewers have deemed this process to be highly prone to error , susceptible to manipulation , and a major source of ssi overpayments . in one field office we visited , staff identified a pattern of activity involving recipients who , shortly after becoming eligible for benefits , claim that they have separated from their spouse and are living in separate residences . staff suspected that these reported living arrangement changes occurred as married recipients became aware that separate living arrangements would substantially increase their monthly benefits . staff also suspected that several local attorneys were preparing “boiler plate” separation agreements for these individuals to help them qualify for higher benefits . however , because of a lack of field representatives to investigate these claims , only rarely were these cases closely reviewed or challenged . during our review , we identified several internal and external studies of ssi living arrangement issues conducted over many years . some of these studies recommended ways to simplify the process by eliminating many complex calculations and thereby making it less susceptible to manipulation by recipients . others contained recommendations for making the ssi program less costly to taxpayers by requiring that benefit calculations be subject to maximum family caps or economies of scale or both when two or more recipients reside in the same household . in 1989 , ssa's office of the inspector general ( oig ) reported that a more simplified process that applied an economies - of - scale rationale to all ssi recipients living with another person would result in fewer decisional errors and reduce annual overpayments by almost $80 million . however , the oig concluded that such a change would require legislative action . despite these studies , and the potential program savings associated with addressing this issue , we could find no evidence that ssa has ever acted on the recommendations or submitted proposals for changing laws governing current living arrangement policies . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .