union . in 24 cases , firms were ordered to stop threatening employees with the loss of their jobs or the shutdown of the firm . firms were ordered in 33 cases to stop other kinds of threats , such as interrogating employees and circulating lists of employees associated with the union . to facilitate the bargaining of a contract , the board ordered firms to provide information to the union in 16 cases . we found 261 federal contractors that were the corporate parents of facilities that had received proposed penalties of $15,000 or more from osha for violations of safety and health regulations in fiscal year 1994 . these contractors received $38 billion in contract dollars , about 22 percent of the $176 billion in federal contracts , valued at $25,000 or more , awarded that year . about 75 percent of the total dollar value of these contracts was awarded by the department of defense , with large amounts of contract dollars also awarded by the department of energy and nasa . about 5 percent of these 261 federal contractors ( 12 firms ) each received more than $500 million in federal contracts in fiscal year 1994 . in total , this group received over 60 percent of the $38 billion awarded to violators . a majority of the 345 work sites ( 56 percent ) penalized for safety and health violations were engaged in manufacturing . an examination of the violators' standard industrial classification codes showed that many of these work sites manufactured paper , food , or primary and fabricated metals . although most violators were engaged in manufacturing , a significant percentage of work sites ( 18 percent ) were engaged in construction . many ( 68 percent ) of the work sites where the violations occurred were relatively small , employing 500 or fewer workers . just over 15 percent of the work sites employed 25 or fewer workers . although few work sites employed large numbers of workers , the federal contractors that own these work sites often employed large numbers of workers in multiple facilities across the country . serious physical harm to workers , or willful ( 69 percent ) — situations in which the employer intentionally and knowingly committed a violation . at work sites of 50 federal contractors , a total of 35 fatalities and 85 injuries occurred . most of the violations ( 72 percent ) were of general industry standards , including failure to protect workers from electrical hazards and injuries resulting from inadequate machine guarding . osha compliance officers assessed a total of $24 million in proposed penalties and $10.9 million in actual penalties for all violations in these 345 inspections . in some cases , these federal contractors were assessed proposed penalties that were especially high . in 8 percent of the 345 inspections , the contractor was assessed a proposed penalty of $100,000 or more . in addition , some of these 261 federal contractors were assessed a significant penalty more than once in fiscal year 1994 for violations that occurred at different work sites owned by , or associated with , the same parent company .