additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . earlier studies reported similar results . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . both darp and tops found that reports of drug use were reduced most for clients who stayed in treatment at least 3 months , regardless of the treatment setting . recommended at least 6 months in treatment ; for both program types , the median treatment episode was 3 months . because all of the effectiveness studies relied on information reported by the clients , the level of treatment benefit reported may be overstated . typically , drug abusers were interviewed before they entered treatment and again following treatment and asked about their use of illicit drugs , their involvement in criminal activity , and other drug - related behaviors.although this data collection method is commonly used in national surveys and drug abuse treatment evaluations , recent questions about the validity of self - reported drug use raise concerns about this approach . in general , self - reporting is least valid for ( 1 ) the more stigmatized drugs , such as cocaine ; ( 2 ) recent use ; and ( 3 ) those involved with the criminal justice system . a recent national institute on drug abuse ( nida ) review of current research on the validity of self - reported drug use highlights the limitations of data collected in this manner . according to this review , recent studies conducted with criminal justice clients ( such as people on parole , on probation , or awaiting trail ) and former treatment clients suggest that 50 percent or fewer current users accurately report their drug use in confidential interviews . as questions have developed about the accuracy of self - reported data,researchers have begun using more objective means , such as urinalysis , to validate such data . for example , nties researchers found that 20 percent of those in a validation group acknowledged cocaine use within the past 30 days , but urinalysis revealed recent cocaine use by 29 percent . tops researchers reported that only 40 percent of the individuals testing positive for cocaine 24 months after treatment had reported using the drug in the previous 3 days . because results from the major studies of treatment effectiveness were not adjusted for the likelihood of underreported drug use , reductions in drug use found may be overstated .