additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . further manufactured by baxter healthcare . seventy - five percent of all american red cross plasma manufactured by the swiss red cross is now at the 60,000-donor limit , with plans for all production to adhere to the limit in the near future . in a study employing the modeling technique noted above , researchers found that limiting the number of donors in a pool may only be marginally beneficial for infrequent recipients , who might be exposed to an emergent unknown infectious agent with a low prevalence in the donor population , which current manufacturing processes did not inactivate or remove . as an example , the researchers calculated that for an agent with a prevalence of 1 in 500,000 ( for example , a rare or emerging virus ) , a pool comprising 10,000 donations would yield a 2 in 100 chance of exposure to that agent for a one - time recipient . for frequent users of plasma products ( that is , 100 infusions during a lifetime ) , however , this same pool size of 10,000 would yield an 86 in 100 chance of exposure to that agent , assuming that the products would come from different pools . reducing the number of donors in a pool does not significantly decrease this effect . thus , these modeling data suggest that smaller plasma pool sizes will reduce the likelihood of transmission of viral agents to infrequent users of plasma products but will have only a minor impact on frequent recipients of such products . in addition , risk of exposure does not always equate with risk of infection . in fact , risk of exposure is always greater than or equal to risk of infection . for example , the recent transmission of hcv by a plasma derivative that had not undergone viral inactivation procedures showed that the risk of seroconversion for recipients of this product increased with the number of positive hcv lots infused and the quantity of hcv viral material infused . not all recipients were infected , however , because the highest percentage of seroconversions seen with the highest levels of hcv virus infused did not exceed 30 percent . not all recipients experience seroconversions because of two factors: ( 1 ) each recipient's dose and ( 2 ) the reduction of infectiousness due to steps in the manufacturing process in addition to viral removal and inactivation . as mentioned , certain infectious units could make it through the donor screening , deferral , and testing process . manufacturers have , therefore , introduced additional steps in the fractionation process to inactivate or remove viruses and bacteria that may have gotten into plasma pools . these techniques virtually eliminate enveloped viruses such as hiv , hbv , and hcv . they are only partly effective , however , against nonenveloped viruses such as hav and human parvovirus . all types of plasma derivatives undergo viral inactivation or removal . the two main methods of inactivation are heat treatment and solvent - detergent treatment .