i can call him at any time . the pastor of my church has also counseled me . my family members . encouraged me to go to work and not rely on disability income . they were helpful to me in assessing the merits and benefits of potential job offers . i am using a combination of prozac and lithium medications to control my condition and me to work regularly where i don't use my sick days . therapy with my counselor for over 4 years has really allowed me to work and function in a work environment . medications for epilepsy help keep condition under control , which minimizes seizures and the risk of getting fired . checks from time to time to make sure everything is okay even suggests taking days off . infectious disease doctor encouraging and is very supportive . he wrote a letter to employer explaining condition and my capabilities . parents are very supportive medications have made me physically able to work . providing emotional support . psychotherapy and group therapy been helpful . also , medication has been helpful . my psychotherapist has gone out of his way to help me . at the college i attended , a director of the disabled talks to my professors and tells them about my condition so that they can take this into account when assigning work and evaluating my performance . ada has helped because i believe that would not have hired me because of my problems . responded affirmatively said that poorer health would inhibit employment . similarly , some said that improved health would facilitate work . we found little difference in future work and program plans between people with physical and psychiatric impairments . di program incentives for reducing risks associated with attempting work appear to have played a limited role in beneficiaries' efforts to become employed . although the trial work period was considered helpful by 31 respondents , others indicated it had shortcomings or were unaware that it existed . for instance , several respondents indicated the amount signifying a “successful” month of earnings ( $200 ) was too low , an all - or - nothing cutoff of benefits after 9 months was too abrupt , and having only one trial period did not recognize the cyclical nature of some disabilities.respondents' mixed views of the design of the trial work period suggest that while they value a transitional period between receiving full cash benefits and losing some benefits because of work , they might be more satisfied with a different design . finally , over one - fifth were unaware of the trial work period and therefore may have unknowingly been at risk of losing cash benefits . moreover , many respondents were unaware of other work incentives as well . consequently , fewer respondents reported these incentives as helpful than might have had they been better informed . for example , 41 respondents were unaware of the provision that allows beneficiaries to deduct impairment - related work expenses from the amount ssa considers the threshold for determining continued eligibility . using the deduction could make it easier for a beneficiary to continue working while on the rolls without losing benefits .