residents . contracts range from a one - page standard form lease to a 55-page document with attachments . some are written in very fine print , while others are prepared in large , easy - to - read type . some contracts are complex documents written in specialized legal language , while others are not . marketing and other written material provided by the facilities also vary widely from a one - page list of basic services and monthly rent to multiple documents of more than 100 pages . we examined written marketing materials and contracts from 60 of the facilities that responded to our survey to determine whether they were complete , clear , and consistent with state laws . while most of the facility materials we reviewed were specific and relatively clear , we found that materials from 20 of the 60 facilities contained language that was unclear or potentially misleading , usually concerning the circumstances under which a resident could be required to leave a facility . contracts and other written materials we reviewed were often unclear or inconsistent with each other or with requirements of state regulation regarding how long residents could remain as their needs change , resident notification requirements , and other procedural requirements for discharge . for example , the contract from a california facility was vague regarding the circumstances under which a resident could be required to move . it stated that the facility can discharge a resident for good and sufficient cause without elaborating on what the cause might be . the contract also failed to refer to state regulations that provide specific criteria for discharge or eviction . as shown in figure 2 , the marketing material one florida facility uses is potentially misleading in specifying that residents can be assured that if their health changes , the facility can meet their needs and they will not have to move again . however , the facility's contract specifies a range of health - related criteria for immediate discharge , including changes in a resident's condition or need for services that the facility cannot provide . the contract of an oregon facility is inconsistent with requirements of state regulation regarding notification of residents before discharging them . oregon regulations specify that residents may not be asked to leave without 14 days' written notice that a facility cannot provide the services they need . however , the facility's contract specifies that residents can be required to move immediately if they need more care than is available at the facility . so you can be assured if health changes occur , we can meet your needs . and you won't have to deal with the hassles of moving again . resident may not be asked to leave without 14 days' written notice stating reasons for the request . ... may terminate this residency agreement immediately ... due to changes in your physical or mental condition , supplies , services or procedures are required that ... by certification , licensure , design or staffing cannot provide . similar requirements regarding the type and level of services that assisted living facilities must provide residents . to assist surveyors , florida and ohio have developed detailed guidelines , similar to those used for nursing home inspections .