access to quality care . physicians raised concerns about untimely claims reimbursement , a slow preauthorization process to approve medical treatment , and unreliable customer telephone service , among other things . some physicians also complained about the lower , “discounted” rates paid to tricare network physicians under its prime and extra options . because of these administrative and cost issues , some physicians are becoming disillusioned with tricare . as we have noted , dod's goals in establishing tricare were to improve access while maintaining quality and controlling costs . dod efforts to set goals and to measure access and quality are incomplete , however , and do not enable dod or others to fully assess whether tricare has improved beneficiaries' access to and quality of health care . moreover , dod's failure to achieve expected cost savings under tricare raises questions about dod's cost - savings claims . dod has not set programwide goals and performance measures to track its progress in meeting tricare access and quality program goals for care provided in mtfs and by contractors . dod has developed a military health system performance report card that includes goals and measures for some aspects of access and quality , such as 95-percent beneficiary satisfaction with access to appointments and system resources . however , this report card applies only to mtfs and does not include care provided through civilian contractors — an estimated one - third of dod's peacetime health care delivery efforts . under its managed care support contracts , dod does set performance - related requirements , and contractors report to dod their performance in meeting these requirements . however , this information is not yet compiled or consolidated with military facility data to provide a programwide picture . beneficiary satisfaction levels , on average , exceed those in civilian hmos . we understand that pa&e has nearly completed the study and that dod top management will likely review it before its release . if the updated review results in conclusions similar to those in the 733 study , and if dod acts on those conclusions , the potential reductions in military medical personnel and facilities could be significant . tricare's primary cost - saving advantages are rooted in the delivery of managed care at military facilities , and any significant reduction in such capacity would necessitate that beneficiaries be provided care in the contractors' networks . this would alter the potential cost - effectiveness of the program . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement . i will be glad to respond to any questions you or other subcommittee members may have . copayments under prime are lower than under the other options . defense health care: reimbursement rates appropriately set ; other problems concern physicians ( gao / hehs - 98-80 , feb. 26 , 1998 ) . defense health care: dod could improve its beneficiary feedback approaches ( gao / hehs - 98-51 , feb. 6 , 1998 ) . defense health care: tricare resource sharing program failing to achieve expected savings ( gao / hehs - 97-130 , aug. 22 , 1997 ) . defense health care: actions under way to address many tricare contract change order problems ( gao / hehs - 97-141 , july 14 , 1997 ) .