in compliance with its conditions of participation . this survey and certification process is administered by hcfa through state survey agencies — usually components of the state health departments . hcfa funds these survey agencies to assess hhas against medicare's conditions of participation and associated standards . surveys are conducted on - site at the hha and involve activities such as clinical records review and home visits with patients . hcfa's state operations manual provides guidance to state surveyors on conducting their surveys . once an hha passes its initial survey and meets certain other requirements , hcfa certifies it as a medicare provider and issues a provider number , which the agency uses to bill medicare . to retain its certification , an hha must remain in compliance with all of the conditions of participation . each hha is supposed to be recertified every 12 to 36 months following the same process used in the initial survey process , with the frequency depending upon factors such as whether ownership changed and the results of prior surveys . but complaints about hha services may trigger an earlier survey . hhas can lose their certification and be terminated from the program if they do not comply with one or more conditions ; for example , an hha providing substandard skilled nursing care that threatens patient health and safety can be terminated . however , hhas not complying with a condition of participation can avoid termination by implementing corrective actions . practically anyone who meets state or local requirements to start an hha can be virtually assured of medicare certification . it is rare that any new hha is found not to meet medicare's three fundamental certification requirements: ( 1 ) being financially solvent ; ( 2 ) complying with title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 , which prohibits discrimination ; and ( 3 ) meeting medicare's conditions of participation . hhas self - certify their solvency , agree to comply with the act , and undergo a very limited initial certification survey that few fail . currently , hcfa certifies about 100 new hhas each month . deterrent to agency certification unless that criminal activity specifically prohibits the individual from medicare participation . although this project targeted hhas suspected of problems , it does demonstrate that criteria other than those used in the limited standard survey may be better predictors of compliance with all the conditions of participation . hcfa defines a branch office of an hha as a unit within the geographic area served by the parent office that shares administration , supervision , and services with the parent office . since the mid - 1980s , many hhas have created branch offices . as shown in figure 1 , about 2,200 hhas operated nearly 5,500 branch offices in january 1997 — over four times the number in november 1993 . in texas , for example , we identified 106 hhas with 3 or more branches , and 1 hha had 25 branch offices . since they are considered to be an integral part of an hha , branches are not required to independently meet the conditions of participation . further , hcfa does not require surveyors to visit patients served by each branch office .