action . furthermore , hcfa often found that the same problems existed when it made its next annual monitoring visit . in our august 1995 report , we found the same problems . we concluded that hcfa's hmo qualification program is inadequate to ensure that medicare hmos comply with standards for ensuring quality of care . specifically , this program remains inadequate because hcfa does not determine if hmo quality assurance programs are operating effectively , systematically incorporate the results of pro review of hmos or use pro staff expertise in its compliance monitoring , and routinely collect utilization data that could most directly indicate potential quality problems . we also found that the enforcement processes are still slow when hcfa does find quality problems or other deficiencies at hmos that do not comply promptly with federal standards . for example , even though one hmo repeatedly did not meet standards during a 7-year period and hcfa received pro reports indicating that the hmo was providing substandard care to a significant number of beneficiaries , hcfa allowed the hmo to operate as freely as a fully compliant hmo . like large corporate purchasers' analysis of performance indicators , the medicare pro program analyzes hmo performance treating certain diseases or performing selected procedures . the pro program , however , is substantially changing its approach . substandard providers were identified ; hcfa officials found this model to be confrontational , unpopular with the physician community , and of limited effectiveness . therefore , by the end of 1995 , case reviews had been replaced by cooperative projects modeled on continuous quality improvement concepts implemented by mutual agreement between pros and risk contract hmos . provider participation is voluntary . typically , these cooperative projects involve establishing joint identification of a problem , appropriate performance indicators , and benchmarks . the pro then measures current hmo performance on these indicators and disseminates these data to the hmos . hmos then may choose to participate in the project to improve care . after implementation of corrective action , the pros again collect data to determine if improvements have been made . medicare: physician incentive payments by prepaid health plans could lower quality of care ( gao / hrd - 89-29 , dec. 12 , 1988 ) . medicare: experience shows ways to improve oversight of health maintenance organizations ( gao / hrd - 88-73 , aug. 17 , 1988 ) . medicare: issues raised by florida health maintenance organization demonstrations ( gao / hrd - 86-97 , july 16 , 1986 ) . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .