information . finally , we visited seven americorps*usa grantees' programs that represented a mix of characteristics , such as mission and scale , to gain insight into program operations , actual sources of funds , and program benefits . we also met again recently with corporation officials to determine what initiatives they have undertaken to improve the cost and performance of americorps since last october . in summary , total resources available for americorps*usa programs for program year 1994-95 included more than the corporation's appropriations . over one - third of the financial resources available for americorps*usa grantees' programs came from sources outside the corporation , mostly from other federal agencies and state and local governments . total resources available per americorps*usa participant averaged $26,654 , of which about $17,600 came from the corporation , $3,200 from non - corporation federal sources , and $4,000 from state and local governments . the remaining amount , roughly $1,800 , came from the private sector . resources available per participant were lower for programs run by nonfederal organizations than for programs operated by federal agencies . total resources available to americorps*usa grantees' programs equaled about $16 per service hour . these figures represent resources available for all program expenses and are not the hourly wages for participants . while we did not try to quantify the benefits of the program , our review of activities at the seven program sites visited indicated that a variety of initiatives have been undertaken to support americorps*usa's goals . the legislation establishing americorps*usa authorizes grantees' programs to help communities address unmet human , educational , environmental , and public safety needs . at the grantees' sites we visited , we found that the projects had been designed to strengthen communities , develop civic responsibility , and expand educational opportunities for program participants and others . the corporation also has directed grantees exceeding a program year 1995-96 cost per participant of $13,800 to reduce their proposed program year 1996-97 per - participant costs by an overall average of 10 percent . the corporation has also increased the grantee's share of total program operating costs from 25 to 33 percent for grants awarded for the 1996-97 program year . the corporation's revised grant guidelines also seek to reduce costs by encouraging a program requesting increased funding to add additional participants , thereby reducing its cost per participant . the guidelines also encourage programs to seek additional funding only for education awards . corporation's words — “get things done.” total resources available means many things . it means cash and in - kind contributions that pay participants' living allowances , social security taxes , health insurance , child care , and the education awards they earn in exchange for their service . it means resources available to pay local program staff who manage operations and supervise staff ; to pay rent for office space and purchase supplies ; to pay for travel and transportation for program staff and participants ; and to pay for materials needed to conduct national service projects . it means resources available to pay for planning grants used to design and formalize future national service programs . and it means resources available to pay for the staff and operations of the corporation for national and community service .