no system of prevention is foolproof . therefore , fda's and oprr's monitoring and enforcement efforts include review of results of irb operations , clinical trials , and allegations of researcher misconduct . fda's primary tool for monitoring human subject protection is its on - site inspections of the irbs that oversee drug research . fda's inspections of irbs demonstrate that , at some institutions , compliance with federal oversight rules is uneven . between january 1993 and november 1995 , fda issued 31 warning letters to institutions regarding significant deficiencies in the performance of their irbs' oversight of drug research . among the more serious violations cited were the following: participation of researchers as irb members in reviewing their own studies , absence of a process for tracking ongoing studies , and failure to ensure that required elements of informed consent were contained in consent documents . the fda warning letters terminated the irbs' authority to approve new studies or to recruit new subjects into ongoing studies until fda received adequate assurance of corrective action . from october 1993 to november 1995 , fda found less serious deficiencies involving about 200 other irbs , such as failure to document the names of irb members and failure of irb minutes to identify controversial issues discussed . in addition to monitoring irbs , fda must be satisfied that manufacturers have complied with human subject protection regulations during clinical trials . to this end , fda conducts on - site inspections of individual drug studies . when examining how a trial was conducted , fda determines , for example , if subject selection criteria were followed , if subjects' consent was documented , and if adverse events were reported . fda's principal focus in these efforts , however , is to verify the accuracy and completeness of study data as well as the researcher's adherence to the approved protocol . most of the drug study violations fda identifies are relatively minor . from 1977 to 1995 , about one - half of the violations related to the adequacy of the informed consent forms . fda also identifies more serious violations . since 1980 , fda has taken 99 actions against 84 clinical investigators regarding their conduct of drug research with human subjects . it cited such instances of serious misconduct as failure to obtain informed consent ; forgery of subjects' signatures on informed consent forms ; failure to inform patients that a drug was experimental ; and failure to report subjects' adverse reactions to drugs under study , including a subject's death . fda has used four types of actions to enforce its regulations: ( 1 ) obtaining a promise from a researcher to abide by fda requirements for conducting drug research , ( 2 ) invoking a range of restrictions on a researcher's use of investigational drugs , ( 3 ) disqualifying a researcher from the use of investigational drugs , and ( 4 ) criminally prosecuting a researcher . at the federal level are the nih's oprr and the fda .