( app . ii compares the affordability of employer - based early retiree health insurance with that purchased in the individual market. ) through the individual market and medicare . it is not surprising that the near elderly are among the most likely age groups to have insurance and the least likely to be uninsured . because aging is associated with greater use of health care services , the importance attached to having health insurance should increase with age . in fact , the extent to which the near - elderly purchase individual insurance suggests that this is the case . whether the near elderly obtained their health insurance through the individual market or through public sources was related to their employment , health , and income status . for example , a relatively high percentage of the near elderly with individual insurance reported that they worked ( 67 percent ) and had excellent or good health ( 85 percent ) . in contrast , those with public sources of coverage were more likely to report that they were unemployed ( 87 percent ) or in poor health ( 69 percent ) . and compared with those who purchased individual insurance , twice as many with public coverage had incomes under $20,000 . the relationship between insurance status and income is not entirely predictable , however , since about 20 percent of the uninsured near elderly had family incomes of $50,000 or more , while almost one - third of those with individual insurance earned less than $20,000 . despite their limited resources , about the same share of the near elderly with low incomes purchased individual insurance as did those with higher incomes . given the cost of comprehensive coverage in the individual market , those with lower incomes may be purchasing less expensive , limited - benefit products . for more than one - half of the near elderly , these individual market costs typically exceed average health care spending for americans under age 65 — in some cases significantly . in april 1998 , the center for studying health system change reported that older adults who purchased individual coverage typically spent a considerably higher proportion of their income on premiums than other adult age groups — about 9 percent for the 60- to 64-year - old group . preferred provider organization / $250 preferred provider organization / $500 preferred provider organization / $500 $214-$602 ( low end and high end ) $160-$309 ( rural / urban ) the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .