physicians . among hmos , where coordinated care and prevention are expected to receive special emphasis , many plans are exploring ways to improve diabetes management ; but providers may be reluctant to invest in expensive approaches until their cost - effectiveness is more evident . hcfa , also recognizing the importance of this issue , has initiated a promising strategy of testing a variety of approaches to learn what works best in medicare — that is , what is effective and what can be implemented at reasonable cost . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions from you and other members of the subcommittee . thank you . this testimony was prepared under the direction of bernice steinhardt , director , health services quality and public health issues , who may be reached at ( 202 ) 512-7119 if there are any questions . other key contributors include rosamond katz , assistant director , and ellen m. smith , jennifer grover , evan stoll , and stan stenersen , evaluators . we focused our review on the following questions: ( 1 ) to what extent are medicare beneficiaries with diabetes receiving recommended levels of preventive and monitoring services ? ( 2 ) what are medicare health maintenance organizations ( hmo ) doing to improve delivery of recommended diabetes services ? ( 3 ) what activities does the health care financing administration ( hcfa ) support to address these service needs for medicare beneficiaries with diabetes ? to respond to these questions , we identified a representative sample of more than 168,000 people with diabetes in the medicare fee - for - service program and reviewed their service claims records for 1994 . we also surveyed 88 hmo plans serving medicare beneficiaries on their approaches to preventive diabetes care and conducted follow - up interviews with 12 of those plans . recommended intervals . this is true both in traditional fee - for - service medicare , which serves about 90 percent of all beneficiaries , and in managed care delivery . the efforts of medicare hmos to improve diabetes care have been varied but generally limited , with most plans reporting that they have focused on educating their enrollees with diabetes about self - management and their physicians about the need for preventive and monitoring services . very few plans have developed comprehensive diabetes management programs . at the federal level , hcfa has targeted diabetes for special emphasis and has begun to test preventive care initiatives ; but like the hmos , hcfa's efforts are quite recent and the agency does not yet have results that would allow it to evaluate effectiveness . the american diabetes association's ( ada ) clinical care recommendations , which reflect the published research evidence and expert opinion , are widely accepted as guidance on what constitutes quality diabetes care . we selected for review six of ada's recommended monitoring services that can be measured using medicare claims data ( see table 1 ) . the service frequencies recommended in table 1 generally apply to the average person with noninsulin - dependent diabetes , the type that accounts for more than 90 percent of diabetics in medicare .