the united states has appealed this decision . based on our previous work on dispute settlement under the u.s. - canadian free trade agreement ( cfta ) , it may be difficult to evaluate objectively the results of a dispute settlement process . it may takes years before a sufficiently large body of cases exists to make any statistical observations about the process . after nearly 5 years of trade remedy dispute settlement cases under cfta , there were not enough completed cases for us to make statistical observations with great confidence . specifically , we were not able to come to conclusions about the effect of panelists' backgrounds , types of u.s. agency decisions appealed , and patterns of panel decisionmaking . wto members must wrestle with three competing but interrelated endeavors in the coming years . implementation , accession of new member countries , and bringing new issues to the table will all compete for attention and resources . the first effort , which we have already discussed , involves implementing the uruguay round agreements . it will take time and resources to ( 1 ) completely build the wto organization so that members can address all its new roles and responsibilities ; ( 2 ) make members' national laws , regulations , and policies consistent with new commitments ; ( 3 ) fulfill notification requirements and then analyze the new information ; and ( 4 ) resolve differences about the meaning of the agreements and judge whether countries have fulfilled their commitments . the importance of implementation was underscored by u.s. trade representative and department of commerce announcements earlier this year that they were both creating specific units to look at foreign government compliance with trade agreements , including wto . the second effort is the accession of new countries to join wto and to undertake gatt obligations for the first time . the accession of new members will present significant economic and political challenges over the next few years . even though , as mentioned earlier , wto members account for about 90 percent of world trade , there are many important countries still outside the gatt structure . the 28 countries that applied for wto membership as of december 1995 included china , the russian federation , viet nam , and countries in eastern europe . these countries will be challenged in undertaking wto obligations and fulfilling wto commitments as current wto members are themselves challenged by the additional responsibilities created by the uruguay round agreements . many of these countries are undergoing a transition from centrally planned to market economies . the negotiations between current wto members and those hoping to join are very complex and sensitive since they involve such fundamental issues as political philosophy . the third effort is negotiating new areas . in december 1996 , a wto ministerial meeting is to take place in singapore . this is to be a forum for reviewing implementation of the uruguay round agreements and for negotiating new issues . some foreign government and wto officials told us that they hope these regularly scheduled , more focused wto ministerial meetings will replace the series of multiyear , exhaustive negotiating “rounds” of the past .