forces command . according to command officials , some of the same problems we identified in our report continue to exist and the enhanced brigades have not reached platoon - level proficiency . specifically , the officials told us that the brigades experienced training difficulties during 1995 , which precluded the units from being validated at platoon - level proficiency . some of the problems that had a negative impact on unit training were ( 1 ) low attendance by personnel at annual training , ( 2 ) shortages in junior and senior enlisted personnel and officers , and ( 3 ) severe deficiencies in individual skills proficiency . for example , one brigade reported that 36 percent of its soldiers were not qualified in their individual military occupational skills . despite the problems , command officials said some brigades are improving , however , they have minimal data to support that position . the training situation with the enhanced brigades calls into question whether the current strategy of deploying national guard combat brigades within 90 days is realistic . the continental air defense mission evolved during the cold war to detect and intercept soviet bombers attacking north america via the north pole . this mission is carried out primarily by dedicated air national guard units . in his 1993 report on roles and missions , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff had determined that the united states no longer needed a large , dedicated continental air defense force . consequently , the chairman recommended that the dedicated force be significantly reduced or eliminated and that existing active and reserve general purpose forces be tasked to perform the mission . the secretary of defense agreed with the chairman's recommendations and directed the air force to reduce the dedicated force but retain the mission primarily as an air force reserve component responsibility . to date , the air force has not aggressively implemented the chairman's or the secretary of defense's recommendations . rather , the air force continues to keep a dedicated force for the air defense mission and has reduced the force by less than 20 percent . we reported in may 1994 that a dedicated continental air defense force was no longer needed because the threat of a soviet - style air attack against the united states had largely disappeared . as a result of the greatly reduced threat , the air defense force had been focusing its activities on air sovereignty missions . however , those missions could be performed by active and reserve general purpose and training forces because they had comparable or more capable aircraft , were located at or near most existing continental air defense bases and alert sites , and had pilots capable of performing air sovereignty missions or being trained to perform such missions . we stated that implementing the chairman's recommendations could result in significant savings . dod fully concurred with our recommendations . in the aftermath of the gulf war , the army adopted a new training strategy that was designed to prepare combat brigades to deploy within 90 days of mobilization . this percentage is slightly higher than the percentage in 1990 .