this is still the case . mexico is currently in the process of developing this infrastructure as well as the guidelines necessary to implement the law . however , u.s. officials remain concerned that the law does not cover the importation of finished products , such as over - the - counter drugs that could be used to make methamphetamines . over the past year , mexico has announced a new drug strategy and instituted a number of new counternarcotics initiatives . the government of mexico also reported that it has channeled significant funds — $754 million during 1998 — into its ongoing campaign against drug trafficking . mexico also indicated that it will earmark about $770 million for its 1999 counternarcotics campaign . during 1998 and 1999 , the government of mexico announced a number of new initiatives . for example , a federal law for the administration of seized , forfeited and abandoned goods that will allow authorities to use proceeds and instruments seized from crime organizations for the benefit of law enforcement is being considered , a federal law that will establish expedited procedures to terminate corrupt law enforcement personnel is also being considered , and the government of mexico recently announced the creation of a new national police force . in addition , the government of mexico has initiated an operation to seal three strategic points in mexico . the purpose of the program is to prevent the entry of narcotics and diversion of precursor chemicals in the yucatan peninsula , mexico's southern border , and the gulf of california . furthermore , the mexican government recently announced a counternarcotics strategy to crack down on drug traffickers . mexico indicated that it plans to spend between $400 million and $500 million over the next 3 years to buy new planes , ships , radar and other military and law enforcement equipment . in addition to the new spending , mexico reported that its new antidrug efforts will focus on improving coordination among law enforcement agencies and combating corruption more efficiently . a senior mexican government official termed this new initiative a “total war against the scourge of drugs. last year we noted that while u.s. - provided assistance had enhanced the counternarcotics capabilities of mexican law enforcement and military organizations , the effectiveness and usefulness of some assistance were limited . for example , two knox - class frigates purchased by the government of mexico lacked the equipment needed to ensure the safety of the crew , thus making the ships inoperative . we also reported that the 73 uh - 1h helicopters provided to mexico to improve the interdiction capability of mexican army units were of little utility above 5,000 feet , where significant drug - related activities and cultivation occur . in addition , we noted that four c - 26 aircraft were provided to mexico without the capability to perform intended surveillance missions and without planning for payment for the operation and maintenance of the aircraft . mr. chairman , let me bring you up to date on these issues . the two knox - class frigates have been repaired and are in operation . according to u.s. embassy officials , the government of mexico is considering the purchase of two additional frigates .