competition formulation . for each work package under consideration , the applicable dod component will determine which government candidate would compete , and the defense depot maintenance council will make the final determination regarding which depot can compete . proposal evaluation and source selection . best - value principles will be used when evaluating proposals and selecting a source of repair . appeals by military depots will be resolved internally within the dod rather than by gao . dod's “cost comparability handbook” will be modified to adjust military depot offers by federal income taxes , cost of facilities capital , and liability insurance . cost estimation and accounting . the defense contract audit agency will ( 1 ) review each public depot maintenance activity to determine if it has well - documented procedures for handling direct and indirect costs , ( 2 ) audit the cost - estimating systems of the public depot offerors , ( 3 ) ensure that each military department's depot cost - estimating and accounting systems are in compliance in a timely manner , and ( 4 ) assess the accuracy and completeness of incurred costs on depot awards . the guidance provides for no comparable scrutiny for a private sector offeror . both the private sector and some depot supporters in the congress have raised concerns regarding aspects of these documents . it is uncertain whether these letters will ultimately become dod policy . since there is no approved dod competition guidance , the air force is conducting the competitions at sacramento and san antonio using its own guidance . in response to our reports , dod has consistently stated that it intends to comply with existing statutes relating to depot maintenance workload allocations . as we look at the services' current actions related to ( 1 ) privatization - in - place , ( 2 ) assessments of existing organic workloads , and ( 3 ) assessments of where to perform new weapon system depot maintenance , we see significant movement of depot maintenance workload to the private sector . while we are continuing work in this area , we are concerned that , due to a lack of clear policy and direction , some maintenance strategies are being delayed and others are being selected that may not be the most cost - effective . as previously discussed , privatizing organic workloads at closing depots rather than transferring and consolidating work at remaining depots further exacerbates dod's excess depot capacity problem and increases depot maintenance costs . dod officials are examining workloads now at organic depots with a view to increase outsourcing . service officials are utilizing the new core methodology and risk assessment process to review mission - essential workloads and reclassify existing organic core work as noncore for outsourcing . the air force has assessed seven workloads to date and determined that the risks from outsourcing were acceptable ; that is , adequate dod capability remains , and available commercial sources can capably do the work . the air force plans to assess its entire workload to determine minimum core capabilities and identify outsourcing candidates . the army and the navy are also beginning to reassess their current workloads to identify core .