private . both coface and bfce have recently been privatized . government covers deficits incurred on state account activities . — coface exercises a dual role by administering export - financing support on behalf of the french government and offering export finance assistance through its own programs . private consortium . hermes and c&l deutsche revision jointly administer german export finance program on behalf of the state . kfw offers export loans to german exporters . government covers deficits on state account activities . — hermes and c&l exercise a dual role by operating the government's export finance programs and offering export finance assistance privately . special section for export credit insurance ( sace ) and central institute for medium term credits ( mediocredito centrale ) public agencies . — some competition with private sector as mediocredito centrale also functions as commercial bank . public . jexim is a independent government agency . eid - miti is housed in japan's ministry of international trade and industry . — jexim aims to supplement and encourage commercial bank financing but not compete with it . — eid - miti competes with private sector providers . export credits guarantee department ( ecgd ) public , independent government department . — short - term business was privatized . — has a specific mandate to break even financially . coface = compagnie francaise d'assurance pour le commerce exterieur . bfce = banque francaise du commerce exterieur . ( $979 ) ( $716 ) ( $934 ) ( $503 ) hermes / c&l and deutsche revision ( $1,985 ) ( $1,501 ) ( $1,821 ) ( $822 ) ( $80 ) ( $113 ) n / a = not available . note 1: there are several caveats with regard to how the numbers in this table should be interpreted . the type and nature of each nation's export credit agency ( eca ) business varies in ways that ultimately influence its costs . in the case of japan's export - import bank , 44 percent of its fiscal year 1995 commitments were for loans not “tied” to japanese exports , 37 percent were for overseas investment loans , and 8 percent for import loans . only 11 percent of jexim's total financing in that year was reported to have been used for export loans . where there are two ecas , we have combined financial results . note 2: negative amounts indicate a deficit . positive amounts indicate a surplus . the figures for the eximbank represent the credit subsidy obligation and administrative costs obligated for the fiscal year . canada's edc reported net income of $171 million , $44 million , and $112 million in 1994 , 1995 , and 1996 , respectively . however , these amounts do not include the support separately provided through the canadian national interest account ( $200 million in 1996 but not available for 1994 and 1995 ) . edc conducts a significant ( 42 percent ) level of business with organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) nations , which influences its profitability . the totals for germany include interest revenues from debt reschedulings . the japanese fiscal year ends march 31 .