appendix i lists these reports . to address the issues discussed in these reports , dod established an internal advisory group to review and make recommendations for improving dod's management of its ffrdcs . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . currently , six of the eight parent organizations that operate ffrdcs also operate one or more non - ffrdc affiliates . some of these affiliates are quite small: the center for naval analyses corporation's institute for public research accounts for about 3 percent of the center's total effort . other affiliates are more significant: the mitre corporation's two non - ffrdc affiliates accounted for about 11 percent of mitre's total effort , and the rand corporation's 5 non - ffrdc divisions account for about 32 percent of its total effort . the massachusetts institute of technology and carnegie - mellon university — parent organizations of the mit lincoln laboratory and the software engineering institute , respectively — each pursue a diverse range of non - ffrdc activities . dod has recently become more active in seeking to oversee work its ffrdcs perform through non - ffrdc divisions . dod sponsors have historically had the opportunity to oversee nonsponsor work performed within the ffrdc because the work is carried out under the ffrdc contracts that sponsors administer . this contract oversight mechanism is not available for non - ffrdc divisions . during 1995 , for example , the air force expressed great reluctance to support the aerospace corporation's proposal to establish a non - ffrdc affiliate , indicating that the air force was concerned that it could not avoid the perception of a conflict of interest . similarly , the mitre corporation sought permission to create a separate corporate division to perform non - ffrdc work . within dod , the director of defense research and engineering is responsible for developing overall policy for dod's 11 ffrdcs . the director communicates dod policy and detailed implementing guidance to ffrdc sponsors through a periodically updated management plan , and determines the funding level for each ffrdc based on the overall congressional ceiling on ffrdc funding and ffrdc requirements . total funding for dod's ffrdcs was $1.25 billion in fiscal year 1995 . dod categorizes each of its ffrdcs as a systems engineering and integration center , a studies and analyses center , or a research and development laboratory . appendix ii provides information on each ffrdc , including its parent organization , primary sponsor , dod funding , and staffing levels for fiscal year 1995 . the military services and defense agencies sponsor individual ffrdcs and award and administer the 5-year contracts , typically negotiated noncompetitively , after reviewing the continued need for the ffrdc .