ii. ) for example , thailand's well - developed transportation system formerly made it the traditional transit route for about 80 percent of the heroin moving out of southeast asia . however , in response to increased thai counternarcotics capability and stricter border controls , this amount has declined to an estimated 50 percent in recent years as new drug - trafficking routes have emerged through the southern provinces of china to taiwan and hong kong or through laos , cambodia , and vietnam . similarly , cooperation between the united states and hong kong has helped reduce the use of hong kong as a transshipment point for southeast asian heroin , but law enforcement weaknesses in china and taiwan have encouraged drug - traffickers to shift supply routes into these countries . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . some of these minority groups control major opium production and heroin - trafficking areas . currently , the united states provides only limited low - level law enforcement cooperation , such as information sharing . u.s. policy restricts direct counternarcotics assistance until the burmese government improves its human rights stance and recognizes the democratic process . in addition , the president has denied certification for counternarcotics cooperation since 1989 . according to state department officials , there has been no improvement in the political and human rights situation , and u.s. policy toward burma is unlikely to change under current conditions . also , in january 1996 , the shan united army ( sua ) , headed by khun sa , a well - known drug lord , ended its armed conflict with the burmese army . despite the potential for the government to undertake meaningful counternarcotics efforts in former sua - controlled territory , there has been little substantive impact on the flow of burmese heroin . furthermore , according to u.s. officials , while khun sa is under indictment in the united states for heroin - trafficking offenses , the burmese government has granted him immunity from prosecution from drug - trafficking offenses and has refused u.s. extradition requests . based on these limitations , u.s. officials told us that they are not optimistic that meaningful changes will take place under the current burmese military regime . as a result , undcp had no way to evaluate accurately the effectiveness of supply reduction projects because no baseline data were established at the outset .