dod concurred with this recommendation . during our review , we found the u.s. central command and its service component commands had taken a number of steps to improve the protection of u.s. forces from terrorist attacks . the u.s. central command's area of responsibility includes the middle east , the region with the most high - threat countries . the special emphasis at u.s. central command was not unexpected given that its forces were the most recent targets of terrorist attacks . among the actions taken , the command had determined the range of specific terrorist threats it needed to counteract in its area of responsibility , including a 20,000-pound truck bomb — the estimated approximate size of the bomb that struck khobar towers ; devised threat - based standards , such as stand - off , to guide the design and construction of new facilities and modifications to existing structures ; established an office that coordinates antiterrorist activities in the region and reports directly to the deputy commander in chief , u.s. central command ; and identified a need for and filled hundreds of additional security positions . during our visits to overseas bases , we found that significant efforts had been taken in turkey and the middle east to increase the protection of u.s. forces from vehicle bombs . in these countries , sites had been fortified in various ways for protection against a possible terrorist attack , particularly against a truck bomb like the one that struck khobar towers . commanders were attempting to extend the stand - off distance around their facilities . where sufficient stand - off was not available , they were using other measures , such as concrete barriers , to mitigate against the impact of a truck bomb . saudi arabia had seen the most profound changes , as thousands of dod personnel were moved to remote facilities in the desert and restricted from leaving base throughout their entire tour . most military dependents were returned to the united states to reduce exposure to the terrorist threat . many dependents also were being withdrawn from kuwait and bahrain . in turkey , an off - base apartment building dedicated solely to u.s. military personnel was closed because it was considered too vulnerable to a truck bomb attack . the personnel living in this building were relocated to on - base housing or dispersed to other off - base housing facilities . the base also had installed concrete barriers to make on - base residential areas and headquarters buildings less vulnerable and had begun to repair holes in the perimeter fence . despite these improvements , commanders and security officials acknowledged that vulnerabilities remained . we discuss these vulnerabilities in our classified statement . terrorists can alter their mode of attack . for instance , some commanders in the middle east are concerned that terrorists will switch to weapons that can be fired over perimeter defenses from hidden locations . the task force characterized state's standards as detailed and descriptive . most importantly , the task force said that state had adopted the standards as requirements , not as guidance .