we will be happy to answer any questions you may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we surveyed primary investigators of ongoing epidemiological studies . because different methodological standards apply to various types of research and because the overwhelming majority of federally sponsored research is categorized as epidemiological , we limited our survey to those responsible for ongoing epidemiological studies . with the help of an expert epidemiological consultant , we devised a questionnaire to assess critical elements of these studies ( including the quality of exposure measurement , specificity of case definition , and steps to ensure adequate sample size ) and to identify specific problems that the primary investigators may have encountered in implementing their studies . we interviewed primary investigators for 31 ( 72 percent ) of the 43 ongoing epidemiological studies identified by pgvcb in the november 1996 plan . we also reviewed and categorized descriptions of all 91 projects identified by april 1997 , based on their apparent focus and primary objective . finally , to review the progress of major ongoing research efforts , we visited the walter reed army institute of research , the naval health research center , and two of va's environmental hazards research centers . to address the third objective , we reviewed major conclusions of the pgvcb and the presidential advisory committee on gulf war veterans' illnesses to determine the strength of evidence supporting major conclusions . the purpose of this review was not to critique pgvcb's or the presidential advisory committee's efforts , per se , but rather to describe the amount of knowledge about gulf war illnesses that has been generated by research 6 years after the war . we reviewed these conclusions because they are the strongest statements that we have come across on these matters by any official body . the presidential advisory committee's report was significant because the panel included a number of recognized experts who were assisted by a large staff of scientists and attorneys . in addition , the committee conducted an extensive review of the research .