depot officials disagree . at this time , the air force has not made a final determination as to how to resolve this dispute . dod decided to issue a single solicitation combining multi - aircraft and commodity workloads at the sacramento depot and a single solicitation for multi - engine workloads at the san antonio depot . under the 1998 defense authorization act , dod issued the required determinations that the workloads at these two depots “cannot as logically and economically be performed without combination by sources that are potentially qualified to submit an offer and to be awarded a contract to perform those individual workloads.” as required , we reviewed the dod reports and supporting data and issued our report to congress on january 20 , 1998.we found that the accompanying dod reports and supporting data do not provide adequate information supporting the determinations . first , the air force provided no analysis of the logic and economies associated with having the workload performed individually by potentially qualified offerors . consequently , there was no support for the department's determination that the individual workloads cannot as logically and economically be performed without combination . air force officials stated that they were uncertain as to how they would do an analysis of performing the workloads on an individual basis . however , air force studies indicate that the information to make such an analysis is available . for example , in 1996 the air force performed six individual analyses of depot - level workloads performed by the sacramento depot to identify industry capabilities and capacity . the workloads were hydraulics , software electrical accessories , flight instruments , a - 10 aircraft , and kc - 135 aircraft . as a part of the analyses , the air force identified sufficient numbers of qualified contractors interested in various segments of the sacramento workload to support a conclusion that it could rely on the private sector to handle these workloads . second , the reports and available supporting data did not adequately support dod's determination . for example , dod's determination relating to the sacramento air logistics center states that all competitors indicated throughout their workload studies that consolidating workloads offered the most logical and economical performance possibilities . this statement was based on studies performed by the offerors as part of the competition process . however , one offeror's study states that the present competition format is not in the best interest of the government and recommends that the workload be separated into two competitive packages . after dod issued its determination and we completed our mandated review , the air force did additional analyses to support its determinations to combine the workloads at sacramento and san antonio . the air force briefed congressional staff on the interim results of these analyses on february 13 , 1998 , and at that time provided us copies of the briefing charts .