these deficiencies are not insurmountable . as we noted in prior reports , many of the problems were internal control deficiencies that can be addressed with adequate top - level management attention . we also noted that some corrective actions have already been undertaken and additional improvements can be made . further , we recommended that the defense contract audit agency be used to certify internal controls and accounting policies and procedures of dod depots to assure they are adequate for identifying , allocating , and tracking costs of depot maintenance programs and to ensure proper costs are identified and considered as part of the bids by dod depots . dod has stated that it plans to use the defense finance and accounting service to review and certify the accounting systems of dod depots . the policy report provides wide implementation latitude in a number of key areas . for example , it provides for a dod depot capability , but the ultimate extent of such capability , and hence dod depot requirements , could be substantially reduced depending on future core workload assessments of privatization , readiness , sustainability , and technology risks . depending on implementation , the policy's preference for privatization and the lack of a clear and consistent methodology for determining risks will likely lead to significant amounts of workload previously designated as core being reclassified as non - core and privatized . for example , with respect to the aerospace guidance and metrology center , the air force is privatizing depot maintenance operations involving 627,000 direct labor hours of work — 100 percent of which had been previously defined as core — stating that because the workload is being privatized - in - place , the risk is manageable . it is unclear how risky that privatization may turn out to be , particularly in light of the contractor's interest in divesting itself of its defense business . however , a similar rationale is being used to support other in - place privatizations . with this predilection , it is likely that future core will represent something far different than it did in the past . for example , dod's march 1996 workload report noted that core would ensure “that the air force establishes and retains the capabilities needed to assure competence in overseeing depot maintenance production that has both public and private sector elements” — a significantly different mission than that historically envisioned for dod's core capability . further , dod's march 1996 report to congress , improving the edge through outsourcing , included intermediate maintenance of dod weapons and equipment — another function traditionally considered core — as one which the department will now consider privatizing . the policy also provides wide latitude in several areas where the decision for determining public or private sector source of repair is based on an assessment of what is “economical” or “efficient.” for example , the policy states that non - core workloads be made available for only private sector competition when it is determined that the private sector can provide the required capability with acceptable risks , reliability , and efficiency . this efficiency requirement does not require the inclusion of the public sector to ensure that privatization is the most cost - effective option .