no one was harmed from this event . the army awarded the contract for small burial sites and issued its implementation plan for the nonstockpile program . the tooele chemical agent disposal facility completed equipment systemization testing . the army certified to the congress that all browder amendment requirements for the award of the anniston construction contract were met . the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1996 ( p.l . 104-106 ) directed dod to conduct an assessment of the chemical stockpile disposal program and options that could be taken to reduce program costs . the army completed disposal of all air force and navy bombs stored on johnston atoll ahead of schedule . the army awarded the systems contract for the construction , operation , and closure of the proposed anniston chemical agent disposal facility . construction of the facility is scheduled to begin after the state of alabama issues the environmental permits . the army started disposal operations at the tooele chemical agent disposal facility . shortly after the start , operations were shut down for a week after a small amount of agent was detected in a sealed vestibule attached to the air filtration system . no agent was released to the environment and no one was harmed . several hair line cracks were discovered in the concrete floor of the tooele disposal facility's decontamination area . the cracks caused a small amount of decontamination solution to leak to a electrical room below . no agent was detected and the cracks were sealed . ( continued ) the 1997 national defense authorization act ( p.l . 104-201 ) directed dod to conduct an assessment of alternative technologies for the disposal of assembled chemical munitions . the act also directed the secretary of defense to report on this assessment by december 31 , 1997 . the 1997 dod appropriations act ( p.l . 104-208 ) provided the army $40 million to conduct a pilot program to identify and demonstrate two or more alternatives to the baseline incineration process for the disposal of assembled chemical munitions . the act also prohibited dod from obligating any funds for constructing disposal facilities at blue grass and pueblo until 180 days after the secretary reports on the alternatives . the chemical weapons convention was ratified by the 65th country needed to make the convention effective . as a result , the convention will go into effect april 29 , 1997 . through ratification , the united states will agree to dispose of its ( 1 ) unitary chemical weapons stockpile , binary chemical weapons , recovered chemical weapons , and former chemical weapon production facilities by april 29 , 2007 , and ( 2 ) miscellaneous chemical warfare materiel by april 29 , 2002 . chemical weapons and materiel: key factors affecting disposal costs and schedule ( gao / nsiad - 97-18 , feb. 10 , 1997 ) . chemical weapons stockpile: emergency preparedness in alabama is hampered by management weaknesses ( gao / nsiad - 96-150 , july 23 , 1996 ) . chemical weapons disposal: issues related to dod's management ( gao / t - nsiad - 95-185 , july 13 , 1995 ) .