according to the u.s . ambassador to colombia , corruption in colombia is the most significant impediment to a successful counternarcotics effort . the state department also reported that persistent corruption within mexico continued to undermine both police and law enforcement operations . many law enforcement officers have been arrested and dismissed due to corruption . the most noteworthy was the february 1997 arrest of general josé gutierrez rebollo — former head of the mexican equivalent of dea . he was charged with drug trafficking , organized crime and bribery , illicit enrichment , and association with one of the leading drug - trafficking organizations in mexico . in february 1998 , the u.s. embassy reported that three mexican law enforcement officials who had successfully passed screening procedures were arrested for stealing seized cocaine — illustrating that corruption continues despite measures designed to root it out . the government of mexico acknowledges that narcotics - related corruption is pervasive and entrenched within the criminal justice system and has placed drug - related corruption in the forefront of its national priorities . effective law enforcement operations and adequate judicial and legislative tools are key to the success of efforts to stop the flow of drugs from the source and transiting countries . although the united states can provide assistance , these countries must seize the illegal drugs and arrest , prosecute , and extradite the traffickers , when possible , in order to stop the production and movement of drugs internationally . however , as we have reported on several occasions , these countries lack the resources and capabilities necessary to stop drug - trafficking activities within their borders . in 1991 , we reported that the lack of resources and adequately trained police personnel hindered panama's ability to address drug - trafficking and money - laundering activities . also , in 1994 , we reported that central american countries did not have the resources or institutional capability to combat drug trafficking and depended heavily on u.s. counternarcotics assistance . in june 1996 , we reported that equipment shortcomings and inadequately trained personnel limited the government of mexico's ability to detect and interdict drugs and drug traffickers , as well as to aerially eradicate drug crops . our more recent work in mexico indicates that these problems persist . for example , in 1997 the u.s. embassy reported that the 73 uh - 1h helicopters provided by the united states to the mexican military for eradication and reconnaissance purposes were of little utility above 5,000 feet , where most of the opium poppy is cultivated . furthermore , the bilateral border task forces , which were established to investigate and dismantle the most significant drug - trafficking organizations along the u.s. - mexico border , face operational and support problems , including inadequate mexican government funding for equipment , fuel , and salary supplements for personnel assigned to the units . our work over the past 10 years has identified other obstacles to implementing the u.s. international drug control strategy: ( 1 ) competing u.s. foreign policy objectives , ( 2 ) organizational and operational limitations among and within the u.s. agencies involved , and ( 3 ) inconsistent u.s. funding levels .