all training is to be complete in 2001 . the first responders trained are expected to train other emergency responders through follow - on courses . the cities we visited were planning to institutionalize various adaptations of the wmd training , primarily in their fire and law enforcement training academies . a related field exercise program to allow cities to test their response capabilities also has begun . dod decided to select cities based on core city population . it also decided to select 120 cities , which equates to all u.s. cities with a population of over 144,000 according to the 1990 census . the 120 cities represent about 22 percent of the u.s. population and cover at least 1 city in 38 states and the district of columbia . twelve states and the u.s. territories have no cities in the program , and 25 percent of the cities are in california and texas . dod took a city approach because it wanted to deal with a single governmental entity that could select the most appropriate personnel for training and receive equipment . in selecting the cities dod did not take into account a city's level of preparedness or financial need . there was also no analysis to evaluate the extent to which the cities selected for the program were at risk of a terrorist attack warranting an increased level of preparedness , or whether a smaller city with high risk factors might have been excluded from the program due to its lower population . in fact , in none of the seven cities we visited did the fbi determine there was a credible threat of a wmd attack , which would be one factor considered in a threat and risk assessment . in our april 1998 report , we cited several public and private sector entities that use or recommend threat and risk assessment processes to establish requirements and target investments for reducing risk . although we recognize there are challenges to doing threat and risk assessments of program cities , we believe that difficulties can be overcome through federal - city collaboration and that these assessments would provide a tool for making decisions about a prudent level of investment to reduce risks . in implementing the domestic preparedness program , dod could leverage state emergency management structures , mutual aid agreements among local jurisdictions , or other collaborative arrangements for emergency response . by delivering the program to cities based on population size , dod is replicating training in nearby cities that might be part of the same response system or mutual aid area . because of such mutual aid agreements and response districts or regions — as well as traditional state roles in both training and the established federal response system — a more consolidated approach could have resulted in fewer training iterations . training in fewer locations while taking advantage of existing emergency response structures could hasten the accomplishment of program goals and reinforce local response integration . such an approach also could cover a greater percentage of the population and make effective use of existing emergency management training venues . under this approach , wmd training would be delivered over the long term through existing state training systems .