additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . some upfront investments still will be required . for example , traditional military construction funding still will be needed as the seed money for privatization projects and for projects not suitable for privatization . also , until many more units are renovated or built on bases under the program , dod will need substantial outlays to operate and maintain existing units . finally , as additional units become privatized , the o&m savings that dod realizes largely will be offset by increased budgeting for the military personnel account to cover the payment of housing allowances to more families . service officials believe that the program may , in fact , be budget neutral . the amount of long - term infrastructure savings are also uncertain . while more data will be needed before any conclusions can be drawn , dod's life - cycle cost analyses for its first two projects at fort carson and lackland air force base showed that , compared with traditional military construction financing costs , the government will achieve significant savings — 24 percent at fort carson and 29 percent at lackland . however , our review of these analyses found that dod's savings estimates were somewhat high . for example , dod did not consider all costs and , in some instances , estimates were not based on actual budgeted amounts for o&m costs under the military construction alternative . after adjusting for these factors over the expected 50-year life of these projects , we estimate costs from privitization will be about 7 to 10 percent less than costs using traditional military construction financing . in addition to questions concerning costs , privatization includes other questions and concerns . for example , many privatization projects under consideration propose long - term , 50-year agreements between dod and the developer . such agreements present several risks , including increased potential that the housing may not be needed in the future , the contractor might not operate and maintain the housing as expected , and civilians might occupy on - base housing if it is not fully used by military members . even if the approach is cost - effective , barriers may exist to using the privatization initiative to improve barracks housing . this is because of a determination that the services' mandatory assignment of single junior enlisted personnel to barracks constitutes an occupancy guarantee . under the budgetary scoring rules established by the office of management and budget ( omb ) for the privatization initiative , if members are not free to decline assignment to privatized housing , dod must set aside funds to cover the entire value of this guarantee up front . because the value of this guarantee could approximate the amount required under traditional military construction financing , funding for a privatized barracks project would not meet dod's leveraging goals . this matter is not an issue in family housing because married members are not mandatorily assigned to family housing units .