this concludes my testimony . i will be happy to answer any questions you may have at this time . 1st cavalry division - headquarters and three brigades at fort hood , tex . 3rd infantry division - headquarters and two brigades at fort stewart , ga. , and one brigade at fort benning , ga. 82nd airborne division - headquarters and three brigades at fort bragg , n.c. 101st airborne division - headquarters and three brigades at fort campbell , ky. 2nd infantry division - headquarters and two brigades in korea , and one brigade at fort lewis , wash. 1st infantry division - headquarters and two brigades in germany , and one brigade at fort riley , kans . 1st armored division - headquarters and two brigades in germany , and one brigade at fort riley , kans . 4th infantry division - headquarters and two brigades at fort hood , tex. , and one brigade at fort carson , colo. 10th mountain division - headquarters and two brigades at fort drum , n.y. 25th infantry division - headquarters and two brigades at schofield barracks , hawaii , and one brigade at fort lewis , wash . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . these actions were detrimental to the readiness of the nondeploying units . for example , gunnery exercises for two armor battalions had to be canceled and 43 of 116 tank crews became unqualified on the weapon system , the number of combat systems out of commission increased , and contractors were hired to perform maintenance . according to 1st armored and 1st infantry division officials , this situation has reduced their divisions' readiness to the point of not being prepared to execute wartime missions without extensive training and additional personnel . if the later - deploying divisions are required to deploy to a second major theater contingency , the army plans to fill personnel shortfalls with retired servicemembers , members of the individual ready reserve , and newly trained recruits .