potential to distort trade . this framework helps clarify that being sanctioned by the government does not necessarily mean that an ste is distorting trade ; rather , a key factor is the presence of direct or indirect subsidies that can give an ste a greater potential to distort trade . we reported that another factor in evaluating the trade - distorting effect of stes ( or private commercial firms ) is share of the world market . the working party on stes is developing an illustrative list of ste attributes and practices in wto and continues to study the questionnaire used to collect information about them . the united states is working within the forum to develop a modified questionnaire that would help make ste activities more transparent . u.s. government and agricultural industry officials hope to negotiate additional disciplines on stes when agricultural negotiations resume in 1999 . negotiations in several service sectors and on market access for certain goods were left unfinished at the end of the uruguay round and may be discussed by ministers at singapore . ustr has pursued trade liberalization and market access in these areas since the uruguay round , but in many cases the outcome of these efforts remains uncertain . for example , within the framework of the general agreement on trade in services ( gats ) , negotiations covering the financial , telecommunications , and maritime service sectors have not yet resulted in final agreements . in addition , ustr hopes to achieve further market access through new tariff reductions for a variety of goods but has testified that considerably more work remains to build “the necessary international consensus” for making such reductions . because u.s. negotiators , in consultation with the private sector , concluded that other members' offers to open their markets to u.s. financial services firms , especially those of certain developing countries , were insufficient to justify broader u.s. commitments ( with no most - favored - nation exemption or other limitations ) . at the end of 1997 , members , including the united states , will have an opportunity to modify or withdraw their commitments . thus , the final outcome and impact of the financial services agreement are still uncertain . ustr has testified that negotiations for a financial services agreement are expected to resume in the first half of 1997 , and the ministers may discuss this at singapore . wto members were also not able to reach agreement on a basic telecommunications services agreement by the original deadline of april 30 , 1996 , and negotiations were subsequently extended to a new deadline of february 15 , 1997 . the united states has noted that while some members made offers that matched that of the u.s. offer in terms of openness , many others did not , thus the united states would not accept the agreement . in addition , the united states has said that in order for the extended negotiations to succeed , “more and better” offers must be made by members , including both developed and developing nations . similarly , negotiations for a multilateral maritime services agreement were unsuccessful and were suspended in june 1996 until the year 2000 , when negotiations for all services sectors will be reopened .