mexico has taken some counternarcotics actions . mexico eradicated substantial amounts of marijuana and opium poppy crops in 1995 with the assistance of up to 11,000 soldiers working on drug eradication programs . according to the department of state , mexican personnel effectively eradicated 29,000 acres of marijuana and almost 21,000 acres of opium poppy in 1995 . furthermore , president zedillo directed the mexican air force to use its f - 5 aircraft to assist in air interdiction efforts in 1995 . on the other hand , the amount of cocaine seized and the number of drug - related arrests in mexico have declined from 1993 to 1995 compared to those before u.s. assistance was terminated . for example , the average annual amount of cocaine seized in mexico between 1990 and 1992 was more than 45 metric tons , including more than 50 tons in 1991 . in contrast , from 1993 to 1995 , average cocaine seizures declined to about 30 metric tons annually . the number of drug - related arrests declined by nearly two - thirds between 1992 and 1995 . mexico's efforts to stop the flow of drugs have been limited by numerous problems . first , despite the efforts that president zedillo has undertaken since late 1994 , both state and dea have reported that corruption in mexico is still widespread and that pervasive corruption is seriously undermining counternarcotics efforts . second , serious economic and political problems have limited mexico's counternarcotics effectiveness . in december 1994 , mexico experienced a major economic crisis — a devaluation of the peso that eventually resulted in a $20-billion u.s. financial assistance package . in addition , high rates of unemployment and inflation have continued to limit mexico's economic recovery . also , mexico has had to focus funds and resources on the chiapas region to suppress an insurgency movement . third , mexico has lacked some basic legislative tools needed to combat drug - trafficking organizations , including the use of wiretaps , confidential informants , and a witness protection program . new legislation authorizing these activities recently passed the mexican congress and is expected to be enacted following ratification by the mexican states . also , until may 1996 , the laundering of drug profits was not a criminal offense and mexico's laws lacked sufficient penalties to effectively control precursor chemicals that are used to manufacture methamphetamine . to counter the growing threat posed by these chemicals , the united states encouraged mexico to adopt strict chemical control laws . fourth , the counternarcotics capabilities of the mexican government to interdict drug - trafficking activities are hampered by inadequately equipped and poorly maintained aircraft . in addition to equipment problems , some mexican pilots , mechanics , and technicians are not adequately trained . for example , many f - 5 pilots receive only a few hours of proficiency training each month , which is considered inadequate to maintain the skills needed for interdiction . moreover , assigning the aircraft to interdiction efforts may not have an immediate impact because of deficiencies in the capabilities and maintenance of the f - 5s . between fiscal years 1975 and 1992 , mexico was the largest recipient of u.s. counternarcotics assistance , receiving about $237 million in assistance .