assistance available to u.s . agricultural producers under u.s. trade law ( gao / nsiad - 98-49r , oct. 20 , 1997 ) . north american free trade agreement: impacts and implementation ( gao / t - nsiad - 97-256 , sept. 11 , 1997 ) . agricultural exports: u.s . how do ustr and usda plan to improve coordination of their activities to address sps measures ? how do ustr and usda plan to work more closely with other relevant agencies , such as fda and epa , in determining which sps measures to address and how to address them ? specifically , at the executive branch level how does the administration intend to balance its trade facilitation and regulatory roles and responsibilities ? absent a coordinated approach for addressing foreign sps measures , the specific role of usda regulatory and research agencies in resolving sps has not been clearly defined . some of these regulatory agencies , such as the animal and plant health inspection service and the food safety inspection service , whose primary responsibilities are to safeguard human , animal , and plant life or health , have increasingly assumed a role in efforts to facilitate trade . several trade authorities and industry officials have expressed frustration that these regulatory agencies ( 1 ) seem to lack a sense of urgency regarding trade matters and ( 2 ) are sometimes willing to engage in technical discussions regarding foreign sps measures for many months and even years . these groups expressed concerns that regulatory authorities lack negotiating expertise , which sometimes undermined efforts to obtain the most advantageous result for u.s. industry regarding foreign sps measures . u.s. regulatory officials , in turn , believe that at times trade authorities and industry groups fail to appreciate that deliberate , and sometimes lengthy , technical and scientific processes are necessary to adequately address foreign regulators' concerns about the safety of u.s. products . government and industry officials have stated that regulatory and research agencies' responsibilities for dealing with foreign sps measures have not been clearly defined . the tension in balancing the regulatory and trade facilitation activities of some usda agencies underlines the need to more clearly define their role in addressing sps measures . questions resulting from our work include the following: what steps has usda taken to use its strategic planning process for integrating disparate agency efforts to address sps measures ? what progress is usda making in using the working group on agricultural trade policy to strengthen usda's sps efforts ? has this initiative , or any other , begun to deal with the tensions that have arisen over the dual roles of some usda agencies as both regulatory and trade facilitation entities ? has usda provided guidance to regulatory agency officials to assist in promoting a more consistent effort to balance their competing goals and policies ? is there outreach to agricultural producers to clarify the new roles that increased foreign trade has required these regulatory agencies to adopt ?