there were two exceptions . first , for an air national guard unit in pennsylvania , the center for disease control and prevention developed an operational case definition , which was quite similar to the case definition of chronic fatigue syndrome . second , the studies conducted by haley et al . also focused on identifying symptom clusters . for those ongoing , epidemiological studies that were built on case - control designs , we asked about how a case was defined . the specificity of this definition is important because a vague case definition can lead to considering multiple kinds of illnesses together . when this is done , it is not surprising to find no commonality of experience among the cases . moreover , the use of specific case definition is particularly critical to achieving meaningful results within this type of research design . at the same time , for the case definition to be relevant , it must fit the symptoms described by an important portion of the group being studied . most of the investigators we interviewed took steps to estimate the size of the sample they would require to have a reasonable expectation of detecting the effects of exposures to hazardous substances . however , many other variables were involved in such calculations , for example , the prevalence of exposures , some of which were unknown at the time the studies were planned . thus , they had to make estimates within somewhat broad parameters . although steps were clearly taken to plan for an adequate sample size , some investigators reported difficulty in locating subjects due to factors beyond their control , such as the rate of referrals from va examination centers or the rate of identification of subjects that fit highly specific case definitions . moreover , other studies , such as those on specific birth defects , required extremely large samples . the ongoing epidemiological research cannot provide precise , accurate , and conclusive answers regarding the causes of veterans' illnesses because of researchers' methodological problems as well as the following: researchers have found it extremely difficult to gather information about many key exposures . for example , medical records of the use of pyridostigmine bromide tablets and vaccinations to protect against chemical / biological warfare exposures were inadequate . gulf war veterans were typically exposed to a wide array of agents , making it difficult to isolate and characterize the effects of individual agents or to study their combined effects . most of the epidemiological studies on gulf war veterans' illnesses have relied only on self - reports for measuring most of the agents to which veterans might have been exposed . the information gathered from gulf war veterans years after the war may be inaccurate or biased . there is often no straightforward way to test the validity of self - reported exposure information , making it impossible to separate bias in recalled information from actual differences in the frequency of exposures . as a result , findings from these studies may be spurious or equivocal . classifying gulf war veterans' symptoms and identifying their illnesses have been difficult . from the outset , the symptoms reported have been varied and difficult to classify into one or more distinct groups .