105-114 , sec . 209 , nov. 21 , 1997 ) , the secretary of veterans affairs is required to set up a program , by july 1 , 1998 , to test new approaches to treating those veterans suffering from undiagnosed illnesses and disabilities . 277 ( 1997 ) , pp . r. w. haley et al. , “evaluation of neurologic function in gulf war veterans: a blinded case - control study,” journal of american medical association , vol . 277 ( 1997 ) , pp . r. w. haley et al. , “self - reported exposure to neurotoxic chemical combinations in the gulf war: a cross - sectional epidemiologic study,” journal of american medical association , vol . 277 ( 1997 ) , pp . g. a. jamal et al. , “the gulf war syndrome: is there evidence of dysfunction in the nervous system ? ” journal of neurology , neurosurgery and psychiatry , vol . 60 ( 1996 ) , pp . presidential advisory committee on gulf war veterans' illnesses , final report ( washington , d.c.: gpo , 1996 ) . presidential advisory committee on gulf war veterans' illnesses , special report ( washington , d.c.: gpo , 1997 ) . c. n. pope and s. padilla , “potentiation of organophosphorus delayed neurotoxicity,” journal of toxicology and environmental health , vol . 31 ( 1990 ) , pp . the results of some studies will not be available until after 2000 . while research on exposure to stress was emphasized in earlier studies , research on low - level chemical exposure was not pursued until legislated in 1996 . the failure to fund such research could not be traced to an absence of proposals . according to dod officials , three recently funded proposals on low - level chemical exposure had previously been denied funds because , at the time , dod did not believe that u.s. troops had been exposed to chemical warfare agents . we found that additional hypotheses were pursued in the private sector . a substantial body of this research suggests that low - level exposure to chemical warfare agents or chemically related compounds , such as certain pesticides , is associated with delayed or long - term health effects . for example , animal experiments , studies of accidental human exposures , and epidemiological studies of humans offer evidence that low - level exposures to certain organophosphorus compounds , including sarin nerve agents to which some of our troops may have been exposed , can cause delayed , chronic neurotoxic effects . for example , a large - scale , federally funded study concluded that stress and exposure to combat or its aftermath bear little relationship to the veterans' distress . the committee also stated that “epidemiological studies to assess the effects of stress invariably have found higher rates of posttraumatic stress disorder ( ptsd ) in gulf war veterans than among individuals in nondeployed units or in the general u.s. population of the same age.” our review indicated that the prevalence of ptsd among gulf war veterans might be overestimated due to problems in the methods used to identify it .