sec . ( reverse trade missions to the united states ) . value assigned by doe ( millions ) company official estimated u.s. exports at less than $5 million ( table notes on next page ) note 1: we use “finalized business agreements” to refer to agreements doe describes as reached financial closure or sales agreements.” note 2: doe did not cite any finalized business agreements for the south africa trade mission . tables iii.1-5 illustrate the total estimated costs of four doe trade missions , from july 1994 to august 1995 . administration & logistics ( provided by state dept. ) administration & logistics ( provided by state dept. ) administration & logistics ( provided by state dept. ) administration & logistics ( provided by state dept. ) total estimated commercial fare for government passengers 15 ( 25.4% ) 20 ( 30.8% ) 26 ( 38.8% ) 25 ( 37.3% ) south africa comparison excluded the additional costs of the charter aircraft trips to kimberley and capetown . south africa - aug. 1995 17 ( 77% ) . to complete our work , we interviewed doe officials ; company officials ; u.s. export - import bank ( eximbank ) officials ; and department of commerce officials , including foreign commercial service officers stationed abroad . we reviewed various doe and commerce department documents , including doe trade mission trip reports , and over 17,000 pages of documentation provided by doe to this subcommittee . we also reviewed financing documents provided by the treasury department and the eximbank , doe press releases , and other documents relating to specific business agreements and companies . at the request of this subcommittee , we focused on the 14 business agreements that doe characterized as having reached “financial closure or sales agreement.” we did not review the other business agreements that were characterized as potential agreements by doe . we contacted the 13 companies associated with these agreements to obtain additional information about the nature and extent of doe's assistance . in two cases , we were not able to obtain a company response to our questions . we relied on the businesses involved to provide estimates of the u.s. export value and the size of their agreements . we did not verify the value of the estimates provided nor did we examine the actual contracts associated with the business agreements . in regard to the costs of the trips , we relied upon information provided by doe's office of the chief financial officer . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts .