this proposal was not adopted . while some outsourcing team meetings are still being held , this effort could be consumed by dod's current quadrennial defense review , which is likely to identify outsourcing as one of its key initiatives . while recognizing the potential savings from outsourcing , we question the savings projections cited by the corm . as we reported in july 1996 , the corm's data did not support its depot privatization savings assumption.half of the competitions were won by the public sector . further , assumptions were based primarily on reported savings from public - private competitions for commercial activities under omb circular a - 76 . many private sector firms generally made offers for this work due to the highly competitive nature of the private sector market for these activities , and estimated savings were generally greater if there were a large number of competitors . we also noted that our work and defense audit agencies have reported that projected savings were often not achieved or were less than expected due to cost growth and other factors . further , the savings resulted from competition rather than from privatization . finally , we also noted that outsourcing in the absence of a highly competitive market , would not likely achieve expected savings and could increase the cost of depot maintenance operations . further , our data shows that outsourcing risks are higher when privatizing unique , highly diverse , and complex work where requirements are difficult to define , large capital investments are required , extensive technical data is involved , and highly skilled and trained personnel are required . corm assumed that meaningful competition would be generated for most of the work it recommended be privatized . yet , for depot maintenance , 76 percent of the 240 depot maintenance contracts we reviewed were awarded on a sole - source basis . the final report of the dsb in november 1996 , achieving an innovative support structure for 21st century military superiority , recommended a dramatic restructuring of dod's support structure by maximizing the use of the private sector for almost all support functions . the dsb provided a new vision where dod would only provide warfighting , direct battlefield support , policy and decision - making , and oversight . all other activities would be done by the private sector — using best practices for achieving better , faster , lower - cost results . the following are examples of changes that might result from dsb's new vision: use the private sector for logistics and maintenance in the continental united states . dod would get out of the repair and inventory management business . expand contractor logistics support — the life - cycle support of weapon systems often by the original equipment manufacturers . the report noted that relief from legislative constraints would be required , but that most contractor logistic support could be done without legislative changes . dod would make an investment of $300 million to $500 million for reliability improvements . privatize - in - place testing and evaluation facilities . outsource automatic data processing business to four to six contractor - owned facilities . outsource most dod finance and accounting service functions . use the private sector to manage dod housing .