mr . chairmen , this concludes my prepared testimony . i would be happy to respond to any questions . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . these problems still exist . for example , we reported in june 1998 that the bilateral border task forces , which were established to investigate and dismantle the most significant drug - trafficking organizations along the u.s. - mexico border , face operational and support problems , including inadequate mexican government funding for equipment , fuel , and salary supplements for personnel assigned to the units . countries in the caribbean also have limited drug interdiction capabilities . for example , we reported in october 1997 that many caribbean countries continue to be hampered by inadequate counternarcotics capabilities and have insufficient resources for conducting law enforcement activities in their coastal waters . we reported that st. martin had the most assets for antidrug activities , with three cutters , eight patrol boats , and two fixed - wing aircraft , whereas other caribbean countries had much less . over the years , our reports have indicated that internal strife in peru and colombia have limited counternarcotics efforts in these countries . in 1991 , we reported that counternarcotics efforts in peru were significantly hampered because of the threat posed by two insurgent groups.currently , colombia's counternarcotics efforts are also hindered by insurgent and paramilitary activities . in 1998 , we reported that several guerrilla groups made it difficult to conduct effective antidrug operations in many areas of colombia . since our report , the situation has worsened . for example , during this past summer the insurgents overran a major police base that was used as a staging area for aerial eradication efforts . some countries , with u.s. assistance , have taken steps to improve their capacity to reduce the flow of illegal drugs into the united states .