currently the useacs do not have such information . export assistance centers . although the tpcc's export strategy stated that these useacs would go through a rigorous evaluation process , commerce and its partner agencies decided to move forward with expanding the network before such evaluations could be concluded . by late february 1996 , the three agencies had expanded the network to 14 useacs , along with 10 district export assistance centers ( deac ) , which have only commerce staff and are connected to the useacs in a hub - and - spoke system . commerce and its partner agencies opened four additional deacs by june 1996 and have plans to further expand the network in the future . useac staff and customers , and officials of nonfederal partner organizations told us that , because of the useacs , u.s. firms are more knowledgeable about and have access to a broader range of federal and nonfederal export services . customers , however , also indicated that useacs can improve the delivery of those services to the u.s. export community . approximately 63 percent of the useac staff responding to our survey said that establishment of the useacs had increased the overall quality of export services to a great or very great extent . about 80 percent of our respondents stated that the useacs had , in particular , substantially increased customer access to the full range of federal export promotion services to a great or very great extent . eighty - two percent of the survey respondents also cited significant increased cooperation among the staffs of the three participating agencies , which we believe would help to expand the availability of federal export services as useac staff work collaboratively or refer clients to partner agencies . during our visits to the four useacs , we learned of some specific examples of useac staff taking the initiative to enhance the value of their services to exporters by working closely with federal and nonfederal partner organizations . these examples demonstrate the potential benefits that can be derived from creation of the useacs . at the baltimore useac , the commerce staff made an effort , as part of their counseling activities , to generate clients for the maryland industrial development financing authority , a state agency that provides export financing . at the long beach , california , useac , the director introduced the “export - trade assistance partnership” program , which sought to utilize the skills and knowledge of federal and nonfederal partner organizations to increase the export know - how of firms that are not yet ready to export . at the chicago and miami useacs , the eximbank and sba staffs closely coordinated their outreach efforts . these individuals were familiar with the financing services of both agencies and referred clients when appropriate . we surveyed the four useacs' 60 “best customers” ( 15 for each useac ) who had received services from more than one useac agency , as identified by the useac directors . of the 40 “best customers” who responded to our survey , a majority stated that they were very satisfied with the export services provided by the useacs .