ii ) . existing wto members and countries that agree to join the wto must abide by a set of rules and obligations that promote trade and increase transparency and fairness in the world trading system . nondiscrimination toward other wto members is a fundamental principle in the wto agreements and is embodied in the granting of mfn status and providing national treatment . generally wto members are obligated under the mfn principle to grant each other trade privileges as favorable as they give to any other foreign country . export controls: sale of telecommunications equipment to china ( gao / nsiad - 97-5 , nov. 13 , 1996 ) . international trade: challenges and opportunities for u.s . businesses in china ( gao / t - nsiad - 96-214 , july 29 , 1996 ) . national security: impact of china's military modernization in the pacific region ( gao / nsiad - 95-84 , june 6 , 1995 ) . export controls: some controls over missile - related technology exports to china are weak ( gao / nsiad - 95-82 , apr . u.s. - china trade: implementation of the 1992 prison labor memorandum of understanding ( gao / ggd - 95-106 , apr . u.s. - china trade: implementation of agreements on market access and intellectual property ( gao / ggd - 95-61 , jan. 25 , 1995 ) . international trade: u.s. government policy issues affecting u.s. business activities in china ( gao / ggd - 94-94 , may 4 , 1994 ) . since then , the united states has attempted to increase market access and reduce trade barriers and other trade distorting policies and practices by entering into numerous bilateral trade agreements with china ( see table i.1 ) . nevertheless , china's implementation of these agreements has been uneven , according to the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) . china still restricts imports , subsidizes chinese exports , and maintains significant barriers to foreign business penetration , according to ustr . for example , the united states has entered into a series of agreements with china regarding china's protection of intellectual property rights ( ipr ) . under the memorandum of understanding on the protection of intellectual property rights signed in 1992 , china amended its patent law , issued copyright regulations , joined international copyright conventions , and enacted protection for trade secrets . however , u.s. officials subsequently determined that china did not establish an adequate and effective mechanism for ipr enforcement . as a result of a special 301investigation , the two parties signed an additional ipr agreement in 1995 in which china committed to ( 1 ) provide improved protection for copyrights , ( 2 ) strengthen border controls , ( 3 ) institute trademark law modernization , and ( 4 ) intensify a “special enforcement period” aimed at cracking down on piracy . however , china's continued insufficient implementation of the 1995 ipr agreement led the united states to threaten to impose sanctions in may 1996 ; the two parties avoided sanctions with the signing of an agreement in june 1996 , which confirmed china's most recent attempts to enforce the 1995 agreement .