additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . these processes involve many different military personnel . recruiters , staff members at the military entrance processing stations , drill instructors at basic training , instructors at follow - on technical training schools , and duty - station supervisors are all involved in transforming civilians into productive servicemembers . the process begins when the services first identify and select personnel to serve as recruiters . it continues when recruiters send applicants to receive their mental and physical examinations at the military entrance processing stations , through the period of up to 1 year while recruits remain in the delayed entry program , and through the time recruits receive their basic and follow - on training and begin work in their first assignments . reexamining the roles of all persons involved in this continuous process is in keeping with the intent of the government performance and results act of 1993 , which requires agencies to clearly define their missions , to set goals , and to link activities and resources to those goals . recruiting and retaining well - qualified military personnel is among the goals included in dod's strategic plan required under this act . as a part of this reexamination , we have found that recruiters did not have adequate incentives to ensure that their recruits were qualified and that the medical screening processes did not always identify persons with preexisting medical conditions . we believe that the services should not measure recruiting success simply by the number of recruits who sign enlistment papers stating their intention to join a military service but also by the number of new recruits who go on to complete basic training . we also believe that the services' mechanisms for medically screening military applicants could be improved . we found that recruiters did not have adequate incentives to ensure that their recruits were qualified . accordingly , we have identified practices in each service that we believe would enhance recruiters' performance and could be expanded to other services . specifically , in our 1998 report on military recruiting , we reported that the services were not optimizing the performance of their recruiters for the following reasons: the air force was the only service that required personnel experienced in recruiting to interview candidates for recruiter positions . in contrast , many army and some marine recruiting candidates were interviewed by personnel in their chain of command who did not necessarily have recruiting experience . the navy was just beginning to change its recruiter selection procedures to resemble those of the air force .