additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . smallpox had characteristics that experts consider desirable for eradication . the disease was easily diagnosed , and all infection resulted in visible symptoms . the vaccine was effective in only one dose , stable in heat , and inexpensive . polio and measles share many of the desirable eradication characteristics of smallpox . both diseases are caused by viral agents , are found only in humans , and have effective interventions available that provide long - lasting immunity . however , certain differences exist that may limit the usefulness of smallpox as a model for other eradication efforts . smallpox was less infectious than either polio or measles and required less immunization coverage . we will briefly discuss the estimates for each disease and the barriers to be overcome . who's cost estimate of $40 million for eradicating dracunculiasis included data on each of the five key factors and appears to be sound . community - based programs to control this disease have been underway since 1980 . continuing civil unrest in some endemic areas of africa precluded meeting the original 1995 target date for eradication . who now expects that all countries except nigeria and sudan will be free of dracunculiasis by 2005 at the latest , assuming safe access and appropriate funding . who's cost estimate includes certification costs that will continue until 2011 . the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and officials from the carter center believe that some country - level eradication goals may be met even sooner than who estimated . most experts agreed that global interruption of the wild polio virus will occur by 2002 or shortly thereafter . global certification is to take place about 3 years after the last case is reported — probably around 2005 . however , some experts have raised concerns about the ability of less developed countries to maintain the required level of polio vaccinations and surveillance until eradication is achieved . in addition , who is concerned about the ability of some countries to detect and report acute flaccid paralysis , a key component of polio surveillance . according to who , unless sufficient resources are mobilized to improve detection capability , eradication cannot be certified . who's cost estimate of $225 million for eliminating leprosy includes well - developed data on all key elements and appears to be sound . the current elimination strategy is based on the multidrug therapy begun in 1981 . measles is highly contagious , requiring higher routine vaccination rates than smallpox and polio .