section 1302 of h.r . 1119 would require dod to reduce its acquisition work force by 42 percent by october 1 , 2001 . if dod were to aggressively pursue best practices in the form of an integrated supplier concept for consumable items , dod could reduce its work force involved in procurement , storage , and distribution of consumable items . for example , the prime vendor program at walter reed resulted in a 50-percent reduction in full time equivalents associated with the medical supply system . section 1421 of h.r . 1119 would require dod inventory control points to reduce their overhead costs to 8 percent of net sales by the end of fiscal year 2000 . this goal is a very aggressive goal , considering that the current cost recovery rate ( the rate applied to the cost of goods to recover overhead costs ) for some dod hardware items is as high as 41.4 percent . however , dod has accomplished the goal for medical supplies through the use of the prime vendor program in that dla reduced the rate for medical supplies from 21.7 in fiscal year 1992 to 7.9 percent in fiscal year 1997 . we also support several requirements of the recently passed senate version of the proposed national defense authorization act of 1998 ( s.936 ) that relate to the application of best business practices at depot - level activities and the expansion of best inventory management practices of dla commodities . for example , section 312 , which deals with the designation of depot - level activities as “centers of industrial and technical excellence,” contains provisions requiring dod to establish a policy to encourage the military services and defense agencies to reengineer their processes and adopt best business practices in connection with their core competency requirements . the section also allows the services to conduct pilot programs to test practices they believe will contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of depot - level operations , improve support to the military users of such activities , and enhance readiness by reducing the time it takes to repair equipment . section 366 of the act deals with the implementation of best inventory practices for dla - managed supplies and equipment . this section requires the dla director to develop and submit to congress , not later than 180 days after enactment of the act , a schedule for implementing practices that the director defines as the best commercial inventory practices applicable to the acquisition and distribution of medical supplies , food and subsistence , clothing and textiles , commercially available electronics , construction supplies , and industrial supplies . the act requires that the schedule for completing implementation of such practices be completed not later than 3 years after the date of enactment . inventory management: the army could reduce logistics costs for aviation parts by adopting best practices ( gao / nsiad - 97-82 , apr . defense inventory management: problems , progress , and additional actions needed ( gao / t - nsiad - 97-109 mar . defense logistics: much of the inventory exceeds current needs ( gao / nsiad - 97-71 , feb. 28 , 1997 ) .