additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . what chemical and biological agents does the government really need to be concerned about ? we have not yet seen a thorough assessment or analysis of these questions . it seems to us that , without such an assessment or analysis and consensus in the policy - making community , it would be very difficult — maybe impossible — to properly shape programs and focus resources . statements in testimony before the congress and in the open press by intelligence and scientific community officials on the issue of making and delivering a terrorist wmd sometimes contrast sharply . on the one hand , some statements suggest that developing a wmd can be relatively easy . for example , in 1996 , the central intelligence agency director testified that chemical and biological weapons can be produced with relative ease in simple laboratories , and in 1997 , the central intelligence agency director said that “delivery and dispersal techniques also are effective and relatively easy to develop.” one article by former senior intelligence and defense officials noted that chemical and biological agents can be produced by graduate students or laboratory technicians and that general recipes are readily available on the internet . on the other hand , some statements suggest that there are considerable difficulties associated with successfully developing and delivering a wmd . for example , the deputy commander of the army's medical research and materiel command testified in 1998 about the difficulties of using wmds , noting that “an effective , mass - casualty producing attack on our citizens would require either a fairly large , very technically competent , well - funded terrorist program or state sponsorship.” moreover , in 1996 , the director of the defense intelligence agency testified that the agency had no conclusive information that any of the terrorist organizations it monitors were developing chemical , biological , or radiological weapons and that there was no conclusive information that any state sponsor had the intention to provide these weapons to terrorists . in 1997 , the central intelligence agency director testified that while advanced and exotic weapons are increasingly available , their employment is likely to remain minimal , as terrorist groups concentrate on peripheral technologies such as sophisticated conventional weapons . mr. chairman , that concludes our prepared statement . we would be happy to answer any questions at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony .