( see fig . generally , imf presently considers 30 of its 182 members to have sufficiently strong balance of payments and external reserve positions so that their currencies can be considered usable . as indicated in figure 2 , the u.s. share of usable resources is about 27.3 percent . currencies provided from quotas are recorded in imf's balance sheet as an asset . some of these resources are clearly more accessible than others . imf's determination of available currency holdings , its primary source of readily available funding for carrying out its operations , is based on its judgment concerning the level of usable currency and the level of reserves needed for contingencies . imf officials have stated that reserves are necessary for two reasons: ( 1 ) to maintain sufficient working balances in various currencies to execute foreign exchange transactions and ( 2 ) to have available for use in the event that some currencies become unusable and can no longer be used to finance imf transactions due to a deterioration in members' balance of payments and external reserve positions . there are several steps involved in calculating the amount of resources imf has readily available for operations . first , imf calculates the amount of currency holdings from quotas , which was estimated to be about $195 billion as of july 20 , 1998 . however , only the currencies of members with sufficiently strong balance of payments and gross external reserve positions are used or usable by imf for financing its transactions and are included in its operational budget , which is a nonpublic document . of the $195 billion of currency holdings , imf estimates that , before taking into consideration imf extended credit , about $130 billion , or 67 percent , is usable . the remaining $65 billion is unusable . these currencies cannot be used to finance imf transactions because imf has determined that the members providing these currencies may be experiencing balance of payment problems or may have drawn on their reserve assets . the distinction between usable and unusable currency is not reported on imf's balance sheet , but is discussed in its annual report . as shown in table 1 , imf reduces its total usable currencies of $130 billion by about $70 billion , the amount of its members' currency purchases outstanding , to determine its available usable resources . imf further reduces its available and usable resources of $60 billion by the amount of the commitments it has made to countries in need of assistance in their balance of payment positions . estimated undrawn commitments total about $17 billion . after these deductions , imf's usable currency holdings amounted to about $43 billion as of july 20 , 1998 . ( see fig . however , imf adjusts this amount to establish a level of reserves it may need for contingencies . there has been some discussion about the appropriate level of imf reserves , the outcome of which may lead to different estimates of the amount available for imf operations . table 2 will assist in understanding the two approaches .