some costs reimbursed . coordinates with international counterparts to discuss securities developments , development and implementation of cooperation agreements concerning securities , and provision of technical assistance for the development of foreign securities markets . supervises and regulates securities markets to ensure fairness and competition and meet changing international conditions . can the state department operate more efficiently ? the state department is entering the 21st century with outdated and costly - to - maintain communications systems and weak and outdated management processes . state has not made the necessary investments to modernize its information technology and is only now beginning a serious attempt to improve its capabilities in this area . the success of those efforts is critical to achieving long - term savings in information management costs and to streamlining its business practices . our work has shown that state's business processes could be made more cost - effective . just this month we reported that the introduction of prevailing best management practices from the private sector into state's staff relocation process could save millions . we have previously identified weaknesses in state's management of its overseas real estate portfolio and recommended a panel to review properties . at the congress' direction , state has established such a panel , including real estate experts from outside the department . the panel has begun its work , recommending properties for sale as well as those where local conditions preclude a sale at fair price to the u.s. government . the congressional budget office estimated that state could generate $150 million over the next 5 years by selling 100 properties that it has identified for potential sale . according to state , last fiscal year the department executed final sales of over $60 million worth of properties and reinvested those proceeds in needed facilities , which will also reduce future rental costs . is state efficiently structured , and are all of state's functions and activities needed ? our work suggests that the answer to the first part of this question is “no,” and the answer to the second is “not clear.” state maintains a headquarters with 6 geographic and 15 functional bureaus , including a bureau for international organizations . some programs and administrative functions overlap between geographic and functional bureaus . for example , although state has a functional bureau with responsibility for political - military issues , it also has 24 political - military positions in other bureaus , including each geographic bureau . in a way , the geographic bureaus operate as six micro - state departments . add to this mix the work and policy interests of the bureau dedicated to working with international organizations , and you have a complicated structure in which to develop policy . in addition to overlap within its own structure , state has bureaus , offices , and activities that mirror those of many other parts of the federal government , including agencies with primary responsibility for trade , agriculture , labor , and environmental issues . while state has a critical role in advancing u.s. interests in these increasingly international issues , it is not clear if the current approach and level of staffing to support its involvement are necessary .