personnel issues . difficulty in hiring and retaining staff has been identified as an impediment to the implementation of the labor agreement . panel's remand did not result in any change in the domestic agency's determination duty for one importer decreased from 13.2 percent to 13.1 percent ; duty for another importer increased from 8.4 percent to 8.5 percent ( continued ) case identification ( in descending order ) synthetic baler twine from u.s . unanimous decisions ? chapter 20 establishes nafta's procedures for settling disputes between the signatory governments regarding nafta's interpretation and application . chapter 20's dispute settlement provides for ( 1 ) consultations between disputing parties to resolve their disagreement and , if that fails , referral of the dispute to the free trade commission ; ( 2 ) referral of the dispute to a panel of independent experts ; ( 3 ) dissemination of panel findings and recommendations ; ( 4 ) resolution of the dispute through nonimplementation or removal of the nonconforming measure ; and ( 5 ) suspension of application of benefits by the complaining party if agreement on resolution to the dispute cannot be reached . chapter 20 panels are chosen from a roster of experts agreed upon by the three signatories . table iv.2 provides information on the chapter 20 disputes initiated under nafta . retaliatory action in response to u.s. safeguard action on broomcorn brooms small parcel delivery ( ups ) . nafta is unique among trade agreements because , under chapter 11 , it contains a comprehensive regime for settling disputes between foreign investors and host governments . international trade agreements have generally concentrated on removing government barriers to trade in goods and services and not on resolving disputes between private parties or regarding investment issues . chapter 11 makes investor - state disputes subject to binding arbitration for monetary compensation . if a dispute is not resolved through consultations , the investor may seek arbitration through a world bank facility or through ad hoc proceedings under united nations arbitration rules . table iv.3 shows the status of the chapter 11 cases brought forward under nafta . metalclad corporation ( u.s. company ) desechos solidos de naucalpan ( u.s. company ) . submitter ( s ) and year filed complaint biodiversity legal foundation , et al . ( 1995 ) sierra club , et al . in the u.s. , and canadian and mexican environmental groups ( 1995 ) comité para la protección de los recursos naturales , a.c. , et al . ( 1996 ) mr. aage tottrup , p. eng ( 1996 ) friends of the old man river ( 1996 ) the southwest center for biological diversity , et al . ( 1996 ) fort huachuca ( az ) base expansion will drain local water supply and destroy ecosystem dependent on it ( san pedro reservoir ) british columbia aboriginal fisheries commission , et al ( 1997 ) secretariat reviewing submission in light of canadian response ( continued ) submitter ( s ) and year filed complaint comité pro limpieza del rio magdalena ( 1997 ) centre quebecois du droit de l'environement , et al . ( 1997 ) canadian environmental defense fund ( 1997 ) animal alliance of canada , et al .