we are reviewing this issue . title ii contains several sections designed to increase emphasis on competitive procurement of services through outsourcing and other miscellaneous reforms and business practices . we generally agree with the aim of the title . our work shows that opportunities exist to improve the business practices addressed in this title . for several sections , we have made suggestions to enhance the likely achievement of the sections' aims . we have questions about the section removing the defense automation and printing service's surcharge and suggest the committee may want to reconsider the section . our specific observations are as follows: section 201: competitive procurement of finance and accounting services . we agree with the aim of section 201 and offer a suggestion to enhance its effectiveness . the massive scope of dod's finance and accounting operations , including that 80 percent of its financial data comes from dod component organizations , is unparalleled . our ongoing work shows that while many large companies have considered outsourcing , they often decided not to outsource because few , if any , vendors were yet capable of providing needed services . according to one vendor , existing vendors' capacity to take on large finance and accounting servicing is a major issue . for example , one vendor stated that a payroll the size of dod's civilian payroll would be too large to immediately transfer to its payroll system . most private sector organizations we talked with had decided to reengineer their finance and accounting functions to bring them more in - line with world - class organizations prior to deciding whether to outsource any finance and accounting services . our ongoing work also shows that it may be three to five more years before the needed capacity will be in place in the private sector to effectively compete finance and accounting services . we agree with the aim of section 101 . we have no basis on which to comment on the level of personnel cuts called for by this section but our work on the u.s. transportation command shows that opportunities for reductions exist . dod must ensure that headquarters functions are reengineered to meet the needs of a smaller , post - cold war military force . the secretary of defense , in discussing the quadrennial defense review , recognized that reductions in dod headquarters were desirable and feasible . given our work and the secretary's statement , we believe there are areas where some level of personnel reduction can be made . our work has also shown that leading edge businesses tie personnel reductions to the reengineering of business processes . therefore , as dod develops its personnel reduction plan required by this section , it is important that it considers restructuring of headquarters' organizations and support activities . section 102: additional reduction in defense acquisition workforce . we agree with the aim of section 102 . we have no basis to comment on the level of cuts called for in this section . in april 1997 , we testified before a joint hearing of two subcommittees of this committee that dod , in contemplating changes to its acquisition workforce , has not taken the opportunity to improve the acquisition process and the results it produces .