vii. ) food security in sub - saharan africa is threatened by continuing and rapid population growth . there are several reasons why this is so . although population growth rates have been declining , the world's population is expected to increase by 2.6 billion people by 2025 . if so , what assurances will they obtain that major agricultural producing / exporting countries will keep their markets fully open at all times , including in times of tight world supplies and rapidly rising prices ? in seeking to identify what actions are needed to help all countries achieve food security , what scenarios of future world agricultural production should be considered ? should a target date for achieving world food security be agreed upon ? without a target date , will summit signatories be able to outline a realistic plan of the actions needed to achieve food security ? should a plan of action estimate the amount of resources required in agricultural production and food - related investment to achieve food security ? given that food aid donations have declined during the past 3 years and given projections of a significant mismatch between food aid resources and food aid needs in future years , what will make an action plan for achieving food security credible to food - insecure countries ? in summary , we believe that the world food summit provides an important opportunity for all countries to address critical issues of world food security . hopefully , it will do so in a way that significantly advances efforts by sub - saharan african countries to cope with their food security problems . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . this concludes my prepared remarks . i will be happy to answer any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . price per ton ( dollars ) . total grain required for nutritional needs ( tons in millions ) nutrition - based food aid grain needs ( tons in millions ) deficit in nutrition - based food aid grain needs ( tons in millions ) . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .