most of this money has gone to the federation . the u.s. government , primarily through the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , committed $294.4 million during the program's first year . this money went to , among other things , repair municipal infrastructure and services , provide small business loans , and give technical assistance for the development of national and federation economic institutions . by the end of 1996 , there were many signs of economic recovery , primarily in the federation . at the end of 1996 , however , economic activity was still at a very low level , and much reconstruction work remained to be done . furthermore , many key national and federation economic institutions — such as bosnia's central bank — were not yet fully functioning . the biggest obstacle to progress in economic reconstruction and economic institution building has been the lack of cooperation among bosnia's political leaders in implementing infrastructure projects and economic institutions that would unite the ethnic groups within the federation and across the two entities . the international community has made many attempts to use economic assistance to encourage compliance and discourage noncompliance with the dayton agreement . for example , during 1996 , according to a state department official , all major bilateral donors had withheld economic assistance from bosnian serb - controlled areas because bosnian serb political leaders failed to comply with key human rights and other provisions of the dayton agreement . further , on may 30 , 1997 , the steering board of the peace implementation council , the organization that provides political guidance for the civilian aspects of the operation , reiterated previous council statements on this issue , tied assistance for housing and local infrastructure to acceptance of returns , and gave priority to unhcr's “open cities” project . moreover , an international donors' conference , originally planned to be held at the end of february 1997 , was postponed because bosnia's council of ministers had not yet adopted key economic laws . on june 19 , 1997 , the donors' conference was again postponed because the government of bosnia , although it had made progress in passing economic laws , had not made sufficient progress toward developing an economic program with the international monetary fund . as of july 15 , 1997 , the donors' conference had not been rescheduled . some international officials in bosnia have questioned the effectiveness of threatening to withhold economic assistance from bosnian serb - and croat - controlled areas in this conditional manner , partly because these areas have received little international assistance to date . according to a state department official , when the u.s. government decided on its conditionality policy toward republika srpska , it knew from analysis that there would be no quick results from the denial of this assistance . state now believes there is increasing evidence that elected officials of republika srpska are under mounting political pressure to make the necessary concessions to qualify for reconstruction assistance . in march 1997 , state and usaid officials told us that some bosnian serb political leaders , including the president of republika srpska , had shown a willingness to accept economic assistance that includes conditions such as employing multiethnic work forces .