we are in the process of making that review . in this regard , we have several preliminary observations . first , the information contained within the two papers does provide supporting data for the logic and the economies of combining the workloads in the solicitations if the workloads are all to be performed at one location . while we are encouraged to see that the air force has provided a substantial amount of information supporting this position , we would have expected to see more analysis relating to the consideration of other feasible alternatives . other alternatives that appear to be logical and potentially cost - effective were not considered or were considered only in a general manner . for example: ( 1 ) solicitations with alternate offer schedules permitting the competitors to offer on any combination of workloads , from one to all , were not considered ; ( 2 ) transferring some of the workloads to another public depot outside the competition process , an option that was discussed in at least one offeror's study report , was not considered ; and ( 3 ) dividing the sacramento workload into two , rather than five separate work packages , as was done for the san antonio acquisition strategy , was given only general consideration . second , the papers stated that managing multiple source selections would lengthen the competition process and increase costs . however , the paper did not discuss the option of having program management teams at two different locations and different source selection teams managing each of the individual competitions . using the two - package scenario previously mentioned , may be a logical and cost - effective alternative . depot officials disagree . at this time , the air force has not made a final determination as to how to resolve this dispute . dod decided to issue a single solicitation combining multi - aircraft and commodity workloads at the sacramento depot and a single solicitation for multi - engine workloads at the san antonio depot . under the 1998 defense authorization act , dod issued the required determinations that the workloads at these two depots “cannot as logically and economically be performed without combination by sources that are potentially qualified to submit an offer and to be awarded a contract to perform those individual workloads.” as required , we reviewed the dod reports and supporting data and issued our report to congress on january 20 , 1998.we found that the accompanying dod reports and supporting data do not provide adequate information supporting the determinations . first , the air force provided no analysis of the logic and economies associated with having the workload performed individually by potentially qualified offerors . consequently , there was no support for the department's determination that the individual workloads cannot as logically and economically be performed without combination . air force officials stated that they were uncertain as to how they would do an analysis of performing the workloads on an individual basis . however , air force studies indicate that the information to make such an analysis is available . for example , in 1996 the air force performed six individual analyses of depot - level workloads performed by the sacramento depot to identify industry capabilities and capacity .