sanctions . the applicability of sanctions may also differ under the two export control systems . commercial communication satellites are subject to two important types of sanctions: ( 1 ) missile technology control regime and ( 2 ) tiananmen square sanctions . under missile technology sanctions , both state and commerce are required to deny the export of identified , missile - related goods and technologies . communication satellites are not so identified but contain components that are identified as missile - related . the national security council left the decision of how to treat such exports to commerce and state . when the united states imposed missile technology sanctions on china in 1993 , exports of communication satellites controlled by state were not approved while exports of satellites controlled by commerce were permitted . under tiananmen square sanctions , satellites licensed by state and commerce have identical treatment . these sanctions prohibit the export of satellites for launch from launch vehicles owned by china . however , the president can waive this prohibition if such a waiver is in the national interest . export control of commercial communications satellites has been a matter of contention over the years among u.s. satellite manufacturers and the agencies involved in their export licensing jurisdiction — the departments of commerce , defense , state , and the intelligence community . to put their views in context , we would now like to provide a brief chronology of key events in the transfer of commercial communications satellites to the commerce control list . as the demand for satellite launch capabilities grew , u.s. satellite manufacturers looked abroad to supplement domestic facilities . in 1988 , president reagan proposed that china be allowed to launch u.s. origin commercial satellites . the united states and china signed an agreement in january 1989 under which china agreed to charge prices for commercial launch services similar to those charged by other competitors for launch services and to launch nine u.s. - built satellites through 1994 . following the june 1989 crackdown by the chinese government on peaceful political demonstrations on tiananmen square in beijing , president bush imposed export sanctions on china . president bush subsequently waived these sanctions for the export of three u.s. - origin satellites for launch from china . in february 1990 , the congress passed the tiananmen square sanctions law ( p.l . 101-246 ) to suspend certain programs and activities relating to the peoples republic of china . this law also suspends the export of u.s. satellites for launch from chinese - owned vehicles . in november 1990 , the president ordered the removal of dual - use items from state's munitions list unless significant u.s. national security interests would be jeopardized . this action was designed to bring u.s. controls in line with the industrial ( dual - use ) list maintained by the coordinating committee for multilateral export controls , a multilateral export control arrangement . commercial communications satellites were contained on the industrial list . pursuant to this order , state led an interagency review , including officials from defense , commerce , and other agencies to determine which dual - use items should be removed from state's munitions list and transferred to commerce's jurisdiction .