we have identified problems in the enforcement of these standards . in analyzing recent inspection and complaint information in california , we found that nearly one in three nursing homes was cited by state inspectors for providing care that created serious or potentially life - threatening problems . although state inspectors identified serious deficiencies , hcfa's policies did not ensure that these deficiencies were corrected . hcfa is developing plans to improve state inspection practices , revise oversight of state inspections , and strengthen actions against poorly performing homes . ( gao / ocg - 99-7 ) . an environment that focuses on results needs different information from that traditionally collected . obtaining more credible results - oriented performance information is essential for ( 1 ) accurately assessing agencies' progress in achieving goals and ( 2 ) in cases where sufficient progress is not being made , for identifying opportunities for improvement . the environmental protection agency ( epa ) epa has found that the wealth of environmental data epa and states collect are often difficult to compile in a meaningful way . for example , inconsistencies in water quality assessments , due to states using methodologies that differ , make it difficult for epa to aggregate the data . using information from these various sources presents a challenge when attempting to conclusively determine whether the quality of rivers , lakes , and streams is getting better or worse over time . absent this information , it has been difficult for epa to set priorities , evaluate the success of its programs and activities , and report on its accomplishments in a credible and informed way . ( gao / ocg - 99-17 ) the health care financing administration hcfa had not developed its own process for estimating the national error rate for its over $181 billion medicare fee - for - service payment program . for fiscal year 1997 , the department of health and human service's inspector general , in its cfo financial audit , estimated that about 11 percent of all such payments for claims , about $20 billion , did not comply with medicare laws and regulations . hcfa has now adopted the reduction of the error rate as a performance goal under the results act . ( gao / ocg - 99-7 ) . the government is heavily dependent on computer systems and networks to implement vital public services supporting national defense , revenue collection , and social benefits . however , billions of dollars have been wasted for computer systems that failed to deliver expected results . to the extent that billions in planned annual obligations for information technology can be spent more wisely , federal programs will operate more efficiently with less cost . to accomplish this , the government faces a number of critical challenges . resolving the year 2000 computing problem is the most pervasive , time - critical risk facing government today . unless adequate actions are taken , key federal operations — national defense , benefit payments , air traffic management , and more — could be seriously disrupted . over the past 2 years , preparedness has improved markedly , but significant challenges remain and time is running out .