this concludes my prepared remarks . i would be happy to answer any questions you may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . oira did not participate in the follow - up effort . our office experienced varying degrees of responses from the agencies . several agencies , notably the environmental protection agency and the department of transportation , took immediate and extensive corrective action to submit rules that they had failed to submit and to establish fail - safe procedures for future rule promulgation . other agencies responded by submitting some or all of the rules that they had failed to previously file . as we noted at the hearing , we believe oira should have played a role in ensuring that agencies were both aware of the cra filing requirements and were complying with them . last week , our office concluded a second review covering the 5-month period from august 1 , 1997 , to december 31 , 1997 , which we conducted in the same manner as the prior review . the initial list which we forwarded to oira on april 2 for distribution to the concerned agencies contained 115 rules from 21 agencies . for example , the joint committee on taxation has corresponded with the internal revenue service ( irs ) as to what should be submitted . therefore , irs procedures , rulings , regulations , notices , and announcements are forwarded as cra submittals . also , in response to the request of the house committee on education and the workforce , the departments of labor and education deliver their cra submissions with a monthly summary directly to the committee , in addition to our office and both houses of congress as required by the cra . as we discussed at your march hearing , we have attempted to work with executive agencies to get more substantive information about the rules and to get such information supplied in a manner that would enable quick assimilation into our database . we note certain congressional committees are taking an active role in overseeing agency compliance with the cra .