can this cycle be broken ? we believe that provisions in pending legislation , various proposals from hud , and other programs could act together to alleviate some of the pressures on housing authorities . both the proposed legislation and hud's latest transformation plan , known as “blueprint ii,” would foster admitting and retaining a higher proportion of working families and thus raising the total rental income . however , policymakers need to recognize that in some cities , this policy change could cause some people with very low incomes to wait longer to receive housing assistance . we believe that these legislative and regulatory changes will help maintain phas' financial health . however , hud and the congress need the cooperation of the public housing authority industry . many housing authorities have told us that the current system is too cumbersome and is detrimental to promoting their fiscal health . like organizations in the private sector , we believe phas are realizing that they must take the initiative and seek out management practices that can improve performance and efficiency . we are currently finding that many phas are initiating innovative practices to cut costs and increase revenues . these practices include privatization , consolidation , and partnerships . we will report later in the year on the use and applicability of these practices for all phas . we have concluded in the past that hud's program for assisting troubled housing authorities should take a more active role in addressing their performance . we also reported last year that hud had made limited use of its legal authority to declare troubled housing authorities in breach of their contracts with the department . moreover , the overall results of hud's focused technical assistance program that targeted the large , troubled authorities have been inconsistent . during the past year , 4 troubled authorities have come off the original list of 17 , and 4 others have made substantial improvements in their performance scores . however , the other nine authorities — accounting for over 70 percent of all housing units managed by troubled authorities — have not shown appreciable improvement . furthermore , the performance of four of the nine declined this past year , despite hud's intervention and technical assistance . hud appears to be taking a more active role in this area . in addition to having some success with several large housing authorities , three times in the last 10 months — in chicago , new orleans , and san francisco — hud has made use of its authority to either declare an authority in breach of its contract or to take control upon the resignation of the authority's board of commissioners . however , taking over troubled housing authorities has not come without a price . hud's top policymakers in public housing are simultaneously engaged in the everyday problems of managing hud and overseeing several problem housing authorities . for example , hud's acting assistant secretary for public and indian housing functions as the new orleans housing authority's board of commissioners and leads hud's takeover team in san francisco . approximately 11 local and headquarters hud staff are at the new orleans housing authority , and a similar staff will be placed at the san francisco housing authority .