iv ) . at the end of fiscal year 1994 , the gap between amtrak's operating deficit and federal operating subsidies was $75 million . at the end of fiscal year 1996 , the gap had increased to $82 million . over this same time , federal operating subsidies went from $502.2 million to $405 million . this deficit may require amtrak to begin borrowing as early as march 1997 to pay their bills . moreover , the cash flow deficit may be even larger than projected if amtrak does not receive anticipated revenues from the sale of property ( $16 million ) and cost savings from lower electric power prices in the northeast corridor ( $20.5 million ) . amtrak's fiscal year 1998 projected year - end cash balance is also bleak . on the basis of current projections , amtrak estimates that it may have to borrow up to $148 million next year . amtrak currently has short - term lines of credit of $150 million . amtrak's need for capital funds remains high . we reported in june 1996 that amtrak will need billions of dollars to address its capital needs , such as bringing the northeast corridor up to a state of good repair . this situation largely continues today . in may 1996 , the federal railroad administration ( fra ) and amtrak estimated that about $2 billion would be needed over the next 3 to 5 years to recapitalize the south end of the corridor and preserve its ability to operate in the near term at existing service levels . this renovation would include making improvements in the north and east river tunnels serving new york city and restoring the system that provides electric power to the corridor . this system , with equipment designed to last 40 to 50 years , is now between 60 and 80 years old , and , according to fra and amtrak , has gotten to the point at which it no longer allows amtrak and others to provide reliable high - speed and commuter service . fra and amtrak believe that this capital investment of about $2 billion would help reverse the trend of adding time to published schedules because of poor on - time performance . over the next 20 years , fra and amtrak estimate , up to $6.7 billion may be needed to recapitalize the corridor and make improvements targeted to respond to high - priority growth opportunities . a significant capital investment will also be required for other projects as well . for example , additional capital assistance will be required to introduce high - speed rail service between new york and boston . in 1992 , the amtrak authorization and development act directed that a plan be developed for regularly scheduled passenger rail service between new york and boston in 3 hours or less . currently , such trips take , on average , about 4-1 / 2 hours . significant rehabilitation of the existing infrastructure as well as electrification of the line north of new haven , connecticut , will be required to accomplish this goal .