( see fig . fra attributed the improved statistics to its safety initiatives , including the rail - highway crossing program . whether the plan contributed to the decline is uncertain: past trends indicate the total number of railroad fatalities declined by 34 percent from 1976 to 1983 ( from 1,630 to 1,073 ) but then fluctuated within a range of 1,036 and 1,324 deaths between 1983 and 1996 . while preliminary data for 1997 show a continued downward trend for accidents , fatalities were projected to increase from 1,039 in 1996 to 1,048 in 1997 . the number of rail - related injuries and illnesses has declined from 65,331 in 1976 to 12,558 in 1996 . as figure 3 shows , most of these injuries and illnesses involved railroad employees . preliminary data for 1997 show a continued decline , with rail - related injuries and illnesses decreasing to 11,540 . railroads must report injuries that require medical treatment or result in work restrictions and lost work days . efforts to reduce injuries to workers must rely on the combined efforts of fra and the occupational safety and health administration ( osha ) . fra generally oversees workplace safety issues intrinsic to railroad operations , while osha is responsible for issues that would be associated with any industrial workplace . however , fra's and osha's presence on railroad property varies greatly . for example , in 1997 , fra conducted over 52,000 inspections of track , railroad equipment , and operating practices related to train operations . in contrast , osha inspectors normally visit railroad properties only in response to an employee or union complaint about working conditions or when investigating a workplace accident that resulted in the injury of three or more employees . fra inspectors have no authority to cite railroads for workplace safety problems that fall under osha's jurisdiction . however , if fra inspectors observe unsafe work practices , such as an employee welding without proper eye protection , they can point out the problem to railroad supervisory personnel for voluntary compliance . labor representatives expressed concern that because of osha's limited resources , certain workplace safety and health issues are not adequately addressed under the split responsibility . fra relies on the voluntary cooperation of the railroads , rather than regulations , to ensure the structural integrity of the nation's 100,700 railroad bridges . a 1995 fra policy statement provides railroads with advisory guidelines to use in implementing their own bridge inspection programs . fra expects its track inspectors to observe structural problems on bridges as they perform their routine inspections and seek cooperative resolutions with the railroad . fra states that the railroads have generally taken corrective action in response to inspectors' observations . however , unlike safety problems with track , signals , or equipment , for which inspectors can cite defects or recommend violations , inspectors have no such discretion when dealing with potentially serious bridge problems . their only recourse is to close the bridge if conditions present an imminent hazard of death or personal injury . fra officials said that developing railroad bridge regulations will dilute the agency's capacity to address issues that the agency believes are more important .