iv ) . in addition , according to corps officials , the conventional hydroelectric generating units at carters , which are used to start the pumpback units , were not designed to consistently handle startups . operating the conventional units for startups over the years damaged the insulation in the generators , causing the units to fail . according to a corps report on the rehabilitation of the hartwell power plant , hartwell's turbines are significantly oversized in comparison with the generators . average age of units ( years ) plant's total nameplate capacity ( mw ) . millers ferry began producing power in 1970 . the power plant's three generating units have a history of operational problems , and the corps has taken remedial action to keep them operational from the outset . however , one of the units has been shut down for nearly 4 years , and the other two units are operating at reduced capacity . delays in repairs have been caused by the documentation and review the corps requires to justify expenditures for major repairs . in april 1996 , the corps awarded a contract for major repairs to the units at an estimated cost of $7 million . millers ferry lock and dam is located in southwest alabama on the alabama river . millers ferry aids navigation along the alabama river and generates electric power , which is marketed by southeastern to wholesale customers . the reservoir and surrounding park have become a popular recreational facility . the power plant's three 25-mw units have a total nameplate capacity of 75 mw . when the generating units came on line in 1970 , they produced extraordinarily high noise and vibration levels , which over the years contributed to the generators' aging at an accelerated rate . also , because the noise levels were high enough to damage human hearing , the corps took several actions to protect personnel in the powerhouse . for example , noise absorbing panels were installed on the ceilings and walls of the powerhouse , and sound enclosures were installed around each of the three generators . since 1970 , the corps has spent about $700,000 on noise abatement measures . according to the corps , although the excessive noise is caused by vibration within the generator , the corps had no recourse against the manufacturer because the design specifications did not address acceptable noise levels . the corps decided to keep the units operating rather than shut them down to correct the exact cause of the noise . in addition , all three of the power plant's generators have failed during the past 9 years . unit 3 failed in june 1987 and was shut down for 27 days for repairs . unit 1 failed in july 1992 , and the damage was so extensive that the unit has been shut down for nearly 4 years . unit 3 failed again in june 1994 and was shut down for 21 days for repairs . the most recent failure occurred when unit 2 failed in november 1995 and was shut down for 45 days for repairs . however , after units 2 and 3 were temporarily repaired and returned to service , they were operated at reduced capacity to prevent further damage .