epa has partially corrected this problem . in 1995 , it created the national prioritization panel to help it set funding priorities for sites at which remedies had been selected and that were ready for cleanup . the panel , which is composed of regional and headquarters cleanup managers , ranks all of the sites ready for cleanup construction nationwide on the basis of the health and environmental risks and other project considerations , such as cost - effectiveness . epa then approves funding for projects on the basis of these priority rankings . epa , however , does not use relative risk as a major criterion when deciding which of the eligible sites to place on the npl . in our discussions with epa managers responsible for assessing sites for superfund consideration , we found that the agency relies on the states to choose which of the eligible sites to refer to epa for placement on the npl . states refer sites after selecting those that they will address through their own enforcement or voluntary cleanup programs . the epa cleanup managers with whom we talked expect that future sites placed on the npl will not necessarily be the most risky but , rather , those that the states find to be large , complex , and therefore costly , or those without responsible parties willing and able to pay for the cleanup . because epa does not usually track the status of cleanups that take place outside of the superfund program , epa does not know if the worst sites in the nation are being addressed first . some epa regions are encouraging their states to voluntarily provide epa with information on the cleanup status of the sites that the states are addressing and that epa considers as potentially posing significant risk . in addition to our work on the high - risk aspects of the superfund program , we have conducted detailed analyses of spending in the program . in summary , we have reported that the share of superfund expenditures that go to cleanup contractors for the study , design , and implementation of cleanups increased from fiscal years 1987 through 1996 , but declined in fiscal year 1997 . we also reported that between fiscal years 1996 and 1997 , epa's superfund costs for administration and support activities correspondingly increased ( see fig . as you know , we are currently conducting additional analysis of the superfund program's expenditures for this committee and others . we plan to report on the results of this work in may . epa's inventory of potential npl sites contains sites that have been awaiting a decision for several years or more on whether they should be listed on the npl . epa and state officials believe that many of these sites need cleanup work , but the respective cleanup responsibilities of epa and the states have not been established . as of the end of fiscal year 1997 , epa's superfund database indicated that the risks of over 3,000 sites had been judged on the basis of preliminary evaluations to be serious enough to make the sites potentially eligible for the npl .