this concludes our statement . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . second , are the costs of regulation burdensome to pipeline carriers ? the regulatory requirements imposed on pipeline carriers do not appear to be high . stb does not have the authority to initiate rate cases . in addition , stb does not require that pipelines file rate schedules , nor does it impose reporting requirements on pipelines wanting to start up or go out of business . in fiscal year 1997 , stb devoted the equivalent of about one full - time staff member to pipeline issues . if a rate case is brought before stb , the cost to the pipeline carrier of defending the case could be substantial . the limited number of pipeline rate cases in stb's and icc's history provides little basis for estimating the cost of these cases . however , stb officials told us that the cost of rail rate cases ranges from less than $50,000 up to about $1 million . third , does the limited number of pipeline rate cases indicate there is no need for continued regulation ? it is possible that the very limited number of rate cases brought before stb and its predecessor in the last 10 years is evidence of effective competition and therefore there is no need to continue pipeline regulation . however , some shippers we talked to contend that the mere existence of a federal regulatory agency with the authority to roll back rate increases acts as a deterrent to unfair rate increases . finally , would shippers have recourse if stb's economic regulation of pipelines was eliminated ? absent stb or any other regulatory body , shippers that believe they are being charged unfair rates would presumably complain to the department of justice or the federal trade commission . however , neither of these agencies currently has the statutory authority to investigate complaints from shippers that believe they are being charged rates that are unreasonable or discriminatory , unless the complaint alleges a violation of antitrust laws . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .