additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . much can change over such extended periods of time . as a result , forest plans can be outdated by the time they are approved , and schedules for implementing the plans' objectives cannot be established for 10 to 15 years . options that have been suggested include shortening both ( 1 ) the time required to develop the plans and ( 2 ) the periods covered by the plans to 3 to 5 years . one drawback to shortening the periods covered by forest plans may be that 3 to 5 years might not provide companies and communities dependent on forest service lands with enough time to plan or develop long - range investment strategies . in addition , according to some forest service officials , events that occur after forest plans have been approved can significantly affect the agency's ability to provide a high degree of confidence concerning the future availability of uses on national forest lands . these events can include listing a species as endangered or threatened or designating land as habitat under the endangered species act , changing timber harvesting methods in response to increased environmental restrictions , and evolving judicial interpretations of procedural requirements in environmental statutes . for example , forest service officials note that recent federal court decisions have required the agency to re - initiate lengthy , formal consultations on several approved forest plans because a species of salmon was listed as threatened in the pacific northwest and the mexican spotted owl was listed as threatened in the southwest . these rulings have prohibited the agency from implementing projects under these plans until the new round of consultations has been completed , even though the forest service believes that some of the projects would have no effect on these species . these forest service officials believe that the congress should provide legislative clarification so that projects unaffected by a subsequent event would not have to be delayed by the lengthy process to amend or revise forest plans . forest service officials also believe that annual appropriations have not always matched the funding assumptions incorporated in forest plans . this lack of connection has occurred , in part , because some forest plans have been developed without reference to likely funding levels . options that have been suggested include linking forest plans more closely to budgeting and including objectives for commodity and noncommodity uses at various funding levels in forest plans . according to these officials , a possible complementary statutory option would be to appropriate funds for the duration of a shortened planning period . the process currently used to reach project - level decisions for implementing forest plans may also have to be shortened . for example , preparing timber sales usually takes 3 to 8 years . one option that might shorten the time required to reach project - level decisions would be to obtain better data to use in developing forest plans . prior gao reports have shown that the goals and objectives in some forest plans were developed using inadequate data and inaccurate estimating techniques .