obtaining liability protection . non - vts approaches . in some cases , improvements have been proposed that are not as extensive as installing a vts system . for example , several years ago in mobile / pascagoula , the coast guard captain of the port proposed a means to enhance port safety at two locations where the deep ship channels ( for ocean - going ships ) intersect the intracoastal waterway ( which mainly has barge traffic and small vessels ) . the proposal involved establishing “regulated navigation areas” that would require vessels from both directions to radio their approach and location to all other vessels in the vicinity . this proposal may merit further consideration before a decision is made on the need for a vts in this port area . at the ports we visited , few stakeholders said they had been involved with the coast guard in discussing whether such alternatives are a viable alternative to vts 2000 systems in their port . in discussions with us , coast guard officials agreed that greater communication with key stakeholders is an essential step in making decisions about vts 2000 . an additional study currently being conducted by the marine board of the national research council may provide additional information that will be useful in assessing vts 2000 . among other things , this study will address the role of the public and private sectors in developing and operating vts systems in the united states . an interim report is due to be completed in june 1996 . most of the stakeholders we interviewed did not support installing a vts 2000 system at their port . their opinions were predominantly negative at five ports , about evenly split at two , and uncertain at one . many who opposed vts 2000 perceived the proposed system as being more expensive than needed . mr. chairman , this concludes our prepared statement . we would be happy to respond to any questions that you or the members of the subcommittee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . there is an acknowledged need to improve marine safety at a number of ports , but not much agreement about how it should be done . decisions about whether vts 2000 represents the best approach are made more difficult by the uncertainties surrounding the scope , cost , and appropriateness of vts 2000 over other alternatives in a number of locations .