not available . difference between unobligated balance and fy 1997 7-month ( continued ) note 1: bold type indicates that previous obligations exceed the unobligated balance . note 2: the comparison represents data for the states only and does not include data for the district of columbia , american samoa , puerto rico , the virgin islands , guam , and the north marianas . app . ii provides a similar comparison based on the combined total unobligated balance of $12.1 billion. ) it is important to note that these comparisons imply that the state's obligation rates for fiscal year 1997 correspond to those for fiscal year 1998 , which may or may not be the case for individual states . furthermore , the total unobligated balance of $12.1 billion includes balances from programs that were not subject to the obligation limitation . as of october 1 , 1997 , seven states had little or no unobligated balances in these program categories . a number of strategies could help the states get through a short period without a new highway funding authorization . at the federal level , the congress could provide the states with the flexibility to use their unobligated balances across the range of federal highway programs , rather than keeping the balances generally tied to specific highway programs and demonstration projects . at the state level , some states may be able to obtain state , local , or private resources to begin projects and later seek federal reimbursement for these costs through advance construction authority . the unobligated balance of $9.6 billion ( from programs subject to the obligation limit ) represents the sum of the unobligated balances remaining from specific programs , such as the interstate maintenance , national highway system , surface transportation , and cmaq programs . these balances may now generally be obligated in accordance with the individual program categories . throughout the istea period , the obligation limits acted to control “total” obligations , thus leaving the states discretion to decide how they would use their obligation authority across the range of specific federal - aid highway programs . for example , in a particular year , a state could have opted to obligate all of its available national highway system funds , but it would have had to make up for its full use of these funds by obligating less in another funding category , such as the cmaq program . differences in the priorities that the states assigned to different highway programs are now reflected in significant variances in the unobligated balances that remain from istea authorizations for these programs . for example , the national highway system had a total unobligated balance of over $426 million at the beginning of fiscal year 1998 , which represents only about 13 percent of the total fiscal year 1997 apportionment for this program . in comparison , the surface transportation program started fiscal year 1998 with an unobligated balance of $4.2 billion , or nearly half of the fiscal year 1997 apportionment for this program . furthermore , the cmaq program had an unobligated balance of $1 billion , or 108 percent of the fiscal year 1997 apportionment for this program .