( see app . ii for details on faa's benefit - cost analyses for the waas program in 1994 , 1996 , and 1997. ) to understand the impact of the potential cost increases and decommissioning delays previously discussed , we requested that faa's support contractor perform alternative runs of the benefit - cost analysis.faa's 1997 analysis served as the base case for comparison purposes . one pessimistic scenario that we requested made the following alternative assumptions from the base case: ( 1 ) the development cost of the primary waas contract would increase by 15 percent , ( 2 ) the leasing costs for communications satellites would increase by 50 percent , and ( 3 ) the decommissioning of the ground - based navigation aids would be delayed by 5 years . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . the feasibility of meeting the 5.2-second requirement ( and , therefore , the 8-second requirement ) has been demonstrated at faa's nstb . but as waas processes more data , its ability to meet the requirement may decline . faa's present analysis shows that the requirement is being marginally satisfied . faa is looking at faster processing equipment to accommodate the expected increase in data . faa may need to add one or two geo satellites to the four it planned to procure or it may have to relax the requirement . experts believe relaxing the requirement may be possible , but faa has to determine the impact on safety if , in the event of a catastrophic loss of both gps and waas , air traffic controllers might have to rely on radar to separate and direct aircraft . no major concerns have been raised by system developers or outside parties because existing aircraft systems have demonstrated this ability . during testing , faa will review contractor data to validate that the integrity requirement can be met . these stations receive data from gps and geo satellites . master stations ( up to 8 sites ) on the ground will process data from the reference stations to determine and verify corrections for each gps satellite . these stations also validate the transmitted corrections . ground earth stations ( up to 8 sites ) will , among other things , receive waas message data from the master stations , and transmit and validate the message to the geo satellites . geo satellites will transmit wide - area accuracy corrections and integrity messages to aircraft and also serve as additional sources of signals similar to gps signals . the ground communications system will transmit information among the reference stations , master stations , and ground stations . for pilots to use gps / waas for navigation , their aircraft must be equipped with receivers that process the information carried by the gps and geo signals .