( see fig . for example , while intercity passenger - related revenues grew by about 4 percent last year , intercity passenger - related expenses grew by about 7 percent . for example , in february 1998 , amtrak added a fourth train per week between chicago and san antonio on the texas eagle route , in part to accommodate expanded mail and express business . amtrak is also planning to begin daily passenger rail service between los angeles and las vegas by january 1999 . in explaining the rationale for attempting to increase revenues through fine - tuning amtrak's routes rather than through cutting back on service , amtrak and federal railroad administration ( fra ) officials pointed to amtrak's mission of maintaining a national route system . they noted that such a system will consist of routes with a range of profitability , including poorer - performing routes that provide needed linkages to better - performing routes . furthermore , poorer - performing routes may provide public benefits , such as serving small cities and rural areas . these officials stressed that cutting the routes with the worst performance could damage the national network and cause the loss of revenue on connecting routes . amtrak has just begun a market analysis that could result in several alternatives for a national intercity passenger rail network . the decision to make route adjustments is a difficult one , even though amtrak's data show that only one of the railroad's 40 routes ( metroliners between washington , d.c. , and new york city ) covers all its operating costs . for the remaining 39 routes , amtrak loses an average of $53 for each passenger . amtrak data show that it loses over $100 per passenger on 14 of these routes , and only 5 routes covered their train costs in fiscal year 1997 . however , amtrak encounters opposition when it proposes to discontinue routes because of the desire by a range of interests to see passenger train service continued in potentially affected communities . in addition , amtrak maintains that every route that covers its variable costs ( costs of running trains ) makes a contribution toward its substantial fixed costs . this projected increase is primarily due to ( 1 ) reductions in expected revenues from amtrak's pilot express program ( $47 million ) ; ( 2 ) a liability for the wage increases provided by amtrak's recent agreement with the brotherhood of maintenance of way employees ( $35 million ) ; and , ( 3 ) an increase in accounts payable that resulted from deferring fiscal year 1997 payables to fiscal year 1998 ( $16 million ) . amtrak began borrowing in february 1998 to make ends meet . amtrak will continue to face challenges to its financial health . despite efforts to improve revenues and cut costs , the railroad continues to lose more money than it planned . this situation may get worse . amtrak's recent agreement with the brotherhood of maintenance of way employees is expected to increase amtrak's fiscal year 1998 labor costs by between $3 million to $5 million .