additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you today . we would be pleased to answer any questions you may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . only “questionable” cases are investigated . in general , the agencies take this approach in an effort to make the program convenient for clients and simple to administer , and to ensure accurate payments ; consequently , controls over determining household composition are not as rigorous as they could be . for example , fns' regulations do not require caseworkers to verify client - provided information on household composition , unless such information is deemed “questionable,” as defined by the state agency . investigators attempt to verify this information through techniques such as visiting the home and / or contacting neighbors and landlords , however , they characterize these efforts as time - consuming , costly , and often unreliable . with respect to trafficking , it is difficult to track the flow of food stamps after they are issued to recipients . federal and state officials agree that food stamps have essentially become a second currency exchanged by some recipients for cash or non - food items . trafficked food stamps may change hands several times , but all food stamps must eventually pass through an fns - authorized retailer because only such a retailer can redeem food stamps for cash from the government . fns is responsible for monitoring program compliance by the approximately 185,000 stores that currently are authorized to redeem food stamps . our 1995 report found that , at that time , fns' controls and procedures for authorizing and monitoring the retailers that participate in the food stamp program did not deter or prevent retailers from trafficking in food stamps . since our report , fns has initiated several actions to reduce trafficking in the program , such as contracting with different companies to make 35,000 to 40,000 store visits by the end of fiscal year 1998 . these visits are being made to verify that the stores are bonafide grocery operations .