additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . appendix i contains the scope and methodology of our review . in summary , we found the following: recognizing the need to improve its budget estimating process with better oversight and documentation , hud has started to improve its process by modifying its organizational structure to increase oversight among the staff responsible for formulating budget estimates . however , many of hud's planned improvements — such as office of budget's analysis of program office submissions — were not implemented in time to affect the department's fiscal year 1999 budget estimate but , according to hud officials , will be in place to enhance the fiscal year 2000 process . hud's request for $4.7 billion to renew section 8 tenant - based assisted housing contracts for fiscal year 1999 could be reduced by $439 million . this is the amount of excess budget authority in the section 8 moderate rehabilitation program that could be used in place of new budget authority to renew expiring housing assistance contracts . in addition , because this excess budget authority exists , hud may not need the $70 million it has requested for section 8 moderate rehabilitation amendment funding . hud's budget request for $1.3 billion in section 8 project - based amendment funding — funds needed to cover shortfalls in long - term section 8 contracts — substantially exceeds the amounts that hud's analyses indicated are needed . according to hud officials , the excessive amount reflects a policy decision by the office of management and budget and hud to augment the request due to the long - term need for amendment funding . to help address the needs of the nation's homeless , hud has requested 34,000 new section 8 vouchers . congressional concern exists over the high proportion of funding for assistance for the homeless that was spent on supportive services instead of on direct housing . although these new vouchers will increase the amount of direct housing assistance for the homeless , hud has not developed the eligibility standards or other planning criteria for these new vouchers that would facilitate implementing the program . hud's budget request for $100 million for the regional connections initiative ( rci ) , a new set - aside within the community development block grant program to address key regional issues , does not provide enough detail to indicate whether this is a reasonable funding level for the program . the additional support that hud provided , however , does not recommend a significant federal effort to address regional problems .