epa agreed with this recommendation . the agreement states that “regulators must be willing to change the way we traditionally look at environmental problems and be receptive to innovative approaches.” epa staff and state officials we contacted generally agreed that epa's top management has articulated a clear commitment to the agency's reinvention effort . but it has been considerably more difficult to translate this message into an agencywide commitment among epa's more than 17,000 employees so that everyday decisions reflect the administrator's stated reinvention principles . we found that program and regional offices do encourage staff , to varying degrees , to participate in reinvention activities and that these efforts have engendered wider staff participation . nonetheless , we also found a consistent acknowledgement from both headquarters and regional management that achieving full commitment to reinvention by the agency's rank and file will be difficult and will take time . one senior program official , for example , noted that it will take time for culture change to filter down to epa line staff and to see if the change takes hold . under epa's reinvention strategy , the agency's goal is to share information and decision - making with all stakeholders , including those “external” to the agency , such as state regulators and representatives of industry and environmental organizations . among other things , the agency hopes this strategy will help to avert litigation by getting up - front agreement among the affected parties and a commitment by industry to meet requirements it has acknowledged to be achievable . we found that the agency has , indeed , made strenuous efforts to involve stakeholders with different interests and perspectives but that achieving and maintaining consensus has been an enormous challenge . the greatest difficulties have come when epa has sought to achieve — or was perceived as seeking to achieve — 100 percent agreement . officials from the three states we contacted noted that efforts to achieve unanimous agreement have been problematic , particularly in common sense initiative negotiations . industry representatives agreed , some of whom have cited the problem as a reason for thinking of terminating their participation in the initiative . accordingly , we recommended in our report that epa improve the prospects for achieving consensus among concerned parties in the agency's reinvention efforts by clarifying the circumstances under which unanimous agreement is required . epa agreed with this recommendation . some of epa's earlier reinvention projects were affected by miscommunication and other problems among the agency's headquarters and regional offices and other participants . in one notable instance involving an xl project submitted by the 3m company , minnesota and 3m officials withdrew their participation because they believed epa headquarters and regional officials were raising new issues late in their negotiations . to help address these kinds of problems , the agency designated certain senior managers in september 1996 as “reinvention ombudsmen” to respond to stakeholders' questions and resolve problems in a timely fashion . this process has helped in the negotiation of a number of xl projects , but many stakeholders have noted that in the longer term , senior management will not be able to intervene each time a problem arises .