the department of agriculture has not implemented our recommendation . the secretary of agriculture indicated that he did not believe such an analysis was necessary and that the current forest service methods fulfilled the requirements of the k - v act . at the time of our 1996 report , the forest service did not have a system in place to ensure the consistent handling of program support charges for the k - v program agencywide . we recommended that the secretary of agriculture require all organizational levels to use a standardized methodology for assessing and withholding the support costs for the k - v program that would limit expenditures for program support to the amounts collected for such purposes . since that time , the forest service has completed an analysis of the methodological changes that are needed to standardize the forest service's practices for assessing and withholding program support costs for the k - v program and the results of the agency's work should be implemented when the practices become part of the forest service's directives in september 1998 . the knutson - vandenberg trust fund , as authorized by the act of june 9 , 1930 , as amended ( 16 u.s.c . 576-576b ) , allows portions of the receipts from timber sales to be deposited into the k - v fund to be used to reforest timber sale areas . in addition to being used for planting trees , these deposits may also be used for eliminating unwanted vegetation and for protecting and improving the future productivity of the renewable resources on forest land in sale areas , including sale area improvement operations , maintenance , construction , and wildlife habitat management . reforestation is needed where timber harvests or natural disasters have depleted the existing timber stands . in fiscal year 1997 , about $166 million was expended from the k - v fund for reforestation and related projects . the majority of the k - v moneys — about $115 million in fiscal year 1997 — was used to fund direct reforestation activities . in addition to the direct reforestation expenditures , about $51 million was used for costs incurred to support and manage the reforestation program , such as rents , utilities , computer equipment , or the salaries of program support staff . federal law permits the forest service to transfer amounts from the k - v fund , as well as other forest service appropriations , to supplement the forest service's firefighting funds when emergencies arise . the forest service is authorized to advance money from any of its appropriations and trust funds to pay for fighting forest fires . the department of agriculture has informed the congress about the general dimensions of the k - v funding issue on several occasions , and that information has resulted in some replenishment of the k - v fund . for example , the fiscal year 1997 omnibus appropriation bill provided additional appropriations for emergency firefighting , and $202 million was apportioned to the k - v fund in january 1997 .