additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the national park system has 376 units . these park units have over 16,000 permanent structures , 8,000 miles of roads , 1,500 bridges and tunnels , 5,000 housing units , about 1,500 water and waste systems , 200 radio systems , over 400 dams , and more than 200 solid waste operations . according to the park service , these facilities are valued at over $35 billion . needless to say , the proper care and maintenance of the national parks and their supporting infrastructure is essential to the continued use and enjoyment of our great national treasures by this and future generations . however , for years park service officials have highlighted the agency's inability to keep up with its maintenance needs . in this connection , park service officials and others have often cited a continuing buildup of unmet maintenance needs as evidence of deteriorating conditions throughout the national park system . the accumulation of these unmet needs has become commonly referred to by the park service as its “maintenance backlog.” the reported maintenance backlog has increased significantly over the past 10 years — from $1.9 billion in 1987 to about $6.1 billion in 1997 . recently , concerns about the maintenance backlog situation within the national park service , as well as other federal land management agencies , have led the congress to provide significant new sources of funding . these additional sources of funding were , in part , aimed at helping the agencies address their maintenance problems . it is anticipated that new revenues from the 3-year demonstration fee program will provide the park service over $100 million annually . in some cases , the new revenues will as much as double the amount of money available for operating individual park units . in addition , funds from a special one - time appropriation from the land and water conservation fund may also be available for use by the park service in addressing the maintenance backlog . these new revenue sources are in addition to the $300 million in annual operating appropriations which are used for maintenance activities within the agency . recent changes in federal accounting standards require federal agencies , including the park service , to develop better data on their maintenance needs . the standards define deferred maintenance and require that it be disclosed in agencies' financial statements beginning with fiscal year 1998 . to implement these standards , the park service is part of a facilities maintenance study team that has been established within the department of the interior to provide the agency with deferred maintenance information as well as guidance on standard definitions and methodologies for improving the ongoing accumulation of this information . in addition , as part of this initiative , the park service is doing an assessment of its assets to show whether they are in poor , fair , or good condition . this condition information is essential to providing the park service with better data on its overall maintenance needs .