this concludes my statement . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or the members of the committee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . first , is the technology originating primarily in the research institution as envisioned in the rationale for the program or is it originating in the small business ? the technology may originate with the research institution , the small business , or a combination of the two . in the sttr program , the assumption is that the research institution will be the primary originator of the new concept . however , data to determine the extent to which research institutions are providing the technologies are not currently available . neither sba nor the agencies have collected this information . the relative roles of the research institution and the small business as the source of the technology bear directly on the need for the sttr program . if a high percentage of the ideas are originating with small businesses rather than with research institutions , this finding would raise questions about the need for the program . on the other hand , if a high percentage of ideas are originating with research institutions , this finding would suggest that the program was achieving the first step in moving ideas from research institutions to small businesses . second , if the program is effective in moving ideas from research institutions to small businesses , then the next logical question concerns whether their collaboration is effective in moving them to the marketplace . this question can be approached from two directions: ( 1 ) short - term views of how well the collaboration is working in general and ( 2 ) long - term data on actual commercialization . information on how well the collaboration is working can be obtained in the near future . information on actual commercial outcomes will require a greater amount of time before it can be obtained . generally , 5 to 9 years are needed to turn an initial concept into a marketable product . third , because one important difference between the two programs is that sttr makes a small business / research institution collaboration mandatory , the question arises whether the sbir program could accomplish the objective of transferring technology from research institutions to the private sector without mandatory collaboration . the rationale for the sttr program tends to assume that such collaborations were relatively rare in the sbir program . however , nih's program manager told us that , in an sbir survey undertaken by nih several years ago , collaboration between small businesses and universities was already evident in well over half of nih's sbir projects . by contrast , the army's program manager believed that sttr's impact will be greater in the army than in agencies such as nih because the army has had a lesser degree of involvement with universities and other research institutions in the past .