additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . these entities often control the decisions affecting hazard mitigation . for example , building code enforcement and land - use planning are generally under local jurisdictions . however , research suggests that , for a number of reasons , state and local governments may be reluctant to take actions to mitigate natural hazards . the reasons include local sensitivity to such measures as building code enforcement and land - use planning , conflict between hazard mitigation and development goals , the lack of an understanding of mitigation and political support , and the perception that mitigation is costly and involves solutions that are overly technical and complex . also , while increased mitigation can be justified only to the extent to which averted losses exceed the increased costs of mitigation , mitigation policies often do not systematically compare the costs of mitigation with the losses expected to be averted , and data on which to base cost - effective mitigation may be incomplete and / or inaccurate . individuals may also lack incentives to take mitigation measures . studies have shown that increasing the awareness of the hazards associated with living in a certain area or previous experience with disasters do not necessarily persuade individuals to take preventive measures against future disasters . residents of hazard - prone areas tend to treat the possibility of a disaster's occurrence as sufficiently low to permit them to ignore the consequences . finally , some research suggests that the availability of federal relief inhibits actions that would mitigate losses from disasters . for example , we noted in a 1980 report that the greater the degree of federal subsidization of disaster losses , the less the incentive for individuals to take action to minimize damage from natural disasters . the national performance review found that the availability of post - disaster federal funds may reduce incentives for mitigation . fema's 1993 review of the national earthquake hazards reduction program ( nehrp ) concluded that at the state level there is “the expectation that federal disaster assistance will address the problem after the event.” there are a number of approaches for addressing state and / or local governments' reluctance to take actions to mitigate natural hazards . our march 1995 testimony discussed recommendations by fema , the national research council , and the national performance review promoting the use of federal incentives to encourage hazard mitigation . fema also attempts to reduce flood losses through buying - out flood - prone properties throughout the country and converting the properties to open spaces .