however , this issue is far from being resolved . the society is developing the standard for risk assessments in two phases ( internal events and emergency preparedness ) . nrc's memorandum of tasks shows that the staff expect to provide recommendations to the commission in march 1999 that address the use of the term regulatory significance and in may 1999 on considering risk in the enforcement process . in january 1999 , we provided the congress with our views on the major management challenges that nrc faces . we believe that the management challenges we identified have limited nrc's effectiveness . in summary , we reported that: nrc lacks assurance that its current regulatory approach ensures safety . nrc assumes that plants are safe if they operate as designed and follow nrc's regulations . however , nrc's regulations and other guidance do not define , for either a licensee or the public , the conditions necessary for a plant's safety ; therefore , determining a plant's safety is subjective . nrc's oversight has been inadequate and slow . although nrc's indicators show that conditions throughout the nuclear energy industry have generally improved , they also show that some nuclear plants are chronically poor performers . at three nuclear plants with long - standing safety problems that we reviewed , nrc did not take aggressive action to ensure that the utilities corrected the problems . as a result of nrc's inaction , the conditions at the plants worsened , reducing safety margins . nrc's culture and organizational structure have made the process of addressing concerns with the agency's regulatory approach slow and ineffective . since 1979 , various reviews have concluded that nrc's organizational structure , inadequate management control , and inability to oversee itself have impeded its effectiveness . some of the initiatives that nrc has underway have the potential to address the first two management challenges . however , the need to ensure that nrc's regulatory programs work as effectively as possible is extremely important , particularly in light of major changes taking place in the electric utility industry and in nrc . yet changing nrc's culture will not be easy . in a june 1998 report , the office of the inspector general noted that nrc's staff had a strong commitment to protecting public health and safety . however , the staff expressed high levels of uncertainty and confusion about the new directions in regulatory practices and challenges facing the agency . the employees said that , in their view , they spend too much time on paperwork that may not contribute to nrc's safety mission . the inspector general concluded that without significant and meaningful improvement in management's leadership , employees' involvement , and communication , nrc's current climate could eventually erode the employees' outlook and commitment to doing their job . this climate could also erode nrc's progress in moving forward with a risk - informed regulatory approach . according to staff , nrc recognizes the need to effectively communicate with its staff and other stakeholders and is developing plans to do so . mr. chairman and members of the subcommittee , this concludes our statement . we would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have .