the administration has not issued a proposed rule . omchs officials explained that revising the rule is a difficult and very contentious issue and the final rule will not be issued until 2000 or later . in addition , omchs has concluded that high - risk carriers can be more accurately targeted by tracking the number of citations issued to each carrier's drivers . i will be pleased to answer any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . a 1997 report prepared for the federal highway administration found that trucking companies with higher rates of citations — for such things as overweight vehicles or moving violations — are also more likely to have higher accident rates . omchs officials have stated that they plan to develop software that will track the number of citations drivers for each carrier receive . however , states must first agree on a standard format for collecting and reporting citations , and omchs does not yet have an estimated date for implementing its plan to use driver citations as a targeting mechanism . because of the large contribution of car driver errors to fatal crashes between large trucks and cars , omchs launched the “no - zone” campaign in 1994 . ( “no - zone” is a term used to describe the areas around a truck where the truck driver's visibility is limited. ) this campaign is intended to reduce crashes between large trucks and cars by educating car drivers about how to safely share the road with large trucks and about trucks' limitations , such as reduced maneuverability , longer stopping distances , and blind spots . the campaign's public education efforts include public service announcements via radio , television , and print ; brochures ; posters ; and decals on large trucks . because car drivers between 15 and 20 years old were found to be involved in a relatively high percentage of fatal crashes , the “no - zone” campaign focused a large part of its public outreach on this age group .