are such changes expected to continue into the future ? would a department increase the visibility and thereby substantially strengthen the active political and public support for actions and programs to enhance the existing agency's goals ? is there evidence that becoming a department would provide better analysis , expression , and advocacy of the needs and programs that constitute the agency's responsibilities ? is there evidence that elevation to a cabinet department would improve the accomplishment of the existing agency's goals ? is a department required to better coordinate or consolidate programs and functions that are now scattered throughout other agencies in the executive branch of government ? is there evidence that a department — with increased centralized political authority — would result in a more effective balance within the agency , between integrated central strategic planning and resource allocation and the direct participation in management decisions by the line officers who are responsible for directing and managing the agency's programs ? is there evidence of significant structural , management , or operational weaknesses in the existing organization that could be better corrected by elevation to a department ? is there evidence that there are external barriers and impediments to timely decision - making and executive action that could be detrimental to improving the efficiency of the existing agency's programs ? would elevation to a department remove or mitigate these impediments ? would elevation to a department help recruit and retain better qualified leadership within the existing agency ? would elevation to a department promote more uniform achievement of broad , cross - cutting national policy goals ? would elevation to a department strengthen the cabinet and the executive office of the president as policy and management aids for the president ? would elevation to a department have a beneficial or detrimental effect upon the oversight and accountability of the agency to the president and the congress ? department of energy: a framework for restructuring doe and its missions ( gao / rced - 95-197 , aug. 21 , 1995 ) . department of energy: framework is needed to reevaluate its role and missions ( gao / t - rced - 95-232 , june 21 , 1995 ) . department of energy: alternatives for clearer missions and better management at the national laboratories ( gao / t - rced - 95-128 , mar . nuclear weapons complex: establishing a national risk - based strategy for cleanup ( gao / t - rced - 95-120 , mar . department of energy: national priorities needed for meeting environmental agreements ( gao / rced - 95-1 , mar . department of energy: research and agency missions need reevaluation ( gao / t - rced - 95-105 , feb. 13 , 1995 ) . department of energy: national laboratories need clearer missions and better management ( gao / rced - 95-10 , jan. 27 , 1995 ) . department of energy: need to reevaluate its role and missions ( gao / t - rced - 95-85 , jan. 18 , 1995 ) . nuclear waste: comprehensive review of the disposal program is needed ( gao / rced - 94-299 , sept. 27 , 1994 ) .