natl . natl . ( 12.4 mi ) . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . for example , how will the reintroduction of the wolf in yellowstone affect the size of the elk herd and , subsequently , the park's woody vegetation ? this past winter , the slaughter of bison that migrated out of the park , combined with the winter kill , reduced the bison herd to about half of its size the previous year . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . in the short term , this reduction may limit the migration of bison from the park , relieve some of the immediate pressure on the park service to take management actions , and create an opportunity for the park service and its critics to complete and assess the results of studies such as the national academy of sciences' review of brucellosis issues . the results of these studies are needed to make informed management decisions . this concludes my statement , mr. chairman . i would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . these officials believe that any risk is unacceptable in an eradication program . in addition , they refer to several other parks where the disease has been eliminated from bison and elk . however , aphis officials agree that vaccines need to be tested and proven to be safe and effective before being used on elk and bison . during our review , we visited two of the three states that surround the park — montana and wyoming . both states are concerned about the potential for the transmission of brucellosis between wildlife and cattle . however , each state approaches this problem differently . for example , the state veterinarian in montana believes that no risk is acceptable because transmission would threaten the states' brucellosis - free certification from aphis . in december 1994 , aphis wrote a letter to montana setting forth its intention to downgrade the brucellosis - free classification of the state if the state failed to take action against bison within its borders that were known to be infected with or had been exposed to the disease .