these agreements are consistent with the program's objectives . because the cdfi act provides no specific guidance for evaluating performance measures , we used results act guidance . we found that the performance measures in the assistance agreements generally assess activities ( such as the number of loans made ) rather than accomplishments reflecting the results of activities ( such as the number of new low - income homeowners ) . according to fund officials and cdfis in our case studies , this emphasis on activity measures is due , in part , to difficulties in isolating and assessing the results of community development initiatives , which may not be observable for many years and may be subject to factors outside the awardees' control . we further found that although the performance measures in the assistance agreements are generally related to specific goals , they do not always address all key aspects of the goals , and most assistance agreements lack baseline data that would facilitate tracking progress over time . the fund has developed reporting requirements for awardees to collect information for monitoring their performance and is developing postaward monitoring procedures for assessing their compliance with their assistance agreements . the fund currently does not have a system for evaluating the impact of awardees' activities . although the fund has disbursed about 80 percent of the fiscal year 1996 bea award funds , it is difficult to determine the extent to which the program has encouraged the 38 awardees to increase their investments in distressed communities . our case studies of five awardees and interviews with fund officials indicate that although the prospect of receiving a bea award prompted some banks to increase their investments , regulatory or economic incentives motivated other banks . in addition , some banks do not collect all of the data on their activities needed to guarantee that increases in investments under the bea program are not being offset by decreases in other investments in these distressed areas . furthermore , the fund cannot be assured that banks' increased investments remain in place because it does not require banks to report any material changes in the status of these investments . although banks have statutory discretion to use their bea awards as they choose , most have told the fund that they are furthering the bea program's objectives by investing a portion or all of their awards in loans or investments supporting community development . the cdfi fund's strategic plan contains all of the elements required by the results act and omb's associated guidance , but these elements generally lack the clarity , specificity , and linkage with one another that the act envisioned . although the plan identifies key external factors that could affect the fund's mission , it does not relate these factors to the fund's strategic goals and objectives and does not indicate how the fund will take the factors into account when assessing awardees' progress toward goals . in addition , the plan does not describe the relationship of its activities to similar activities in other government agencies , and it does not indicate whether or how the fund coordinated with other agencies in developing its strategic plan .