the results have been mixed . in early 1994 , for example , continental airlines created a separate , low - cost service in the east , commonly referred to as “calite.” largely because it grew too rapidly and was unable to compete successfully against usair and delta , calite failed and was terminated in early 1995 . as a result of the loss of competition brought by calite , the largest fare increases during the first 6 months of 1995 occurred at airports in the east , primarily at small - and medium - sized communities in north carolina and south carolina . more recently , other low - cost carriers have emerged in the east . the most successful of these to date has been valujet . however , valujet has begun to experience some of the problems of operating in the east , such as difficulties in obtaining scarce take - off and landing slots at congested airports . even so , valujet's success has sparked competitive responses from the dominant airlines in the east . delta , for example , plans to initiate a separate , low - cost operation of its own in the east later this year . however , because most of valujet's growth occurred in the second half of 1995 and the competitive responses of other airlines are only beginning to unfold , data are not yet available to determine the extent to which valujet has affected fares in the east , particularly at airports serving small and medium - sized communities that have yet to benefit from the overall trend toward lower airfares since deregulation . most communities served by the airports in our sample have more air service today than they did under regulation . seventy - eight percent of the small and medium - sized - community airports have had an increase in the number of departures , and every large - community airport has more departures . overall , the number of departures has increased by 50 percent for small - community airports ; 57 percent for medium - sized - community airports ; and 68 percent for large - community airports . in addition , the overall number of available seats has increased for all three airport groups . however , because of the substitution of turboprops for jets in many markets serving small and medium - sized communities following deregulation , the increase in the number of available seats has been less dramatic for those communities than the increase in departures . for example , although the number of departures has increased by 50 percent for small - community airports , the number of seats has increased by only 15 percent — an increase that barely exceeds the overall increase in population over the past two decades at the communities served by these airports . because of the greater use of turboprops , some airports serving small and medium - sized communities have actually had a decrease in the number of available seats even though the number of departures has increased . the airport serving bismarck , north dakota , for example , has had a 23-percent decrease in the number of seats even though the number of departures has increased by 54 percent .