were in the interior west . national forests counties in interior west with above average population growth ( > 25% ) . since 1990 , 95 percent of these expenditures have been in the interior west . fiscal year the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . what changes in incentives and contracting procedures are needed to facilitate the mechanical removal of low - value materials ? such decisions should be based on a sound strategy . however , the forest service has not yet developed a cohesive strategy for addressing several difficult barriers to improving the health of the national forests by reducing fuels . developing a strategy will depend in large part on data being gathered under the forest service and interior's joint fire science program which , as noted earlier , are directed at correcting these deficiencies . however , a forest service official involved in implementing the program told us that the agency may need a decade to complete many of the research projects under the program . it may also take another decade or longer to revise or amend forest plans to incorporate the program's findings and begin implementing individual fuels reduction activities . many experts argue that the tinderbox that is now the interior west cannot wait that long . they also believe that inaction — or simply allowing nature to take its inevitable course — will cost more not only in funds for fire suppression but also in lives and damage to human health , property , and infrastructure than would undertaking strategic actions now . madam chairman , this concludes our prepared statement . we will be pleased to respond to any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . since 1990 , 90 percent of national forest acres burned by fire were in the interior west . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . how can the need for reintroducing fire into frequent fire forests and conducting mechanical removals best be reconciled with the requirement to maintain air quality standards and fulfill other stewardship objectives ? if enough funding is not appropriated , what priorities should be established ?