additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . fns concurred with our findings and recommendations . we will continue to monitor the agency's progress made in implementing strategies to reduce or eliminate obstacles to cost containment . our survey also collected information on the practices that the states are using to ensure that program participants meet the program's income and residency requirements . the states' requirements for obtaining income documentation vary . of the 48 wic directors responding to our survey , 32 reported that their state agencies generally require applicants to provide documentation of income eligibility ; 14 reported that their states did not require documentation and allowed applicants to self - declare their income ; and 2 reported that income documentation procedures are determined by local wic agencies . of the 32 states requiring income documentation , 30 reported that their documentation requirement could be waived under certain conditions . our review of state income documentation polices found that waiving an income documentation requirement can be routine . for example , we found that some states requiring documentation of income will waive the requirement and permit self - declaration of income if the applicants do not bring income documents to their certification meeting . while existing federal regulations allow the states to establish their own income documentation requirements for applicants , we are concerned that basing income eligibility on the applicants' self - declarations of income may permit ineligible applicants to participate in wic . however , the extent of this problem is unknown because there has not been a recent study of the number of program participants who are not eligible because of income . information from a study that fns has begun should enable that agency to determine whether changes in states' requirements for income documentation are needed . regarding residency requirements , we found that some states have not been requiring proof of residency and personal identification for program certification , as required by federal regulations . in our september 1997 report , we recommended that fns take the necessary steps to ensure that state agencies require participants to provide identification and evidence that they reside in the states where they receive benefits . in february 1998 , fns issued a draft policy memorandum to its regional offices that is intended to stress the continuing importance of participant identification , residency , and income requirements and procedures to ensure integrity in the certification and food instrument issuance processes . also , at the request of fns , we presented our review's findings and recommendations at the ebt and program integrity conference jointly sponsored by the national association of wic directors and fns in december 1997 . the conference highlighted the need to reduce ineligible participation and explored improved strategies to validate participants' income and residency eligibility . fns requires the states to operate a rebate program for infant formula . this statement contains information on the scope of this ongoing work . in summary , we found the following: states had unspent wic funds for a variety of reasons .