see app . ii for a similar discussion of the steps to clean up a site. ) the superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986 ( sara ) provided that facilities discovered after the act was passed should be evaluated for placement on the npl within 4 years of the site's discovery if epa determines on the basis of a site inspection or preliminary assessment that such an evaluation is warranted . in 1992 , epa developed techniques to speed up the evaluation and cleanup of sites . these techniques included the expanded use of removal actions and the merging of certain site evaluations . epa pilot - tested these techniques in 1992 and declared them operational in 1994 . in 1995 , epa initiated its final round of administrative reforms , intended to make the program faster and achieve other improvements . in planning its superfund activities in 1993 , epa set an expectation that sites would be cleaned up within 5 years from listing . more recently however , epa has estimated that newly listed sites will be cleaned up within 8 years . for our reviews , we asked epa to provide us with data on the length of time taken ( l ) to evaluate sites for possible placement on the npl and ( 2 ) to complete cleanups of listed sites . the source of the data was epa's comprehensive environmental response , compensation , and liability information system ( cerclis ) , which is the official repository of superfund data . to measure the time taken to evaluate sites for listing , we identified sites that were added to the npl each year and calculated the time between their listing and their “discovery,” i.e. , their entry into cerclis . to measure the time for the cleanup process following listing , we identified the “operable units” at which remedial actions had been completed each year and calculated the time between the end of the remedial action and the date the site was added to the npl . we also measured the time it had taken operable units to complete various phases of the superfund process . for example , we calculated how long it took for cleanup remedies to be selected and designed . generally , the average time between discovering a site and placing it on the npl has increased over the life of the superfund program . ( see fig . as indicated by figure 1 , sites listed in fiscal year 1996 had been discovered an average of 9.4 years earlier , down from 11.4 years in fiscal year 1995 . the average site listing time has not met sara's 4-year goal since 1986 . although average listing times have generally lengthened , it should be understood that epa can move quickly to list some sites if circumstances warrant . for example , in 1996 , it listed three sites within 9 to 12 months after discovery when the public health service's agency for toxic substances and disease registry issued a public health advisory concerning the sites . epa used an expedited process that bypassed its normal evaluation process to list these sites . in addition , epa may undertake removal actions at sites to deal with imminent threats before they are listed .