this statement is based on that report . in summary , we found: the nine states increased the total amount of funds they lent from $3.3 billion in 1995 to $4.0 billion in 1996 . all nine states increased the amount they lent by 15 percent or more , and three states achieved increases of 30 percent or more . six states increased their amount by 15 to 29 percent . in addition , seven of the nine states increased the percentage of available funds they lent . of these seven , three states increased this proportion by 17 percentage points or more . nevertheless , the percentage of funds lent as of the end of 1996 varied substantially among the nine states . specifically , five states had lent 80 percent or more of their available funds , three states had lent between 70 and 79 percent , and one state had lent 60 percent . in eight of the nine states , officials identified the expiration of the authorizing legislation , as well as federal requirements , as affecting the amount and percentage of funds lent . for example , officials in seven states said the legislation's expiration created uncertainty about the loan conditions that might apply in the future and caused some communities to postpone seeking or accepting loans . also , officials in seven states said that other federal requirements — such as a prevailing - wage provision — discouraged some communities from seeking loans . u.s. general accounting office p.o . we selected these states because they provide diversity in terms of the size and complexity of their srf programs and other factors , such as geographic location . however , the conditions in these states are not necessarily representative of the conditions in all 51 srfs . we used a questionnaire and follow - up discussions to collect information on srf activities and finances from program officials from the nine states . we also interviewed epa headquarters and regional officials who are responsible for the srf program . we did not attempt to independently verify the information collected from epa or the states . the data cited in this statement are as of the end of the applicable state's fiscal year or the federal fiscal year , as appropriate . in seven of the nine states , the state fiscal year ends on june 30 ; in texas , it ends on august 31 ; and in florida , it ends on september 30 , which is also the end of the federal fiscal year . the overall amount of funds lent by the nine states increased between 1995 and 1996 , from $3.3 billion to $4.0 billion . the amount lent by each state also increased . during the same time period , seven states increased their percentage of funds lent , and two states maintained or decreased their percentage of funds lent . all nine states increased the amount of funds they lent between 1995 and 1996 . for example , pennsylvania increased the amount lent by 17 percent , from $267 million to $311 million . the other three states increased their amount of funds lent by 30 percent or more .