this problem is not new . we reported in 1980 and again in 1982 that funding for security has low priority and little visibility . earlier i mentioned missing classified documents at lawrence livermore laboratory . in response to that report , both doe and laboratory officials showed little concern for the seriousness of the situation and told us that they believed the missing documents were the result of administrative error , such as inaccurate record keeping and not theft . although doe is required to conduct an assessment of the missing documents' potential for compromising national security , at the time of our report doe did not plan to do this for over 1 year after we reported the documents missing . similarly , security problems identified by doe's own internal security oversight staff often go unresolved , even today . for example , issues related to the inadequate separation of classified and unclassified computer networks were identified at los alamos in 1988 , 1992 , and 1994 . this problem was only partially corrected in 1997 , as classified information was discovered on los alamos' unclassified computer network in 1998 . we found in 1991 that deficiencies doe identified as early as 1985 at six facilities had not been corrected by 1990 because doe did not have a systematic method to track corrective actions taken on its own security inspections . the low priority given security matters is underscored by how doe manages its contractors . doe's contract with the university of california for managing its los alamos and lawrence livermore national laboratories contain specific measures for evaluating the university's performance . these measures are reviewed annually by doe and should reflect the most important activities of the contractor . however , none of the 102 measures in the los alamos contract or the 86 measures in the lawrence livermore contract relate to counterintelligence . we reported in 1997 that doe had not developed measures for evaluating the laboratories' counterintelligence activities , and doe told us it was considering amending its contracts to address this problem . performance measures for counterintelligence activities are still not in its contracts for these two laboratories . the contracts do contain a related measure , for safeguarding classified documents and materials from unauthorized persons , but this measure represents less than 1 percent of the contractor's total score . safeguards and security performance measures in general account for only about 5 percent of the university's performance evaluations for the two laboratories . the low priority afforded security matters may account for the low rating doe has just given nuclear weapons facilities in its latest annual report on safeguards and security . two weapons laboratories — los alamos and lawrence livermore — received a rating of “marginal” for 1997 and 1998 . in its annual evaluation of los alamos' overall performance , however , doe rated the laboratory as “excellent” in safeguards and security , even though the laboratory reported 45 classified matter compromises and infractions for the year . the previous 3-year rolling average was 20 . doe explained that the overall excellent score was justified based on los alamos' performance in many different aspects of safeguards and security .