( app . i shows the federal appropriations for amtrak since fiscal year 1988. ) in response to continually growing losses and a widening gap between operating deficits and federal operating subsidies , amtrak developed its strategic business plan . this plan ( which has been revised several times ) was designed to increase revenues and control cost growth and , at the same time , eliminate amtrak's need for federal operating subsidies by 2002 . amounts for fiscal year 1997 are estimated . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . fra and amtrak believe that this capital investment of about $2 billion would help reverse the trend of adding time to published schedules because of poor on - time performance . over the next 20 years , fra and amtrak estimate up to $6.7 billion may be needed to recapitalize the corridor and make improvements targeted to respond to high - priority growth opportunities . a significant capital investment will be required for other projects as well . for example , additional capital assistance will be required to introduce high - speed rail service between new york and boston . in 1992 , the amtrak authorization and development act directed that a plan be developed for regularly scheduled passenger rail service between new york and boston in 3 hours or less . currently , such trips take , on average , about 4-1 / 2 hours . significant rehabilitation of the existing infrastructure as well as electrification of the line north of new haven , connecticut , will be required to accomplish this goal . according to amtrak , since fiscal year 1991 the federal government has invested about $900 million in the high - speed rail program , and an additional $1.4 billion will be required to complete the project . a significant capital investment will also be required to acquire new equipment and overhaul existing equipment . amtrak plans to spend about $1.7 billion over the next 6 years for these purposes . we reported in july 1996 and february 1995 on amtrak's need for capital investments and some of the problems being experienced as a result . we noted the additional costs of maintaining an aging fleet , the backlogs and funding shortages that were plaguing amtrak's equipment overhaul program , and the need for substantial capital improvements and modernization at maintenance and overhaul facilities . we also commented on the shrinking availability of federal funds to meet new capital investment needs . our ongoing work , the results of which we expect to report later this year , is looking at these issues .