as for groundwater , doe has not started any cleanup . by june 1995 , the department had spent about $16.7 million on site characterization and various planning activities . to make the cleanup as cost - effective as it can , doe is proposing to leave the groundwater as it is at 13 sites , allow the groundwater to cleanse itself over time at another 9 sites , and use an active cleanup method at 2 locations , in monument valley and tuba city , arizona . these 24 sites are referred to as title i sites . under the act , doe is to clean up the title i sites , as well as the nearby properties that were contaminated . in doing so , doe works closely with the affected states and indian tribes . doe pays for most of this cleanup , but the affected states contribute 10 percent of the costs for remedial actions . title ii of the act covers the cleanup of sites that were still active when the act was passed . these 26 sites are referred to as title ii sites . title ii sites are cleaned up mostly at the expense of the private companies that own and operate them . they are then turned over to the federal government for long - term custody . before a title ii site is turned over to the government , the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) works with the sites' owners / operators to make sure that sufficient funds will be available to cover the costs of long - term monitoring and maintenance . the cleanup of surface contamination consists of four key steps: ( 1 ) identifying the type and extent of the contamination ; ( 2 ) obtaining a disposal site ; ( 3 ) developing an action plan , which describes the cleanup method and specifies the design requirements ; and ( 4 ) carrying out the cleanup using the selected method . generally , the primary cleanup method consists of enclosing the tailings in a disposal cell — a containment area that is covered with compacted clay to prevent the release of radon and then topped with rocks or vegetation . similarly , the cleanup of groundwater contamination consists of identifying the type and extent of the contamination , developing an action plan , and carrying out the cleanup using the selected method . according to doe , depending on the type and extent of the contamination , and the possible health risks , the appropriate method may be ( 1 ) leaving the groundwater as it is , ( 2 ) allowing it to cleanse itself over time ( called natural flushing ) , or ( 3 ) using an active cleanup technique such as pumping the water out of the ground and treating it . the most hazardous constituent of uranium mill tailings is radium . radium produces radon , a radioactive gas whose decay products can cause lung cancer . the amount of radon released from a pile of tailings remains constant for about 80,000 years . tailings also emit gamma radiation , which can increase the incidence of cancer and genetic risks .