additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . dot indicated that it is still considering this action . the agency did not agree with our recommendation that faa consider an airport's efforts to make gates available to nonincumbents when making federal airport grant decisions . instead , dot said that it would rather address this issue on a case by case basis as problems are brought to its attention . in light of the lack of progress over the past 7 years , however , we believe that our recommendations , combined with our suggestions for potential congressional action , offer prudent steps to promote competition in regions that have not experienced the benefits of airline deregulation . operating barriers continue to limit competition and contribute to higher airfares in several key markets in the upper midwest and east . in some cases , these barriers have grown worse . as a result , our october 1996 report recommended that dot take actions that we originally suggested in 1990 and highlighted areas for potential congressional action . the report specifically addressed the effects of slots , perimeter rules , exclusive - use gate leases , and marketing strategies developed by the established airlines since airline deregulation . to reduce congestion , faa has since 1969 limited the number of takeoffs and landings that can occur at o'hare , national , laguardia , and kennedy . by allowing new airlines to form and established airlines to enter new markets , deregulation increased the demand for access to these airports . such increased demand complicated faa's efforts to allocate takeoff and landing slots equitably among the airlines . to minimize the government's role in the allocation of slots , dot amended its rules in 1985 to allow airlines to buy and sell them to one another . under this “buy / sell rule,” dot grandfathered slots to the holders of record as of december 16 , 1985 . emphasizing that it still owned the slots , however , dot randomly assigned each slot a priority number and reserved the right to withdraw slots from the incumbents at any time . in august 1990 , we reported that a few established carriers had built upon the favorable positions they inherited as a result of grandfathering to such an extent that they could limit access to routes beginning or ending at any of the slot - controlled airports . in october 1996 , we reported that this level of control over slots by a few established airlines had increased even further ( see app . as a result , little new entry has occurred at these airports , which are crucial to establishing new service in the heavily traveled eastern and midwestern markets .