some sponsors had financial difficulty . the ohio director said more sponsors incurred costs that exceeded the federal reimbursement in 1997 and that it was hard for sponsors to “break even.” both pennsylvania and tennessee officials reported that rural sites are having the most difficulty managing their programs with the reduced rates . sponsors facing such financial difficulty that do not lower the costs associated with meal preparation would need to either seek additional sources of funds for the shortfall or cut expenditures for other aspects of their program , such as recreation . in the remaining four states , officials were not certain whether the reduced rates had any other effects . according to usda officials , the full effect of the reduced subsidies was not experienced in the summer of 1997 . the officials said that they believed some sponsors chose to continue participating in the program in 1997 to test their ability to manage the program financially with the reduced rates . according to usda officials , sponsors' experiences in 1997 will determine whether they remain in the program . they suggested that the number of sponsors leaving the program in 1998 would be greater than in 1997 . in responding to our question of whether they would see additional changes in the number of sponsors over the next 3 years because of the rate decrease , the states reported the following: 24 states and the district of columbia said that the number of sponsors 16 states reported that the lower meal rates would not affect the number 10 states reported that they were uncertain of the effect . state officials predicted similar effects on the number of children participating in the program over the next 3 years . officials in 22 states reported that participation will decrease somewhat . most of these officials explained that if they lost sponsors because of the rate decrease , the number of children the state served would decrease . officials in 16 states and the district of columbia reported that the decrease in reimbursement rates would not affect the number of participants in their program . officials in 14 states said that they were uncertain of the effect . state officials explained that a number of factors may mitigate the effects of the rate decrease on the number of sponsors and children over the next 3 years . it did not reduce subsidies for administrative costs . table 1 highlights the changes in the reimbursement rate for meals since 1996 . while the 1998 rates reflect an increase to account for inflation , they are still lower than the rates established for 1996 . the 1996 act also eliminated grants to the states for initiating or expanding the school breakfast and summer food programs . these grants , known as start - up and expansion grants , had been mandated by the child nutrition act for the school breakfast program since 1989 and the summer food program since 1994 . previously , usda had been required to provide grant funding totaling $5 million a year through fiscal year 1997 , $6 million in 1998 , and $7 million a year thereafter for grants in both programs . these grants covered sponsors' one - time costs associated with starting or expanding the programs .