messrs . chairmen , this concludes our testimony . we would be pleased to answer questions that you or members of the committees may have at this time . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . federal housing assistance is needed in tribal areas . the urban institute recently reported that 40 percent of native americans in tribal areas live in overcroweded or physically inadequate housing compared with 6 percent of the u.s. population.moreover , providing safe and decent housing at a reasonable cost in tribal areas is difficult because of the austere and remote nature of the setting . today , our testimony focuses on the ( 1 ) funding history and results of hud's housing programs for native americans , ( 2 ) factors that complicate and make costly the development and maintenance of affordable housing for native americans , and ( 3 ) hud's ability to detect mismanagement in indian housing and the potential impact of the recently enacted native american housing assistance and self - determination act of 1996 on hud's oversight of indian housing . the high level of unpaid rent among assisted native american families has exacerbated the problem of accomplishing needed maintenance . routine and preventive maintenance is an operating expense that an iha pays for out of rental income and an operating subsidy that hud provides to help defray expenses . however , according to hud , appropriations for these subsidies have not been sufficient to cover all operating expenses not covered by rental income . therefore , shortfalls in rental income generally mean fewer funds to spend on maintenance . in recent years , these shortfalls have been at high levels for both the rental housing and the mutual help programs . for example , the urban institute reported that at the end of 1993 , 36 percent of all tenants in the rental program were delinquent in their rent payments . in contrast , the average delinquency rate in public housing is only 12 percent . to counter shortfalls in rental income , some ihas enforce strong eviction policies . others , however , are either unwilling or unable to do so .