additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . table 2 shows the results . as indicated , smaller airports' share of aip would increase under higher funding levels if the current distribution formula were used to apportion the additional funds . increasing pfc - based funding , as proposed by the department of transportation and backed by airport groups , would mainly help larger airports , for several reasons . first , large and medium hub airports , which accounted for nearly 90 percent of all passengers in 1996 , have the greatest opportunity to levy pfcs . second , such airports are more likely than smaller airports to have an approved pfc in place . finally , large and medium hub airports would forgo little aip funding if the pfc ceiling were raised or eliminated . and ( 3 ) what effect will various proposals to increase or make better use of existing funding have on smaller airports' ability to fulfill their capital development plans ? in 1998 , we reported that the 3,304 airports that make up the federally supported national airport system obtained about $7 billion from federal and private sources for capital development . the nation's 3,233 smaller airports accounted for 22 percent of this total , or about $1.5 billion . as a group , smaller airports depend heavily on federal grants , receiving half of their funding from the federally funded airport improvement program and the rest from airport bonds , state grants , and passenger facility charges.by contrast , the 71 largest airports in the national airport system obtained $5.5 billion in funding , mostly from tax - exempt bonds and relied on the airport improvement program for only 10 percent of their funding . small airports planned to spend nearly $3 billion per year for capital development during 1997 through 2001 , or $1.4 billion per year more than they were able to fund in 1996 . smaller airports' planned development consists of projects eligible for airport improvement program grants , like runways , and projects not eligible for grants , like terminal retail space . at least $945 million and as much as $1.4 billion of smaller airports' planned development that is eligible for grants may not be funded on an annual basis . the difference between funding and planned development is much greater for smaller commercial and general aviation airports than it is for large airports . several initiatives to increase or make better use of existing funding have emerged in recent years , including increasing the amount of airport improvement program funding and raising the maximum amount airports can levy in passenger facility charges . under current formulas , increasing the amount of airport improvement program funding would help smaller airports more than larger airports , while raising passenger facility charges would mainly help larger airports .