( app . i lists the demonstration sites we visited , by agency. ) washington , d.c . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . this concludes my statement . however , with data from only 1 year , it is difficult to draw definitive conclusions , either about the lack of a negative effect on visitation at most sites or about whether fees had an impact at sites where visitation declined . agency surveys also found that visitors generally support the program and the amount of the entrance or user fees charged . for example , a park service survey at 11 demonstration sites found that 83 percent of the respondents either were satisfied with the fees they paid or thought the fees were too low . as mentioned earlier , surveys indicate that visitors especially endorse the retention of the fees at the sites where they were collected , so that they can be used to fund the sites' needs . these positive results notwithstanding , some interest groups and recreation fee experts have identified gaps in the survey data . for example , while the surveys provide information about users in general , they may not be able to address the impact of fees on certain groups , such as backcountry users and low - income users . these survey efforts may also not provide information about potential visitors who may have chosen not to enter because of the fee . all four agencies plan additional surveys of visitors . as the four continue with the demonstration program by adding sites and trying new types of fees or means for collecting them , it is important to continue to assess the support of site visitors and consider addressing identified gaps in their visitor research . in closing mr. chairman , while our testimony today has focused on improvements that could be made to the fee demonstration program , it is important to remember that this program appears to be working well and meeting many of the law's intended objectives . the demonstration has brought millions of additional dollars to recreation areas across the country with little or no impact on visitation patterns .