we also found that atp had other effects . more than three - fourths of the joint - venture applicants indicated that they had come together solely to pursue an atp project , thus satisfying atp's goal of serving as a catalyst for the formation of joint ventures . furthermore , of the 45 applicants that tried to find funding elsewhere before turning to atp , about half were told by prospective funders that their projects were either too risky or precompetitive — characteristics that fulfill the aims of atp funding . we surveyed 766 u.s. manufacturers that had completed at least 40 hours of manufacturing extension program assistance , including nist's mep , and received 551 responses . we obtained respondents' views on the impact of these services on their business performance and on the factors affecting the impact of these services . we did not verify either the positive or negative impacts reported by manufacturers , nor did we evaluate the operations or management of specific federal or state programs . we also obtained the views of other manufacturers that had little or no experience with these programs to determine why they made little or no use of them . most manufacturers responding to our questionnaire — about 73 percent — reported that they believed the programs' assistance had positively affected their overall business performance . we found that there is no primary indicator of research and development results . the companies that we spoke with collect data on various output indicators , such as return on investment and patents granted , but in general make limited use of them in their investment decisions . instead , they emphasized that research and development contributes directly to the bottom line . because companies are profit oriented , many of the indicators tracked by the private sector cannot be directly applied to the federal government . determining the specific outcomes resulting from federal research and development is a challenge that will not be easily resolved . however , in response to recent legislation requiring agencies to report on program results , some progress is being made in measuring the impacts of research . gpra incorporates performance measurement as one of its most important features . under this act , executive branch agencies are required to develop annual performance plans that use performance measurement to reinforce the connection between the long - term strategic goals outlined in their strategic plans and the day - to - day activities of their managers and staff . among the factors that manufacturers said had affected the impact of mep services was their own companies' input . for example , a wide range of factors determines if and when a particular r&d project will result in commercial or other benefits . it can also take many years for a research project to achieve results . experiences from recent gpra pilot efforts reinforce the fact that output measures are highly specific to the management and mission of each federal agency and that no single indicator exists to measure the results of research .