ii. ) we found that although epa was given many additional pollution prevention , control , abatement , and enforcement initiatives , its budget for carrying out these activities did not keep pace with the increased responsibilities . nuclear waste: management and technical problems continue to delay characterizing hanford's tank waste ( gao / rced - 96-56 , jan. 26 , 1996 ) . the advisory committee's report therefore recommended that ( 1 ) an independent panel review planned secret environmental releases and ( 2 ) epa permanently keep key documents related to its environmental oversight of classified programs and report periodically to the congress on its oversight of such programs . agencies are required to submit unclassified and classified eiss for epa's review , but according to activities office officials , epa is not charged with conducting outreach to ensure that all such eiss are submitted . also , epa is not responsible for reviewing the thousands of other lower level environmental planning documents — such as environmental assessments — which agencies generate each year ; its review is limited to eiss , which are required for “major” actions only . as a result , epa activities office staff said their overview of agencies' internal nepa planning is very limited . according to epa records and activities office officials , historically some agencies have not been sending eiss to epa for review , either classified or unclassified , as required . such agencies include the central intelligence agency ( cia ) , the national security agency ( nsa ) , and the defense intelligence agency . according to epa officials who have been assigned the responsibility to review eis's for the cia and nsa over the past several years , they have not had contact with these agencies concerning eiss and do not know who these agencies' liaisons are for nepa matters . furthermore , environmental compliance officials within the agencies may not be reviewing all classified research activities . according to a responsible air force nepa compliance official , although his office is charged with reviewing classified eiss internally , historically the office has rarely received such documents for review . he said his office may not have a need - to - know for all such documents . he also could not recall his office receiving for review any unclassified or classified nepa documents prepared for proposed projects at the classified air force operating location near groom lake , nevada . agencies may conduct environmental planning secretly , and a proposed action may proceed without prior public comment . for example , in 1994 , the government conducted project sapphire , a classified nuclear nonproliferation action that transferred highly enriched uranium from kazakhstan in the former soviet union to storage at oak ridge , tennessee . doe conducted internal nepa planning for project sapphire in the form of a detailed classified environmental assessment , but because it was an environmental assessment and not an eis , epa was not required to review the assessment and prior public comment was not possible for national security reasons . the public was fully apprised of the project sapphire environmental assessment after the uranium transfer was completed .