this concludes my prepared statement . we would be glad to respond to any questions that you and members of the committee might have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . the public's concern about aviation safety and security has been heightened . the congress and the administration have a renewed commitment to addressing this urgent national concern . the commission's work is a good start toward an evolutionary process of reaching agreement on the goals and steps to improve aviation safety and security . to guide the implementation of the commission's recommendations , dot and faa will need a comprehensive strategy that includes ( 1 ) clear goals and objectives , ( 2 ) measurable performance criteria to assess how the goals and objectives are being met , and ( 3 ) a monitoring , evaluation , and reporting system to periodically evaluate the implementation . aviation security is another component of ensuring the safety of passengers . it rests on a careful mix of intelligence information , procedures , technology , and security personnel . the commission strongly presented aviation security as a national security priority and recommended that the federal government commit greater resources to improving it . finally , although the commission concluded that many of its proposals will require additional funding , it did not specifically recommend funding levels for new security initiatives over the long term . instead , the commission recommended that the federal government devote at least $100 million annually to meet security capital requirements — leaving the decision on how to fund the remaining security costs to the national civil aviation review commission . the national civil aviation review commission is charged with looking at faa funding issues , and we do not want to preempt its report and recommendations . but , for example , the $144.2 million appropriated by the congress in 1997 for new security technology represents a fraction of the estimated billions of dollars required to enhance the security of air travel .