this concludes my statement . i would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have . total ( fees + special accounts ) the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . these rights primarily affect concessioners in the park service . as existing concession contracts expired , the new contracts would contain language directing the concessioner to depreciate the value of its possessory interest over an extended period of time . once the possessory interest was fully depreciated , the structure would be owned by the government . removing possessory interest in concession facilities would provide the park service with greater control over these facilities and would allow greater flexibility in managing concessioners . for example , when possessory interest is provided for , the park service would have to use appropriations to buy out the possessory interest of a nonperforming concessioner . if possessory interest were eliminated , the park service could terminate the contract of a nonperforming concessioner without having to use appropriations to acquire concession facilities . in addition , government ownership of concessions facilities has the potential of expanding competition for concession contracts . if the concession facilities are government owned , prospective bidders for concession contracts would not be required to expend capital to acquire facilities . as such , the park service may receive more bids for the award of concession contracts which has the potential of increasing the return to the government . concessioners operating under these agreements generated about $2.2 billion in gross revenues . over 90 percent of concession agreements and the concession gross revenues were from concessioners in the six land management agencies — with many of the largest concessioners operating in the park service . for agreements that were either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994 , concessioners in all of the land management agencies paid the government an average of about 3 percent of their gross revenues . in the case of the park service , the average return was about 3.5 percent . in contrast , concessioners in nonland management agencies paid fees of about 9 percent of their gross revenues .