additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . that region had conducted five of the ntc removals . more than half of the ntc removals in epa's survey had exceeded either the time or the cost limits . proposed legislation to reauthorize superfund , h.r . 2500 and s. 1285 , would raise the limits on removals and relax the consistency requirements . mr. chairman , this completes our prepared statement . we would be pleased to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . opinions vary about the significance of these disadvantages . under a remedial cleanup contract , epa pays a contractor to conduct a fixed set of actions that both parties have agreed to at the start of the cleanup . in contrast , under an ntc cleanup contract , epa pays a contractor for the company's time and materials , but an epa site manager directs the contractor's actions . epa technical and regional staff involved in ntc removals agree that time and materials contracts require almost daily on - site supervision , whereas remedial cleanup contracts do not . however , epa site managers argue that close supervision of the contractor offers epa greater control over the work and more flexibility to make adjustments . under its ntc removal authority , epa may have more difficulty enforcing private party cleanup agreements than it would under its remedial authority . for a remedial action , epa uses a consent decree issued by a court , whereas , for an ntc removal , it uses an administrative order issued by its regional management . epa headquarters and regional officials involved in both processes are concerned about the potential for a private party to default on an ntc removal because an administrative order does not provide epa with immediate penalties for enforcing a cleanup agreement . if a party does default , epa may then have to fund the rest of the cleanup while the matter is being resolved in the courts . private parties have told us , however , that even with the consent decree for remedial agreements , a default will also likely have to be resolved in the courts .