the result is inefficiency and waste . for example , according to a november 1995 internal forest service report , inefficiencies within the agency's decision - making process cost up to $100 million a year at the individual project level alone . these costs are not borne by the forest service , but by the american taxpayer , since the agency accomplishes fewer objectives with its yearly appropriations . moreover , as we pointed out in our report and in our april 29 , 1997 , testimony on the forest service's process for revising the tongass national forest plan , the increased costs of inefficiency at every decision - making level within the forest service should be measured not only in dollars but also in lost ecological and economic opportunities . a deteriorated aquatic or riparian ecosystem cannot be restored and the critical habitat of an endangered species cannot be protected until a decision is made . similarly , a livestock grazing permit cannot be renewed and a timber sale cannot be offered until the agency reaches a decision . however , the most likely outcomes of the forest service's current decision - making process are indecision and delay . delays in finalizing forest plans , coupled with delays in finalizing agencywide regulations and reaching individual project decisions , can total a decade or longer . for example , the agency spent almost 10 years revising the tongass forest plan , and preparing a timber sale usually takes another 3 to 8 years . as a result , those who are economically dependent on the national forests are precluded from forming reasonable expectations about the future availability of the forests' uses . in addition , the forests' health and productivity over time — whether measured by the diversity of species , the availability of commodities , or any other indicators of performance — are affected by the missed opportunities for improvement . past efforts by the forest service to improve its performance have been stymied by the organization's highly decentralized management . at every level , managers have considerable autonomy and discretion for interpreting and applying the agency's policies and directions . for example , in response to congressional concerns about the forest service's inability to deliver what is expected or promised , the chief , in the fall of 1991 , formed an agencywide task force to review the issue of accountability . the task force's 1994 report set forth a process and recommended changes to strengthen accountability . however , the task force's recommendations have never been implemented throughout the agency . the results act , if implemented successfully , should help break the existing cycle of inefficiency within the forest service , strengthen the agency's accountability for performance and results , and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its decision - making . the strategic goals in the forest service's plan form the starting point and foundation for holding the agency accountable for its performance . hence , these goals are critical to successfully implementing the act within the agency . however , agreement has not been reached on the strategic goals in the forest service's plan , and the agency cannot begin to derive the benefits anticipated from implementing the act .