this concludes my prepared remarks . we will be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee might have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . we view these actions as positive steps . however , some key issues concerning their implementation remain to be decided , such as the relationship between the chief procurement officer and hud's office of procurement and contracts , the precise role of the contract review board in overseeing hud's procurement actions , and hud's ability to have the necessary resources in place to carry out its procurement responsibilities effectively . perhaps even more important is the extent to which these actions will lead to a change in hud's culture , so that acquisition planning and effective contractor oversight will be viewed by both management and staff as being intrinsic to hud's ability to carry out its mission successfully . the hud 2020 management reform plan appears to be the driving force behind agency operations . hud has clearly linked its management reform efforts to the agency's results act plans , so that its success in meeting annual performance goals and achieving strategic objectives depends on the success of the management reform efforts . in addition , hud's legislative proposals for 1997 support both its management reforms and strategic objectives . in its september 30 , 1997 , strategic plan , hud stated that the plan builds on the foundation of the sweeping management reforms . each of the plan's objectives includes a discussion of the reform efforts that will affect the objective . the plan also notes that the secretary's mission to restore the public's trust in hud — one of the purposes of the 2020 hud management reform plan — permeates the department and is an integral part of each and every objective in the strategic plan . the plan states the important linkage to the hud 2020 management reform plan: “to create a new hud , we will need the full range of approaches set out in strategic plan and the management reform plan .