departments of transportation and justice ? ( 2 ) what would be the competitive impact of the proposed alliance ? and ( 3 ) to what extent should the sales and marketing practices of american airlines and british airways be considered in reviewing the alliance ? european regulatory agencies have nearly completed their reviews of the proposed american airlines / british airways alliance . they are considering a range of issues that would have to be addressed as a condition of approving the alliance , including the number of slots and gates that other airlines would need at london's heathrow airport to compete , as well as american airlines' and british airways' sales and marketing practices . the european commission anticipates its report proposing draft remedies for the american airlines / british airways alliance will be issued within the coming weeks . the united kingdom , which is also reviewing the proposed american airlines / british airways alliance , is waiting for the european commission to announce its draft remedies . in contrast , the u.s. department of transportation has not yet begun its formal review of the proposed alliance . because neither american airlines nor british airways has filed all the documentation requested , the department does not yet consider the application complete . as a result , justice has not submitted formal comments on the alliance . once american airlines and british airways file all of the requested documents , the department of transportation initially proposed holding an “oral hearing” to help complete its analysis of the issues in dispute . however , after receiving comments from the airlines , it is now reconsidering the type of hearing it may hold . in addition , the department has reiterated that it will not approve the proposed american airlines / british airways alliance until the united states successfully negotiates an open skies agreement with the united kingdom . the proposed alliance of american airlines and british airways — the two largest carriers in the u.s. - u.k. markets — raises significant competition issues . currently , the two airlines account for nearly 58 percent of the available seats on scheduled u.s. and british airlines between the united states and london . in addition , they provide over 70 percent — and in some cases all — of the available seats on scheduled u.s. and british airlines between heathrow and several key u.s. airports , including chicago , boston , and miami . as a result of this level of market concentration , the u.s. department of transportation's approval of the alliance would further reduce competition unless , as a condition of the approval , other u.s. airlines were able to obtain adequate access to heathrow . each major u.s. carrier we spoke with , as well as the other large british carrier that operates transatlantic service to the united states — virgin atlantic — emphasized that gaining a sufficient number of takeoff and landing slots , gates , and facilities at heathrow was critically important to be able to compete effectively against the alliance , and several expressed doubt that the proposed alliance could be sufficiently restructured to prevent it from being inherently anticompetitive .