however , these tests have not been finalized . in addition to these computer - assisted tests , the corporation plans to conduct more detailed manual reviews of applications that it considers to be “high risk.” however , according to current plans , these reviews will not be performed until after funds are committed to applicants and vendors . to carry out these detailed reviews , the corporation will designate applications as high risk if they ( 1 ) request a large total amount of funds , ( 2 ) request a large amount of funds compared with other applications on a per - unit basis ( such as per - student or per - patron ) , ( 3 ) are from wealthy private schools , or ( 4 ) have been placed on an “alert list” of applications that have been identified in some way as potentially violating the program's rules . the corporation was established in the fall 1997 . the corporation stated that its operating expenses for calendar year 1997 were approximately $1.9 million . for calendar year 1998 , the first full year of program operations , the corporation estimates its operating expenses at $18.8 million . most of this estimate covers the costs of contracts , including the corporation's contract with neca and an independent auditor . corporation staff stated , however , that the 1998 estimate may increase as program procedures and systems need to be redesigned in response to fcc's recent rule changes . to receive universal service support , schools and libraries must complete a two - stage application process which , for the program's first year of funding , began in january 1998 . during the first stage , applicants post requests for services on the corporation's web site so that vendors can provide the applicants with bids on the cost of providing the requested services . the corporation has received to date nearly 48,000 of these initial applications ( fcc form 470 ) . the second stage of the process begins after the schools and libraries have accepted a bid and entered into a contract with a service vendor . the applicants then submit on paper a second application ( fcc form 471 ) that details the types and costs of the services being contracted for , and the amount of the discount being requested . in its original order , fcc determined that applications would be funded on a first - come , first - served basis . subsequently , fcc amended its rules and the corporation established a 75-day window within which these second applications would be considered as arriving at the same time . this was done , in part , in order to reduce disparities between applicants with substantial administrative resources and applicants with fewer resources . the act did not prescribe a structure for administering the program . however , the fcc directed the establishment of the schools and libraries corporation . fcc's chairman selects or approves the corporation's board of directors as well as the hiring and removing of the chief executive officer .