first , it does not cover all importers . while ideally it would be preferable to monitor all importers , it may not be practicable because the costs to law - abiding importers would also increase . second , even if customs and fda focused only on problem importers , the agencies would need to develop a coordinated system to identify them . some of the more promising suggestions are discussed below . each of these suggested approaches has advantages and disadvantages , costs , or limitations that would have to be considered before any changes are made . for certain importers that fda believes are more likely than others to violate import controls because they have a history of violations , customs and fda could work together to ensure that substitution does not occur before either inspection or disposal . for example , fda could target importers , and customs could order that these importers' shipments be delivered by bonded truckers to an independent , customs - approved , bonded warehouse pending inspection . although fda can request customs to require importers to present shipments for inspection at a bonded warehouse , it does not routinely use this authority and make such requests . in los angeles , for example , fda officials said they have had customs make an importer present a shipment to a bonded warehouse only once in the past 2 years . given their concerns about importers circumventing federal controls over imported foods , customs and fda officials at san francisco and miami are considering implementing variations on this option . for example , in miami , customs and fda officials are developing a program to require importers of fda - refused shipments to deliver them into the custody of a centralized examination station , a type of bonded warehouse , for disposal , rather than allowing the importer to retain custody . this approach has the advantage of preventing the targeted importers from bypassing inspection controls and of ensuring the proper disposal of the targeted importers' shipments that were refused entry . furthermore , this approach would serve as a deterrent to importers likely to violate requirements because they would have to pay the additional costs associated with unloading a shipment and storing it at a bonded warehouse . moreover , this approach would not require any change in customs' authority . customs currently uses bonded warehouses for its own inspections and could , at fda's request , require targeted importers to use bonded warehouses . this approach also has several limitations . similarly , this approach would depend on effective coordination after such identification — fda would need to request customs to maintain control of a shipment , and customs would have to act accordingly . as we have noted , effective coordination between fda and customs does not always occur . customs and fda could take steps to better ensure that importers with a history of violations are not substituting products before inspection and are not returning the actual refused cargo for destruction or reexport by adopting variations on controls used by fsis for meat and poultry imports .