additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . effective implementation is critical to success . sustained oversight by the congress is needed to ensure effective implementation . because the federal land management agencies have similar responsibilities yet different legislative requirements , any effort to streamline or reorganize them will require a coordinated approach within and across the agencies to avoid creating new , unintended consequences for the future . in particular , potential gains in efficiency need to be balanced against the policy reasons that led to the existing structure . for example , transferring responsibility for environmental compliance from regulatory agencies , such as the fish and wildlife service , epa , and the corps of engineers , to the forest service and the bureau of land management may help expedite the implementation of projects and activities . however , any potential gains in efficiency from such a transfer would need to be balanced against the policy reasons that led originally to separating the responsibility for federal land management from the responsibility for regulatory compliance . moreover , while there may be a growing consensus for streamlining or reorganizing the existing structure of federal land management , as the comptroller general noted in his may 17 , 1995 , testimony , the key to any streamlining or reorganization plan — and the key to building a consensus behind it — is the creation of specific , identifiable goals . applying this principle to federal land management will require decisionmakers to agree on , among other issues , how to balance differing objectives for commodity and noncommodity uses over the short and long term . for example , the forest service is experiencing increasing difficulty in reconciling conflicts among competing uses on its lands , and demands for forest uses will likely increase substantially in the future . some forest service officials believe that the laws governing the agency's mission provide little guidance for resolving these conflicts . as a result , they have suggested that the congress needs to provide greater guidance on how the agency is to balance competing uses and ensure their sustainability . in particular , the chief of the forest service has stated that ( 1 ) the maintenance and restoration of noncommodity uses , especially biological diversity , needs to be explicitly accepted or rejected and ( 2 ) if accepted , its effects on the availability of commodity uses need to be acknowledged . subsequent proposals included additional agencies . the congress did not act on this “interchange” proposal . ecological considerations also suggest that the federal land management agencies rethink their organizational structures and relationships with one another . scientific research has increased the agencies' understanding of the importance and functioning of natural systems , such as watersheds , airsheds , soils , and vegetative and animal communities , specific components of which ( eg , threatened and endangered species and wetlands ) are protected under various environmental statutes . the boundaries of these natural systems are often not consistent with existing jurisdictional and administrative boundaries .