this concludes my statement . i would be pleased to respond to any questions you or members of the committee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . these plans could be more useful to decisionmakers if their relationships were clearer . in summary , sba has made progress in its strategic planning efforts , based in part on its consultation with the congress . as i noted earlier , sba's september 1997 strategic plan includes several improvements that make it more responsive to the requirements of the results act . however , as is the case with many other agencies , sba's development of a plan that conforms to the requirements of the results act and to omb's guidance is an evolving process . as my testimony notes , there are still several areas where improvements need to be made to sba's strategic plan in order to meet the purposes of the results act . performance measures are directly linked to 11 of the 14 performance objectives in the plan . the results act is the centerpiece of a statutory framework to improve federal agencies' management activities . the results act was designed to shift the focus of attention of federal agencies from the amount of money they spend , or the size of their workloads , to the results achieved by their programs . agencies are expected to base goals on their results - oriented missions , develop strategies for achieving their goals , and measure actual performance against the goals . the results act requires agencies to consult with the congress in developing their strategic plans . this consultation gives the congress the opportunity to help ensure that the agencies' missions and goals are focused on results , are consistent with the programs' authorizing laws , and are reasonable in light of fiscal constraints . the products of these consultations are to be clearer guidance to agencies on their missions and goals , which should lead to better information to help the congress choose among programs , consider alternative ways to achieve results , and assess how well agencies are achieving them .