research and development to accomplish the same goals . use of energy - efficient products , through a broad - based effort to expand the use of existing energy - efficient technologies . 4. credit for early action , to provide an immediate incentive for companies to take near - term actions to cut emissions . ( 4 ) have efforts been coordinated ? focus on federal procurement and energy use as a means to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from federal sources . electricity restructuring , to change the rules that can impede the introduction of cleaner technologies . the setting of a concentration goal for greenhouse gases in the atmosphere . ( 5 ) have implementation concerns been addressed ? in discussing these themes , we cited previous gao reports — concerning doe and other agencies — to illustrate these areas . the primary focus of epa's responsibilities under the climate change initiative is to increase the use of energy - efficient products . as with doe's research and development activities , epa's efforts will largely continue and expand ongoing activities . for fiscal year 1999 , the agency is proposing to spend about $142 million in that effort ; this is an increase of about $77 million over the previous year's $65 million . epa has specified performance goals for this action . the goals include reducing u.s. energy consumption by over 45-billion kilowatt - hours and reducing emissions by 40-million metric tons of carbon equivalent per year . however , the goals may overstate the potential results of epa's programs . in a 1997 report on selected voluntary climate change programs , which are now included in epa's portion of the climate change technology initiative , we found that , in some cases , epa did not adjust reported reductions to take account of nonprogram factors that may have contributed to the reported results . for example , for the green lights program ( which is intended to encourage businesses and others to install energy - efficient lighting ) , we found that epa did not take into account the fact that utility companies' financial incentives and other factors may have induced participants to undertake some energy - saving activities . in commenting on our 1997 report , epa said it would further study the programs' impact . in commenting on a draft of this statement , an epa official stated that the results of the further study support epa's position that it has adequately accounted for nonprogram factors in reporting results . we have not had an opportunity to review the basis for this statement . because stage 1 lacks a quantitative goal for reducing greenhouse gas emissions , does not have a specific performance plan , and contains incomplete information on expected outcomes and links to the protocol's target , stage 1 may not provide a firm foundation for stages 2 and 3 . the success of voluntary efforts in stage 1 would make it easier for the united states to adjust to the mandatory measures envisioned in stage 3 and to achieve the substantial reductions in emissions specified in the kyoto protocol . these mandatory measures would be implemented in the third stage ( 2008-12 ) , when the protocol's target must be reached .