other key positions remain unfilled . the project is still without a technical director , and doe's review committee recently concluded that there was still “an inadequate level of technical management at the laboratory.” this committee also noted that a full - time operations manager should be appointed and that a manager is needed to oversee the construction of the facilities that will house the equipment and instruments being built by the individual laboratories . in addition , the committee reported that the slow progress in the facilities portion of the project is due in large part to the relative inexperience of the project facilities staff . doe also found that the designs of each of the collaborating laboratories' component parts have not effectively been integrated into the total project , primarily because oak ridge national laboratory's project office lacks the appropriate technical expertise to integrate the designs and to plan for commissioning and operating the facility . several other key project officials were hired later than originally planned . for example , a manager for environment , safety , and health was hired in december 1998 , and the architect - engineering / construction management contractor was hired in november 1998 . doe had hoped to fill these important positions before the construction phase began in october 1998 . because of these delays in hiring staff , the project is underspending its appropriation . obligations and costs are currently running at about 60 percent of the planned budget ( through 4 months of the project's 87-month schedule ) . a major reason for the slow pace of spending is that los alamos national laboratory only recently ( nov. 1998 ) hired a permanent team leader and consequently is behind the other laboratories in completing several project tasks . in addition , the architect - engineering / construction management contract was finalized later than originally planned . doe officials told us they are confident , however , that the current spending pace will not affect the project's overall schedule and that the current spending patterns represent the prudent use of funds . the project's cost and schedule estimates are not fully developed and thus do not yet represent a reliable estimate ( baseline ) . according to a senior doe official , the current project team does not have the expertise to develop a detailed cost estimate , preferring instead to accept laboratories' cost estimates that lack supporting detail . this shortfall in expertise has delayed the development of an accurate estimate of the project's total cost . doe's independent reviewer expressed a similar concern , noting that the cost estimate in the project is based on its design and that “higher quality estimates are needed for a credible baseline.” of particular concern are the inadequate allowances for contingencies ( unforeseen costs and delays ) built into the project's current cost and schedule estimates . the project's cost estimate allows 20 percent for contingencies , well below the 25-30-percent allowance that doe and contractor officials believe is necessary for a project of this scope and complexity . concerned about the low contingency allowance , doe's independent review team reported that the project will not be completed at the current cost estimate .