the remainder is designated as reserves . in response to your request , we provided you with information on ( 1 ) the region's allocation of funds for its operating costs for fiscal years 1993 through 1998 ; ( 2 ) the nature , purpose , and allocation of centralized field costs and the steps the alaska region is taking to comply with the congressional limitation on the expenditures for the regional office and centralized field costs ; ( 3 ) the rationale for and the distribution of regional reserve funds ; and ( 4 ) whether the forest service's national forest system and research appropriations were used appropriately to pay for work performed by the pacific northwest research station in connection with the revision of the tongass land management plan and for post - plan studies . the alaska region's operating costs ranged from $108 million to $127 million annually during fiscal years 1993 through 1997 . the region allocated from 71 to 76 percent of these funds to the field offices for carrying out local programs , such as timber sale preparation or wildlife activities ; 13 to 17 percent for managing regional office operations , including overall direction and support for field offices ; 4 to 7 percent for centralized field costs ; 2 to 5 percent for regional reserves ; and 2 to 4 percent for state and private forestry operations . for fiscal year 1998 , the region's estimated allocations totaled about $106 million to carry out these regional programs . until fiscal year 1998 , the alaska region used centralized field costs to manage certain programs or activities for the benefit of multiple offices . centralized field costs include activities such as payments to the national finance center for payroll and accounting services . the forest service's fiscal year 1998 appropriations act limited the alaska regional office's expenditures for regional office operations and centralized field costs to $17.5 million . to comply with this legislative requirement , the alaska region eliminated the use of the centralized field cost category , included unallocated funds in regional reserve accounts until the funds are distributed to the field units , and separated the costs for state and private forestry operations from the operations of the regional office . the alaska region establishes reserves because of the uncertainty about the timing or the amount of funds needed for certain projects . once the specific amount or responsible unit is determined , the region distributes the necessary reserves to the unit responsible for making the payment . in fiscal years 1995 through 1997 , the alaska region distributed reserves ranging from $6 million to $12 million . the four field offices received from 87 to 98 percent of the reserves during this period , and the remainder went to the region for regional office operations . any ending balance in the reserve category becomes the carryover amount for the next fiscal year . beginning in fiscal year 1995 , both the alaska region's portion of the national forest system appropriation and the pacific northwest research station's portion of the forest and rangeland research appropriation funded the work performed by the research station scientists on the revision of the tongass land management plan and post - plan studies .