postal service . the postal inspection service's main investigative focus for the food stamp program is the theft of food stamps and ebt cards from the postal service's custody prior to receipt by the food stamp recipient . finally , the u.s. secret service investigates food stamp counterfeiting and makes recommendations on security measures relating to ebt cards . states are responsible for investigating and prosecuting individuals suspected of falsifying information in order to obtain food stamps and misusing their food stamps — such as selling their stamps for cash . states sometimes work with fcs or usda's oig to investigate retailers' fraud and abuse in the program . in an effort to supplement federal efforts to investigate retailers , fcs has used state law enforcement bureau agreements . under these agreements , fcs provides the states with food stamp coupons to use in conducting their own trafficking investigations . fcs has established agreements with 32 states , but only 10 states have conducted sustained efforts against food stamp trafficking . food stamp benefits have historically been distributed in the form of printed coupons . in reading , pennsylvania , in 1984 , however , fcs piloted the use of an alternative delivery system — ebt . since this pilot , there has been increasing interest in moving to ebt systems . under such systems , recipients receive plastic debit cards to obtain their food stamps and pay for purchases through point - of - sale terminals installed at check - out counters in food stores . at the time of the purchase , recipients enter a personal identification number . the ebt computer then verifies that sufficient funds exist in the recipient's food stamp account , debits the purchase amount from the recipient's account , and credits it to the retailer's account . at the end of each business day , the authorized sales are totaled and funds are transferred electronically to the retailer's bank account . currently , 11 states have implemented ebt systems statewide . eight of these states deliver multiple program benefits with their ebt system , including other federal and state programs . additionally , 16 states use ebt systems in selected counties . all the remaining states are in the process of implementing ebt systems . collectively , ebt systems supply almost 20 percent of all food stamps . by eliminating paper coupons that may be lost , sold without any record of the sale , or stolen , ebt systems can help cut back on food stamp fraud . ebt systems reduce the likelihood of benefit theft . of most importance , however , ebt systems create an electronic record of each food stamp transaction , making it easier to identify and document instances where food stamp benefits are trafficked . ebt data include the following information on each transaction: the exact time of day , the amount , the recipient's identity , the store's identity , and the specific cash register in the store . reviewers can use these data to identify suspicious transactions or transaction patterns . since 1991 , usda's oig has opened 234 cases involving food stamp trafficking as a result of analyzing ebt data .