that concludes our testimony . we would be happy to respond to any questions you or members of the subcommittee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . such costs have appeared in many of the bills reviewed by doe . for example , doe has disallowed time charges for attorneys when the work is clearly for other cases or when the description of work was vague or incomplete . doe has also questioned charges for work such as “document management,” “filing,” and entertainment expenses . finally , charges for long - distance telephone calls , overnight delivery , special messenger services , computer database research and other disbursements have been denied for lack of supporting documentation . this action has saved hundreds of thousands of dollars . however , in certain instances , the guidance is not being consistently applied or followed . further , our work found that other issues are driving doe' s overall litigation costs . these include the number of law firms representing doe contractors , how discovery requests are handled , and database development . doe has begun to take action — such as consolidating the law firms and contractors in the in re hanford case — to address these issues . doe's responsibility for contractors' litigation costs has its roots in the early nuclear programs . since the inception of these programs in the 1940s , the federal government has relied on contractors to operate its nuclear facilities . however , because of the high risk associated with operating these facilities , the agencies responsible for managing nuclear activities — from the atomic energy commission to doe — included litigation and claims clauses in their management and operating contracts . these clauses generally provide that litigation expenses are allowable costs under the contracts . in addition , judgments against the contractors arising from their performance of the contracts are reimbursable by doe . over the past several years , class action lawsuits have been filed against past and present contractors responsible for operating doe's facilities . in general , these suits contend that the operation of the facilities released radioactive or toxic emissions and caused personal injury , emotional distress , economic injury , and / or property damage .