( see fig . the difference might actually be even greater if it were not for $250 million in special facility bonding for a single cargo / general aviation airport . funding for 1996 is shown by source . planned spending for future years is shown by the relative priority of the projects , as follows: faa's highest priorities ( shown as reconstruction and mandates ) total $1.4 billion per year and are for projects to meet safety , security , and environmental requirements , including noise mitigation , and for projects that maintain the existing infrastructure ( reconstruction ) . other high - priority projects — primarily , those adding capacity — add another $1.4 billion per year . other projects of a relatively lower priority — such as those bringing airports up to faa's design standards — add another $3.3 billion per year , for a total of $6.1 billion per year . finally , airports anticipate another $3.9 billion per year in projects that are not eligible for aip — such as those expanding commercial space in terminals and constructing parking garages . ( 3 ) what effect will various proposals to increase airport funding have on airports' ability to fulfill capital development plans ? in summary , our answers to these questions are as follows: in 1996 , the 3,304 airports that make up the national airport system obtained about $7 billion for capital development . more than 90 percent of this funding came from three sources: airport and special facility bonds ( $4.1 billion ) , the airport improvement program ( $1.4 billion ) , and passenger facility charges paid on each airline ticket ( $1.1 billion ) . the magnitude and type of funding varies with each airport's size . the nation's 71 largest airports accounted for nearly 80 percent of this funding . as a group , these airports received only about 10 percent of their funding from the airport improvement program . by contrast , the remaining 3,233 smaller airports that complete the national system rely on the airport improvement program for half of their funding . airports planned as much as $10 billion per year in development for the years 1997 through 2001 , or $3 billion per year more than they spent in 1996 . about $1.4 billion per year of that development is planned for safety , security , environmental , and reconstruction projects — the federal aviation administration's ( faa ) highest priorities . another $1.4 billion per year of that development is planned for other high - priority projects , primarily adding airport capacity . other projects of a relatively lower priority , such as bringing airports up to the federal aviation administration's design standards , add another $3.3 billion per year . airports anticipate another $3.9 billion per year for projects that are not eligible for funding from the airport improvement program , such as expanding commercial space in terminals and constructing parking garages . the difference between current funding and planned development is especially acute for smaller commercial and general aviation airports . their 1996 funding would cover only about half of their total planned development . several proposals to increase airport funding have emerged in recent years .