only time will tell . this program is new ; only one state has begun a project under its sib since the initial pilot states were selected for sib participation in april 1996 . therefore , it is too early to assess how effectively sibs will help to meet transportation needs . our ongoing work has found that the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) is testing and evaluating the use of an innovative design - build contracting method for highway construction . this method differs from traditional contracting practice in that it combines , rather than separates responsibility for the design and construction phases of a highway project . proponents of design - build see several advantages to the approach , including better accountability for costs and quality , less time spent coordinating designer and builder activities , firmer knowledge of project costs , and reduced burden in administering contracts . however , fhwa's authority to implement design - build is limited and 17 states have laws which , in effect , prevent the use of design - build . finally , while design - build may result in the faster completion of projects , it may also require an accelerated revenue stream to pay for construction . istea expressed the need for a new direction in surface transportation research , finding that despite an annual federal expenditure of more than $10 billion on surface transportation and its infrastructure , the federal government lacked a clear vision of the role of federally funded surface transportation research and an integrated framework for the fragmented surface transportation research programs dispersed throughout the government . the act recognized the federal government as a critical sponsor and coordinator of new technologies that would provide safer , more convenient , and more affordable future transportation systems . our september 1996 report on surface transportation research confirmed what istea stressed — dot must play a critical role in surface transportation research . dot's role as the leader in surface transportation research stems from the department's national perspective , which transcends the interests and limitations of nonfederal stakeholders . for example , the states generally focus on applied research to solve specific problems ; industry funds research to develop new or expanded markets ; and universities train future transportation specialists and conduct research that reflects the interests of their funders . while the department has established councils and committees to coordinate its research , the lack of a departmental focal point and an inadequate strategic plan may limit its leadership role . first , surface transportation research within the department is focused on improving individual modes of transportation rather than on creating an integrated framework for surface transportation research . this modal structure makes it difficult for dot to develop a surface transportation system mission ; accommodate the need for types of research — such as intermodal and systems assessment research — that do not have a modal focus ; and identify and coordinate research that cuts across modes . second , dot does not have a department - level focal point to oversee its research , such as an assistant secretary for research and development . instead an associate administrator of the research and special projects administration ( rspa ) coordinates the department's surface research programs .