ii. ) as a result , it is extremely difficult to gain competitive access to these airports , according to executives at many airlines that started after deregulation . although the development , maintenance , and expansion of airport facilities is essentially a local responsibility , most airports are operated under federal restrictions that are tied to the receipt of federal grant money from faa . to address the gate lease problem , we recommended that when disbursing airport improvement grant moneys , faa give priority to those airports that do not lease the vast majority of their gates to one airline under long - term , exclusive - use terms . at laguardia and national airports , perimeter rules prohibit incoming and outgoing flights that exceed 1,500 and 1,250 miles , respectively . the perimeter rules were designed to promote kennedy and dulles airports as the long - haul airports for the new york and washington metropolitan areas . however , the rules limit the ability of airlines based in the west to compete because those airlines are not allowed to serve laguardia and national airports from the markets where they are strongest . by contrast , because of their proximity to laguardia and national , each of the seven largest established carriers is able to serve those airports from its principal hub . while the limit at laguardia was established by the port authority of new york & new jersey , national's perimeter rule is federal law . thus , in our october 1996 report , we suggested that the congress consider granting dot the authority to allow exemptions to the perimeter rule at national when proposed service will substantially increase competition . we did not recommend that the rule be abolished because removing it could have unintended negative consequences , such as reducing the amount of service to smaller communities in the northeast and southeast . this could happen if major slot holders at national were to shift their service from smaller communities to take advantage of more profitable , longer - haul routes . as a result , we concluded that a more prudent course to increasing competition at national would be to examine proposed new services on a case - by - case basis . our october 1996 report also emphasized that certain marketing strategies of incumbent airlines , taken together , had created strong loyalty among passengers and travel agents , making it difficult for nonincumbents to enter markets dominated by an established airline . two strategies in particular — booking incentives to travel agents and frequent flier plans — have encouraged business flyers , who represent the most profitable segment of the industry , to use the dominant carrier in each market . because about 90 percent of business travel is booked through travel agencies , airlines strive to influence the agencies' booking patterns by offering special bonus commissions as a reward for booking a targeted proportion of passengers on their airline . similarly , frequent flier programs have become an increasingly effective tool to encourage customers' loyalty to a particular airline . as such , entry by new and established airlines alike into a market dominated by one carrier is very difficult .