8 billion . in many cases , hud pays higher amounts to subsidize properties than are needed to provide the households living in them with decent , affordable housing . in other cases , rents set by hud are lower than required to maintain the properties' physical condition , contributing to poor living conditions for families with low incomes . initially termed “mark to market” in last year's budget request , and now referred to as “multifamily portfolio reengineering,” the goal and general framework of hud's proposal remain the same: eliminate excess subsidy costs and improve the poor physical condition of some of the properties by relying primarily on market forces . specifically , for properties with mortgages insured by fha that also receive project - based assistance , hud has been proposing to let the market set the property rents to market levels and reduce mortgage debt if necessary to permit a positive cash flow . in addition , hud has proposed replacing project - based rental subsidies with portable tenant - based subsidies , thereby requiring the properties to compete in the marketplace for residents . while maintaining this general framework , hud made several changes to its proposal this year . for example , under the initial proposal all rents would have been reset to market levels whether the market rents were above or below the subsidized rents . the current proposal gives priority attention initially to properties with subsidized rents above market . in addition , hud plans to let state and local governments decide whether to continue with project - based rent subsidies after mortgages are restructured or to switch to tenant - based assistance . hud has also indicated that it will allow owners to apply for fha insurance on the new , restructured mortgage loans , whereas last year the proposal expressly disallowed fha insurance on restructured loans . we are currently evaluating a study by ernst & young llp released on may 2 , 1996 , that was designed to provide the department with current information on hud's multifamily portfolio . this information could form the basis for the improvement of key assumptions needed to estimate the net savings or costs associated with the reengineering proposal . in this regard , hud's contract with ernst & young llp requires that the firm update hud's information on ( 1 ) market rents versus the project - based rents that the agency subsidizes and ( 2 ) the physical condition of the properties.these two variables strongly influence whether a property can operate at market rents without debt reduction or what amount of debt reduction is needed to cover the property's expenses . having good data on these variables will allow fha to better develop claims estimates which will be based on the amount of debt write - down . in addition , the rent data are integral to estimating the change in subsidy costs if the project - based rents are replaced with market rents and the residents receive tenant - based assistance . hud also tasked ernst & young with developing a financial model that would show the likely result of reengineering the portfolio and identify the related subsidy costs and claims costs .