additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . mr. chairman this concludes our statement . we would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . one property had been shown by realtors eight times while it contained debris . in fact , a realtor noted that the only accessible entrance to the property was blocked with furniture and debris , which was the case when we visited the property . during our august 1997 inspection of 24 properties in this location , we found that most of the properties contained either interior or exterior debris . consequently , prospective buyers were sometimes viewing properties littered with household trash , personal belongings , and other debris . in addition , hud's field office staff did not always inspect the properties managed by ream contractors , as suggested by hud's guidance . because hud recognizes that physical inspections are the best method for monitoring the contractors' work , hud's guidance suggests that field office staff conduct monthly physical inspections of a minimum number of properties assigned to each contractor . no historical data are available for field office contracting activities . hud's 2020 management reform plan and supporting documents indicate that the department's reliance on contractors to help carry out its responsibilities will remain significant . for instance , the plan calls for hud to contract with private firms for a number of functions , including physical building inspections of public housing and multifamily insured projects ; legal , investigative , audit , and engineering services ; and activities to clean up the backlog of troubled assisted multifamily properties . previously , physical inspections of multifamily projects were carried out by hud personnel , mortgagees , and regional contractors . the plan also encompasses the potential use of contractors to manage construction under the hope vi program . finally , the 2020 reforms call for transferring the office of housing's contract administration activities for its rental assistance programs to contract administrators . the new arrangement would be similar to the process under the office of public and indian housing's rental assistance programs .