additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . blm had only two employees who were required to live on - site . about 75 percent of the park service's housing inventory is composed of single - family and multiplex units compared with about 50 and 26 percent , respectively , for the forest service and blm . in part , because of the park service's mix of housing types , the agency has experienced far higher repair and rehabilitation costs . for example , in 1993 , we reported that the park service estimated a backlog of $546 million for repairs , rehabilitation , and replacement of its housing inventory ; whereas the forest service , having about the same number of units but a different mix , had a backlog of less than a third of the park service . a park service official had a difficult time substantiating the difference beyond the fact that only a portion of the difference resulted from the agency's higher rehabilitation and construction standards and higher costs associated with rehabilitating units classified as historic structures . furthermore , in 1994 we reported that of the three agencies , only the park service plans to replace and upgrade its housing . although the forest service and blm do not plan to stop providing housing altogether , both plan to minimize their involvement in providing housing to employees and instead rely more upon private sector housing . among the reasons the forest service and blm are minimizing housing is that ( 1 ) their current housing inventories were too expensive to maintain , ( 2 ) previous justifications for providing housing were no longer valid , ( 3 ) better roads have made it easier for employees to live in nearby communities , and ( 4 ) employees have shown a preference for living in private residences . in closing , the park service has been slow to resolve problems that we have identified in past reports . it has taken an act of congress to move the agency to review and revise its housing policies and make arrangements to determine its need for and condition of its housing inventory . by taking these steps , the agency appears to be on the right track toward making progress in key areas . the plans are not required to be reviewed or approved by agency regional management . in 1993 , we reported that the park service had not fully justified the need for all of its employee housing .