the agency cannot now do this . the park service will need to develop more accurate and reliable information on its deferred maintenance needs ( as well as its other park operating needs ) and to track progress in addressing them . in administering its recreational fee demonstration program , the park service decided that using the revenue to address its maintenance needs is a high priority . however , during hearings before this subcommittee last year , we reported that the park service did not have a common definition of what should be included in its backlog of maintenance needs and did not have a routine , systematic process for determining these needs . as a result , the agency was unable to provide us with a reliable estimate of its deferred maintenance needs . at the same hearing , interior's assistant secretary for policy , management , and budget made several commitments to address these problems . the commitments were to ( 1 ) establish common definitions for deferred maintenance and other key maintenance and construction terms ; ( 2 ) develop improved data collection processes for accumulating data about annual and deferred maintenance needs , among other things ; ( 3 ) provide guidance for preparing a 5-year priority maintenance and construction plan for the fiscal year 2000 budget ; and ( 4 ) issue instructions for reporting deferred maintenance in agency financial statements . to date , the department of the interior has made some progress in meeting these commitments . in february 1998 , common definitions were developed for deferred maintenance . the department has also provided guidance for the agencies to use to develop priority maintenance plans . in addition , the department has issued instructions on how agencies should report deferred maintenance in their financial statements . these are all positive steps that should , if implemented properly , help the park service as well as other interior agencies manage their maintenance activities . nonetheless , the park service still does not have accurate information on its maintenance needs . this is evident from a february 1998 interior report , which states , among other things , that the deferred maintenance needs of interior agencies , including the park service , have never been adequately documented . to remedy this situation , interior and its agencies , including the park service , are beginning to develop a maintenance management system that can generate consistent maintenance data for all interior agencies . interior expects to identify the systems needed to generate better maintenance data needs by june 1999 . however , this is just a first step . interior and its agencies are also in the process of obtaining better information on the condition of their facilities . any data improvements resulting from this effort will likely be several years away . effects varied somewhat from location to location . of the 206 sites in the demonstration program in fiscal year 1997 , 58 percent had increases in visitation , 41 percent had decreases , and 1 percent were unchanged .