additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . the park service has taken steps to correct the situation . for example , automated systems are in place to track illegal activities such as looting , poaching , and vandalism , and an automated system is being developed to collect data on deficiencies in preserving , collecting , and documenting cultural and natural resource museum collections . for the most part , however , relatively limited progress has been made in gathering information on the condition of resources . when asked why more progress is not being made , park service officials generally told us that funds are limited and competing needs must be addressed . our 1995 study found that funding increases for the park service have mainly been used to accommodate upgraded compensation for park rangers and deal with additional park operating requirements , such as safety and environmental regulations . in many cases , adequate funds are not made available to the parks to cover the cost of complying with additional operating requirements , so park managers have to divert personnel and / or dollars from other activities such as resource management to meet these needs . in addition , we found that , to some extent , these funds were used to cope with a higher number of park visitors . two examples will help illustrate this point . in california's redwood national park , scientific information about resource damage is helping mitigation efforts . scientists used research data that had been collected over a period of time to determine the extent to which damage occurring to trees , fish , and other resources could be attributed to erosion from logging and related road - building activities . on the basis of this research , the park's management is now in a position to begin reducing the threat by advising adjacent landowners on better logging and road - building techniques that will reduce erosion . the second example , from crater lake national park in oregon , shows the disadvantage of not having such information . the park did not have access to wildlife biologists or forest ecologists to conduct scientific research identifying the extent of damage occurring from logging and its related activities . for example , damage from logging , as recorded by park staff using observation and a comparison of conditions in logged and unlogged areas , has included the loss of habitat and migration corridors for wildlife .