what do you think ? who would this affect ? can that much be cut from administration and not hurt the participants of the program ? ” “what if i also told you that by reducing federal support for food assistance , the personal responsibility act would lower retail food sales , reduce farm income and increase unemployment ? what do you think ? do you believe it ? ” “what if i told you that if the programs were given to the states to run , then all food and nutrition assistance would be forced to compete for limited funds ? states' ability to deliver nutrition benefits would be subject to changing annual appropriation priorities . what do you think ? ” “what if i told you that there is a proposal in congress to put a ceiling or a cap on how many people can be on the program at once ? how do you feel about that ? ” “now that you know a little more about the house plan , what do you think ? would you support this plan ? what do you think life would be like for food stamp recipients if this passed ? ” lake research presented its findings in a meeting on april 20 , 1995 , to the under secretary , her executive assistant , and fcs' top management . a lake research memo addressed to the under secretary , outlining the focus group findings , was also distributed during that meeting . this memo presented the focus group participants' perceptions of usda's suggested reforms and their views on proposed name changes to the food stamp program . the memo also provided strategies on how usda could promote its ideas to the public . among other things , this memo contained the following statements: “we need to translate the popularity of wic [the special supplemental food program for women , infants , and children] and school lunch to the food stamp program and make people associate children with food stamps.” “our side has a powerful message in protecting children from hunger . voters truly believe that no child in america should go hungry.” “this is still a tough fight , particularly when the opposition combines food stamps with welfare . voters have a very developed critique of welfare and adamantly want it reformed.” this same language appeared in lake research's draft report , which was delivered to usda on may 1 , 1995 . following objections raised by fcs managers , terms such as “voters” and several politically oriented references were removed from the final report . lake research delivered its final report to usda on may 23 , 1995 . as of april 30 , 1996 , the deputy administrator of the food stamp program had not received a copy of this report . given her responsibilities for administering the food stamp program , we would have expected this report to have been provided to her . in closing , mr. chairman , we found that usda did not comply with the federal acquisition regulation and the paperwork reduction act and used a flawed methodology that would not allow the contract's stated purpose to be achieved .