usda did not increase the rates where necessary . for example , for one of the crops we reviewed , usda did not increase the rates as much as it could have when ( 1 ) severe losses from 1993 were added to the database for establishing the 1995 rates and ( 2 ) a year from the 1970s when losses were lower was deleted from the database . according to usda , it had not sufficiently raised rates out of concern that higher rates would discourage farmers from buying crop insurance . furthermore , when we examined the rates at various levels of coverage and production , we found that the rates were ( 1 ) too high for coverage at the 75-percent level and ( 2 ) too low for farmers with above - average crop yields . as a result , the rates for both coverage and production levels were not always aligned with risk . this occurred because usda did not periodically review and update the calculations it used to adjust rates above and below the basic rate . to set premium rates for the 75-percent coverage level , usda applies pre - established mathematical factors to the basic rate . however , these factors have not resulted in rates that are aligned with risk . for crops insured at the 75-percent coverage level , usda set premium rates ranging from 19 to 27 percent more than required . as a result , the 1994 income from premiums was about $30 million more than required for this coverage . although grain sorghum had the greatest percentage of rates in excess of those required , corn had the greatest amount of additional premium income because its program is much larger . usda also adjusts the basic rates for a farmer's individual crop yields . usda's basic rate applies to the farmer whose average yield is about equal to the average for all producers in the county . let me place our work in context . as you know , farming is an inherently risky enterprise . federal crop insurance is one of the primary mechanisms used by participating farmers to protect against the risk of losses caused by events such as droughts , floods , hurricanes , and other natural disasters . as usda has rapidly expanded the availability of crop insurance , from 59 crops insured in 1994 to 75 in 1999 , and introduced new insurance products to protect farmers' revenue , so too have the federal government's costs for crop insurance increased . since 1995 , the federal government has expended an average of about $1.4 billion each year for the crop insurance program — including premium subsidies , insurance company reimbursements , and underwriting losses . the program will cost an estimated $1.6 billion in 1999 . because of the program's rapid expansion and its significant financial costs to the government , we have been asked to examine various aspects of the crop insurance program .