additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . critics argue that these assumptions are not realistic for all sites . the senate proposal calls for the use of site - specific data and “realistic and plausible” assumptions about the risks posed by contaminants . for example , the bill calls for considering data about a site when deciding how the land at a site may be used in the future . determining a site's future use is key to estimating people's future exposure to contaminants at the site , which , in turn , helps to determine the level of cleanup required for the site . we found that when epa lacked specific data on a site's future use , it adopted the assumptions that would be the most protective of human health , namely , that the land would be used for residential rather than commercial or industrial purposes . assuming future residential use can lead to estimates of health risks that warrant cleaning up a site immediately . in reviewing epa's data for 225 superfund sites , we found that at about half of the 190 sites where epa had decided cleanup was necessary , the health risks were ranked as high not because of the land's current use but because epa had assumed the land's use would change in the future . epa recognizes that this assumption leads to costlier cleanups , and last year the agency decided to use more site - specific data when deciding what assumptions to make about a site's future uses . the proposed legislation would go farther to incorporate the assumptions about future land use in cleanup decisions . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . given that both the government and private industry have spent billions of dollars to date on the superfund program but significant numbers of sites remain to be cleaned up , it is important to achieve the maximum amount of environmental protection from the available federal resources . we reported in 1994 that although epa had adopted a policy of addressing the worst sites first , its regional offices had set priorities using such factors as the amount of work needed to evaluate a site instead of considering the site's health and environmental risks . we would now like to discuss some of the implications of the bill's provisions .