the office was established in january 1997 . in the interim , an epa work group composed of employees on temporary assignment started to develop the new planning , budgeting , and accountability system . however , the work group was not fully staffed , and the development of the new system is still in the early stages . the new office of planning , analysis , and accountability will not be fully staffed before july 1997 . epa faces long - term challenges to obtain the scientific and environmental data needed to fully support its new system . although much environmental information has already been collected , many gaps exist and the data are often difficult to compile because divergent data collection methods have been used . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . likewise , much effort is still required to identify , develop , and agree on a comprehensive set of environmental measures to link the agency's activities to changes in environmental conditions . without environmental measures , epa has to rely solely on administrative measures , such as the number of permits issued or inspections made , to measure its performance or success . in an april 1995 report , the national academy of public administration recommended that epa establish specific environmental goals and strategies to attain them , and use comparative risk analyses to select priorities and develop strategies for specific programs . napa also said that epa should consolidate its planning and budgeting functions , use the budget process to allocate resources to the agency's priorities , and establish accountability by setting and tracking benchmarks and evaluating performance . the napa study's recommendations are similar to the requirements for federal agencies established by the government performance and results act of 1993 ( gpra ) . the interim work group that had been assigned to develop the new system was detailed to the new office to continue its work . the work group has 21 employees , fewer than half the number that epa had planned for the group . the new office is authorized 49 employees . as of the end of march 1997 , epa had published job announcements to fill 26 of the new positions . epa officials told us that these announced positions , which are open only to current epa employees , will be filled in may 1997 . a final report on our work will be provided to the subcommittee this summer . in summary , our preliminary findings are as follows: in march 1996 , the epa administrator announced plans to create a new office of planning , analysis , and accountability . under gpra , agencies must establish strategic plans , by september 30 , 1997 . gpra also requires agencies to submit to the office of management and budget , beginning for fiscal year 1999 , annual performance plans , including annual performance goals and performance measures . our testimony today is based on the preliminary results of our ongoing work for the subcommittee .