missouri . state officials said that in the first years of their program , they provided grants to airports that needed safety - related upgrades but had not previously received aip funding , either because the airports were too small or the types of projects had not met faa's funding criteria . state officials told us that the initial block grant program was scheduled to last for 2 years and they felt compelled to issue as many grants to small airports as possible during that time . thus , the state awarded more grants to more airports than faa would have typically funded in a similar period with the same amount of money . we conducted a nationwide survey to determine whether states would be interested in participating in a block grant program . of the 43 nonparticipating states , 34 , or 79 percent , indicated that they would be interested in participating in such a program and appeared capable of doing so . ( see app . i for a list of the 34 states interested in participating in the block grant program. ) many states wanted the flexibility to manage airport funds and financial assistance to administer the program . nearly all of the states expressing interest in the block - grant program already manage state - funded capital improvement programs of their own . many of the state programs include funding for airport maintenance projects and emphasize aviation safety and education for pilots and the community at large . the majority of the states that expressed an interest in the block grant program appear to have the staff with the types of expertise that would be needed to successfully administer aip grants for general aviation airports . in response to our survey , over 59 percent of the interested states said they had at least one full - time engineer , grant administrator , planner , and airport inspector . in addition , in 1995 , over 71 percent of the interested states reported that they used either contract employees , personnel from other state agencies , or both to augment their own staff's expertise . besides having staff with the requisite skills , the states interested in joining the block grant program have already assumed many of the responsibilities taken on by block grant states . over 90 percent of these states currently perform half or more of the tasks normally performed by faa . these tasks include assisting airports in land acquisition and sales , assisting airports in identifying improvement projects and eligible projects , and reviewing plans and specifications for specific projects . many of the interested states would be more inclined to participate in the block grant program if they could use their own methodology for selecting projects . over three - quarters of the states interested in the block grant program currently have their own systems for prioritizing airport projects . we reviewed several of these systems and found that they include many of the same elements that appear in faa's priority system , including high priorities for safety projects . however , in some instances , states prioritize projects that would be ineligible for funding using faa's priority system , such as constructing general aviation terminals and hangars .