new issues have also been raised . key issues include the following . hud's original proposal sought to address this situation by subjecting properties to the disciplines of the commercial market by converting project - based subsidies to tenant - based assistance , adjusting rents to market levels , and refinancing existing insured mortgages with smaller , uninsured mortgages if necessary for properties to operate at the new rents . however , to the extent that the final provisions of reengineering perpetuate the current system of fha insurance and project - based subsidies , hud's ability to manage the portfolio will remain a key concern . thus , it will be necessary to identify other means for addressing the limitations that impede hud's ability to effectively manage the portfolio , particularly in light of the planned staff reductions that will further strain hud's management capacity . while hud has not formulated a specific proposal for dealing with the tax consequences of portfolio reengineering , it has stated that it is willing to discuss with the congress mechanisms to take into account tax consequences related to debt forgiveness for property owners who enter into restructuring agreements . an issue with short - term — and potentially long - term — cost implications is whether hud should continue to provide fha insurance on the restructured loans and , if so , under what terms and conditions . if fha insurance is discontinued when the loans are restructured as originally planned , hud would likely incur higher debt restructuring costs because lenders would set the terms of the new loans , such as interest rates , to reflect the risk of default that they would now assume . the primary benefits of discontinuing insurance are that ( 1 ) the government's dual role as mortgage insurer and rent subsidy provider would end , eliminating the management conflicts associated with this dual role , and ( 2 ) the default risk borne by the government would end as loans were restructured . however , the immediate costs to the fha insurance fund would be higher than if insurance , and the government's liability for default costs , were continued . our preliminary review of this information indicates that the costs of claims will be significant . on average , the data indicate that mortgage balances for the properties needing mortgage restructuring — including those in the full write - off and nonperforming categories that would have their mortgages totally written off — would need to be reduced by between 61 and 67 percent . this reduction would result in claims against fha's multifamily insurance funds . as we discussed in our testimony before this subcommittee last year , the congress faces a number of significant and complex issues in evaluating hud's portfolio reengineering proposal . thus , the government could insure loans for 3 to 5 years , in lieu of the current practice of bearing default risk for 40 years . finally , the current practice of the government's bearing 100 percent of the default risk could be changed by legislation requiring state housing finance agencies or private - sector parties to bear a portion of the insurance risk .