additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . we plan to report on the results of our assessment this summer . in closing , mr. chairman , fha is a prominent player in the home mortgage loan market , particularly for low - income and minority borrowers , first - time home buyers , and borrowers with high ltv ratios . the mortgage loan terms offered by fha as well as va still differ in important ways from those offered by pmis . solely on the basis of the ltv and qualifying ratios of borrowers , many fha borrowers in 1995 may not have been able to obtain or could have been delayed in obtaining a home mortgage without the more lenient terms offered by fha . the impact that foreclosures can have on the financial health of the fund was demonstrated during the 1980s . until that time , the fund remained relatively healthy . however , in the 1980s losses were substantial primarily because foreclosure rates were high in economically stressed regions , particularly in the rocky mountain and southwest regions . by the end of fiscal year 1990 , the fund's economic value / reserves were estimated at about a negative $2.7 billion . mr. chairman , this concludes my statement . we would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . opportunities to expand participation include reallocating unused units to fannie mae and allowing the use of risk - sharing reinsurance ( 1 ) with 18-year balloon mortgages — an option that is currently available only to fannie mae — and ( 2 ) with loan pools as well as individual loans . participation in the demonstration programs has enabled hud to facilitate the financing of affordable multifamily housing while limiting its loss exposure through risk sharing . regarding the need for oversight of lenders' compliance , we reported that loan claim files submitted by lenders to hud following loan defaults often do not contain required loan documents , including the certifications signed by the borrower that the property improvement work has been completed .