that concludes our testimony . we would be pleased to respond to any questions you may have . to determine the risks associated with current spent fuel storage at hanford and the department of energy's ( doe ) plans to reduce those risks , we reviewed doe and defense nuclear facilities safety board reports on current storage conditions and doe documents describing the spent fuel storage project . the same basin leaked again in 1993 . in both incidents , it is likely that contamination reached the columbia river . the buildings that house the basins are also inadequate , and the location is environmentally precarious . the buildings are not airtight and allow sand , dirt , and dust to enter the water basins , contributing to the buildup of sludge at the bottom of each pool . the basins are about 1,400 feet away from the columbia river — much too close , in the view of doe and other parties interested in protecting the river from environmental damage . the existing storage poses risks of exposing workers , the public , and the environment to radioactive materials . for example , an earthquake or even an industrial accident could cause a basin to rupture , releasing large quantities of contaminated basin water to the soil and the columbia river . the loss of water in the basins could also expose workers and the public to the airborne transmission of radioactive materials released from the corroded fuel and the sludge in the bottom of the basins . evaluations conducted in 1993 by doe and 1994 by the safety board concluded that improving the spent fuel's storage was urgently needed . because of the deteriorated condition of the spent fuel and one of the storage basins , the safety board described the situation as one where “imminent hazards could arise within two or three years,” a time period that has already passed . the safety board recommended that , among other things , doe take action to improve the storage of spent fuel on a high - priority , accelerated basis . doe has responded to the safety concerns about the spent fuel by developing a plan to dry the fuel and store it farther from the columbia river . this strategy , which has been evolving since 1994 , includes cleaning and packaging the fuel in the basins , removing and drying the fuel at a new processing facility to be built near the basins , and transporting the fuel to a new interim storage facility on the hanford site several miles from the river . the fuel will be stored there in sealed containers until its final disposition occurs , in a permanent geologic repository . the project also involves treating and disposing of the sludge , debris , and water left in the basins after the fuel is removed . the spent fuel project is organized into subprojects and includes constructing two major facilities — a fuel - drying facility and a canister storage facility .