additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . we found similar misunderstandings in several other cases we reviewed . epa regional officials who produced a technical product that assessed the environmental impacts of tributyl tin told us that the contractor - prepared product had been peer reviewed . while we found that the draft product did receive some internal review by epa staff and external review by contributing authors , stakeholders , and the public , it was not reviewed by experts independent of the product itself or of its potential regulatory ramifications . when we pointed out that — according to epa's policy and the region's own peer review procedures — these reviews are not a substitute for peer review , the project director said that she was not aware of these requirements . in two other cases we reviewed , there were misunderstandings about the components of a product that should be peer reviewed . for example , in the great waters study — an assessment of the impact of atmospheric pollutants in significant water bodies — the scientific data were subjected to external peer review , but the study's conclusions that were based on these data were not . similarly , in the reassessment of dioxin — an examination of the health risks posed by dioxin — the final chapter summarizing and characterizing dioxin's risks was not as thoroughly peer reviewed . in both cases , the project officers did not have the conclusions peer reviewed because they believed that the development of conclusions is an inherently governmental function that should be performed exclusively by epa staff . however , some epa officials with expertise in conducting peer reviews disagreed , maintaining that it is important to have peer reviewers comment on whether or not epa has properly interpreted the results of the underlying scientific and technical data . epa's quality assurance requirements also state that conclusions should be peer reviewed . the office of solid waste and emergency response formed a team to help strengthen the office's implementation of peer review by identifying ways to facilitate good peer review and addressing barriers to its successful use . we are encouraged by the renewed attention epa is giving to improving the peer review process . although it is too early for us to gauge the success of these efforts , the involvement of the agency's upper - level management should go a long way to ensure that the problems we identified are resolved . mr. chairman , this concludes my prepared statement .