this represents a 20-percent increase from 1992 . at the same time , the annual number of miles traveled by large trucks increased by 25 percent . if this trend of increasing truck travel continues , the number of fatalities could increase to 5,800 in 1999 . this figure is substantially more than the goal that the federal highway administration established for 1999 of reducing fatalities from truck crashes to below the 1996 level of 5,126 . while trucks are involved in fewer crashes per mile traveled than are cars , crashes involving trucks are more likely to result in a fatality . in 1997 , 98 percent of the fatalities from crashes between trucks and cars were occupants of the car . while no reliable nationwide information exists on the causes of crashes involving large trucks , one existing data base does provide some indication of the extent to which factors such as driver behavior , vehicle mechanical condition , the roadway , and the environment contribute to these crashes . however , the existing data base includes data from only fatal truck crashes , and does not rely on a thorough investigation of the crash scene . to better tailor its activities to address the factors that are most likely to contribute to truck crashes , omchs plans to design and fund the development of a data base that contains more detailed information on these factors . in addition , several states plan to collect their own data on contributing factors based on in - depth crash investigations . while many actions outside omchs' authority influence truck safety , omchs has undertaken a number of activities to improve truck safety , such as identifying high - risk carriers for safety improvements and educating car drivers about how to share the road with large trucks . however , the effectiveness of these activities is limited by ( 1 ) data that are incomplete , inaccurate , or untimely ; ( 2 ) the length of time it will take to complete several activities ; and ( 3 ) the unknown effect of omchs' campaign to educate car drivers about the limitations of large trucks . for example , omchs' effort to identify high - risk carriers for safety improvements depends in part on having complete data on the number of crashes experienced by carriers . however , omchs estimated that about 38 percent of all crashes and 30 percent of the fatal crashes involving large trucks were not reported to omchs in 1997 . the annual number of fatalities from crashes involving large trucks increased by 20 percent from 4,462 in 1992 to 5,355 in 1997 ( see fig . 1 ) .this result reversed a trend of decreasing truck fatalities in the previous 5-year period , 1988 through 1992 . according to omchs officials , states do not report all crashes for several reasons . in particular , ( 1 ) states do not understand that complete reporting would enable omchs to more accurately target high - risk carriers , ( 2 ) state employees who submit crash data to mcmis may not have sufficient training or incentives , or ( 3 ) there may be errors in some states' data bases that are preventing the transmittal of the data .