the lawsuits are pending . interior's regulations for transferring federal land under flpma do not encourage , require , or prohibit public hearings on proposed transfers . nevertheless , interior wanted the state to conduct a formal public hearing on the ward valley facility because of the controversy over the facility . according to interior , the second supplement and tritium tests will fulfill its responsibility to assure the public that health and safety concerns are adequately addressed . california conducted a public hearing as a part of its licensing procedures for the ward valley facility . the applicable state laws and regulations required the state to conduct a hearing in which the public makes brief oral statements and provide written comments . all comments were to be considered by the state and included in the written licensing record . several individuals and groups unsuccessfully urged the state to conduct a public hearing on the license application using formal , trial - type procedures . however , a state appellate court found that the state had met the requirements of state law and regulations and an appeal of the court's decision was denied . california issued a license to us ecology to build and operate a disposal facility for low - level radioactive waste at ward valley in accordance with the state's authority under the atomic energy act of 1954 and related state laws and regulations . interior , however , has not accepted the results of the state's licensing proceeding as an adequate basis for interior to make a land - transfer decision . for example , in an august 11 , 1993 , letter to the governor of california , interior's secretary asked the state to conduct a formal public hearing as part of a credible process for determining if the site is appropriate so the secretary can make a land - transfer decision . flpma requires the secretary of the interior to ensure that federal lands transferred to other parties are properly used and protect the public interest . california , on the other hand , is responsible for licensing and regulating the ward valley facility according to the state's laws and regulations , which are intended to adequately protect public health and safety . where the respective responsibilities of interior and the state overlap , if at all , has been an uncertain matter . the former secretary , in his january 1993 decision ( subsequently rescinded ) to transfer the land , accepted the state's and us ecology's technical findings supporting the state's licensing decision and accepted that the proposed facility would be licensed by the state according to all applicable federal and state laws and regulations . in contrast , the current secretary has asserted more overlap between interior's and the state's respective responsibilities . for example , when the secretary requested the state to conduct a formal public hearing , he said the hearing should focus on the issue of the migration of radionuclides from the site because that issue directly relates to his “ . responsibility under federal law regarding the suitability of the site .