additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . to date , such a commission has not been established . consolidate functions or close facilities . previous studies have identified this as another option to reduce expenditures . for example , several years ago , the coast guard identified a cost - cutting option involving the consolidation of its training facilities , a move that would have resulted in annual savings of $9 million , by closing the facility at petaluma , california . fearing a public outcry by the local community , especially because of the numerous recent closures of military bases in california , the coast guard postponed taking this step . to address situations like this , we recommended that the congress may wish to consider a facility closure approach for the coast guard that is similar to the one dod has used to evaluate base closures . under this approach , an independent commission would be established and given authority to recommend the closure of some of the coast guard's facilities . another option for addressing any funding gap would be for the coast guard to secure new sources of funding for its capital projects . however , obtaining additional funding through the normal appropriation process is uncertain , given existing limits on discretionary funding . while this may change as the administration and the congress deliberate on how to use the existing surplus in the federal budget , no agreements have been reached . for fiscal year 1999 , the coast guard received an emergency appropriation totaling $230 million in addition to its regular appropriations to help buy new capital equipment . most of these funds were for equipment to stem the flow of illegal drugs into the united states . the additional funds were used in part for ongoing capital projects , such as upgrades to c - 130 aircraft engines and purchases of new sensors for coast guard ships and aircraft , potentially leaving more room in future years' budgets for the deepwater project and other needs . additional emergency funding may be available in future years as well . in january 1999 , legislation was introduced in the senate to authorize additional funding for the coast guard in fiscal years 2000 and 2001 for anti - drug operations ; however , there is no guarantee that these funds will be appropriated . user fees are another potential source of revenue to supplement the coast guard's future budgets for capital spending , but the coast guard has been unsuccessful in getting congressional approval to impose such fees on services it performs . last year , the house and the senate turned down a coast guard request to levy $165 million in user fees and stated its opposition to such fees . in its fiscal year 2000 budget request , the coast guard is again proposing a user fee on commercial cargo and cruise vessels for navigation services that the coast guard provides but does not charge for .