additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . these figures are reported annually to the executive committee . this difference is attributable to two factors . first , because of time lags between project approvals and the start of project implementation , the number of projects actually in progress or completed at a particular point in time is significantly smaller than the total number of projects approved by the multilateral fund's executive committee . second , projects that are under way , particularly investment projects , often take longer to complete than originally projected . as of december 31 , 1996 , only 688 , or 45 percent of the 1,537 projects approved since 1991 had been completed . of the approved funding of $485 million for these projects , only $197 million ( 41 percent ) had been disbursed , leaving an undisbursed balance of about $288 million for completion of those projects . planned spending commitments by the four implementing agencies in 1997 total about $128 million , meaning that less than half of the undisbursed funds approved for projects through 1996 is expected to be disbursed by the end of 1997 . some of the reasons cited for delays in project implementation and completion include the following: recipients attempted to renegotiate projects after executive committee approval . the business entity needed more time to secure financing from counterparts . the grant recipients decided to change project specifications . the business entity chose to delay conversion until competitors' projects were approved by the executive committee . the business entity wanted government regulations passed before allowing implementation to proceed . the bidding process resulted in higher costs than budgeted for the project . delays in the start of projects and slower than anticipated progress once they have begun have concerned the multilateral fund's executive committee . in may 1997 , the executive committee required the implementing agencies to submit reports , by the next meeting of the executive committee , for projects ( 1 ) where no disbursement has occurred for 18 months after project approval and ( 2 ) that remained uncompleted 12 months after the prescribed completion date . information from these reports will be used to develop guidelines to ensure that the project preparation process includes measures to prevent delays in implementation or completion in the future . the executive committee also decided projects that have had their funding requests significantly reduced during the review process could not proceed until the intended recipients confirm that they have additional funding available to allow for prompt project implementation . summary data on project type , approved funding , and project status are detailed in appendix iii . the multilateral fund has a number of mechanisms in place that are designed to ensure that funds are properly accounted for and that the amount of funds allocated to specific projects is reviewed and verified . when it was established in 1991 , the fund accepted the accounting and auditing mechanisms of the implementing agencies and relied primarily on the implementing agencies' long - established institutional procedures .