implements these plans . doe has a history of not fully implementing its management and oversight plans , and there are some early indications on this project that doe may be having difficulty ensuring that the proper expertise is in place and fully funding project support activities . mr. chairman , before discussing the details of our findings , we would like to briefly explain doe 's strategy for cleaning up hanford's tank waste . hanford's aging underground tanks contain about 54 million gallons of highly radioactive waste . doe currently estimates the total cost of cleaning up the tank waste at more than $50 billion ( in actual year dollars ) . to convert the waste into a form for more permanent storage , the waste will be separated into high - level and low - activity components and then , through a process called vitrification , converted into a glass - like material that can be poured into steel containers where it will harden . the immobilized high - level waste will be stored on - site for eventual shipment to a national repository , while the low - activity waste will be permanently disposed of on the hanford site . doe envisioned that two contractors would build and operate demonstration facilities that would initially treat at least 6 percent of the waste . doe referred to this part of the waste treatment effort as phase i. doe estimated that phase i would last at least until 2007 and cost about $3.2 billion and another $1.1 billion in contract support costs , for a total of about $4.3 billion . in september 1996 , doe awarded a fixed - price contract for $27 million to each of the two contractor teams to begin phase i by developing preliminary facility designs and other preliminary project plans . one team was led by bnfl and the other team was led by lockheed martin advanced environmental systems ( lockheed ) . in phase ii , contractors would compete for a contract to process the remaining tank waste . doe's experience during the initial part of phase i led to a change in the contracting approach . in may 1998 , after reviewing the preliminary designs and plans submitted by the two competing teams , doe decided to continue phase i with only one contractor — bnfl . on august 24 , 1998 , doe signed a fixed - price contract with bnfl for $6.9 billion to continue with phase i. doe estimated that its other costs related to supporting bnfl's efforts would be about $2 billion , bringing the project's total estimated cost to about $8.9 billion . doe's august 1998 contract with bnfl is a substantial departure from doe's original privatization strategy . according to doe , changes to its initial approach were made to optimize the technical approach and to make the project financially feasible or to reduce the likelihood of performance failure . estimated costs for the project have also increased significantly . the total project costs for phase i , including doe's support costs , increased from $4.3 billion in the original estimate to $8.9 billion in the current estimate ( in constant fiscal year 1997 dollars ) .