two of those airlines are delta and united . if these airlines were to compete less because of their alliance , passengers traveling between these two cities could be harmed . barriers that restrict entry at key airports may increase the potential for harm from the proposed alliances because they remove the threat that high fares or poor service will attract competition from established or new entrant airlines . as we have reported in the past , barriers such as slot controls — limits on the number of takeoffs and landings — at four airports in chicago , new york , and washington , d.c. , and long - term exclusive - use gate leases at six additional airports have led to higher fares on routes to and from these airports . such barriers make entry at those airports difficult because the incumbent airlines frequently control access to the airport's gates . nonincumbent airlines generally would have to sublease gates from the incumbent airline , often at less preferable times and at a higher cost than the incumbent pays . at two of the four slot - controlled airports — new york's laguardia and washington's reagan national — the levels of concentration by the existing dominant airline would increase substantially following the alliance . the increase at chicago's o'hare and new york's kennedy , on the other hand , would be much more modest . similarly , with the six airports that are gate - constrained , because the dominant airlines already control such large percentages of the available gates , the increases in concentration that would occur following the alliances are also relatively small , averaging less than 2 percent . ( see table 3. ) to the extent that there is an increased concentration of slots and gates , entry may become more difficult , which would further limit competition on routes to and from these airports and likely lead to higher airfares . our previous work has shown that airlines that dominate traffic at an airport generally charge higher fares than they do at airports that they do not dominate . it will coordinate with doj on the alliance reviews . dot does not have prior approval authority over an alliance . on the basis of a recommendation from an administrative law judge , dot could issue a cease - and - desist order . alliances could benefit consumers by increasing the number of destinations and the frequency of flights available through each partner . the airlines believe that these increases will in turn attract new passengers , allowing them to offer more frequent flights , and , if demand is substantial , more new destinations . in an alliance that includes code - sharing , such as those proposed by united and delta and northwest and continental , airline route networks are effectively joined , expanding possible routings by linking two different hub - and - spoke systems . the service provided through code - sharing replicates the “seamless” travel that would be provided by a single airline , known as “on - line service.” this type of service is generally preferred by airline passengers because it allows the convenience of single ticketing and check - in .