some partnerships have already been created . for example , epa and the states are reviewing reporting burdens to identify areas in which the burden can be reduced or eliminated . under another epa initiative , the agency is working with states to create data standards so that environmental information from various epa and state databases can be more readily shared . representatives of state environmental agencies and the environmental council of the states have expressed their ideas and concerns about the role of epa's new information office and have frequently reminded epa that they expect to share with epa the responsibility for setting that office's goals , priorities , and strategies . according to a council official , the states have had more input to the development of the new epa office than they typically have had in other major policy issues and the states view this change as an improvement in their relationship with epa . collecting and managing the data that epa requires to manage its programs have been major long - term challenges for the agency . the epa administrator's recent decision to create a central information office to make fundamental agencywide improvements in data management activities is a step in the right direction . however , creating such an organization from disparate parts of the agency is a complex process and substantially improving and integrating epa's information systems will be difficult and likely require several years . to fully achieve epa's goals will require high priority within the agency , including the long - term appropriate resources and commitment of senior management . the first copy of each gao report and testimony is free . additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . our final report will be provided in august 1999 . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists . epa estimates that its central information office will be operational by the end of august 1999 and will have a staff of about 350 employees . the office will address a broad range of information policy and technology issues , such as improving the accuracy of epa's data , protecting the security of information that epa disseminates over the internet , developing better measures to assess environmental conditions , and reducing information collection and reporting burdens .