to date , the book has not been published . in our august 1996 report , we identified a number of irregularities in the process used to hire the former project manager , set her salary , and collect financial disclosure statements from her and the former assistant project manager . the problems we found with each of these efforts are discussed below . we found no irregularities in the manner in which fcs awarded the contract to global . however , we believe that team nutrition officials acted improperly in assigning tasks under the global contract that were beyond the contract's scope of work . these officials also did not follow normal contracting procedures in dealing with subcontractors under the global contract . federal procurement law requires that an agency conduct a separate procurement when it wishes to acquire services that are beyond the scope of an existing contract . a matter is outside the scope of the original contract when it is materially different from the original purpose or nature of the contract . in our view , team nutrition officials assigned global two tasks — tasks 9 and 10 — under its contract that materially deviated from the original contract's overall scope of work . under its contract with fcs , global was to provide support services to assist team nutrition in conducting a national nutrition education campaign , including the planning and development of educational materials and communication efforts related to nutrition . as we discussed in our may 1996 testimony , task 9 was to conduct focus group research to assess the reactions of the general public and food stamp recipients to usda's proposals to change the food stamp program . we concluded that this work , which cost fcs about $33,000 , was outside the scope of global's support services contract . similarly , task 10 — to evaluate the success of the san francisco county jail's garden project and to develop a guidebook on the project to show other communities how to implement similar programs — has no substantive relationship to nutrition education or the dissemination of sound nutrition information . the garden project is a program to rehabilitate former prisoners by having them grow produce that is either donated to the needy or sold to restaurants . this evaluation , for which fcs has budgeted about $49,000 , differs materially from the subject matter of the global contract , which is to assist fcs in its efforts to provide “effective nutrition education” and to communicate “sound nutrition information.” furthermore , contrary to normal contracting practices , team nutrition officials directed global to hire specific subcontractors and did not give global the opportunity to perform the work itself . generally , once an agency awards a contract , the contractor is responsible for performing the work , either by using its own resources or by hiring a subcontractor . team nutrition officials negotiated directly with five firms to perform work for certain elements of its nutrition education campaign before the five firms signed subcontract agreements with global . representatives from three of these firms also met with the under secretary to discuss their work before any contractual arrangement had been made between these firms and global .