additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . the agency has not implemented many of these options . for example , past studies by groups outside the coast guard have pointed out that lengthening periods between assignment rotations for military personnel could substantially reduce transfer costs , which now amount to more than $60 million a year . the coast guard thinks its current rotation policies are best and does not plan to study the issue further . in addition , using civilian personnel rather than military personnel in administrative support positions could achieve significant cost savings . soon , we will be reporting to this subcommittee on other administrative and support functions that have potential for cost savings . achieving some of these cost - cutting measures will be controversial and difficult , either because they involve a change in the agency's organizational culture or they are not popular with the public . consolidating functions or closing facilities have been identified by previous studies as another option to reduce expenditures . for example , several years ago , the coast guard identified a cost - cutting option involving the consolidation of its training facilities , a move that would have resulted in annual savings of $15 million by closing the facility at petaluma , california . fearing a public outcry by the local community , especially because of the numerous recent closures of military bases in california , the coast guard postponed taking this step . to address situations like this , we recommended that the congress may wish to consider a facility closure approach for the coast guard that is similar to the one the department of defense has used to evaluate base closures . under this approach , an independent commission would be established and given authority to recommend the closure of some of the coast guard's facilities . to date , such a commission has not been established . even if the coast guard is successful in achieving significant cost savings by improving its operating efficiency , the adequacy of this approach alone to meet budget challenges is highly uncertain . as we pointed out in our 1997 report , the agency may have to look beyond efficiency measures for cost - cutting options . our past work examining a cross section of private - sector and public organizations that have faced fiscal constraints similar to the coast guard's has shown that a much broader approach for evaluating potential cost - cutting options is often needed . frequently , these broader assessments have involved a fundamental rethinking of the missions and services performed by the organizations and the sources of their funding . driven largely by the potential magnitude and the impact of the deepwater project on future budgets , the administration has renewed efforts to evaluate the roles and the missions of the coast guard and to push for additional user fees .