the committee was not part of the interdisciplinary team . shortly after the committee was established and during the 6-month period for commenting on the draft tongass forest plan , the congress passed the tongass timber reform act of 1990 . among other things , this act eliminated anilca's special funding provision for maintaining the timber supply from the tongass , limited timber harvesting near certain streams , designated additional wilderness areas within the tongass , and designated 12 additional special management areas in which harvesting timber and building roads is generally prohibited . the act also made nine modifications to the long - term timber sale contracts , including adding provisions to the contracts to prohibit the disproportionate harvest of old - growth timber . why does an agency study and restudy issues without reaching closure ? why does this same agency attempt to do what it says sometimes cannot be done regardless of the time and money invested ? and why does it spend a significant portion of its limited resources on conducting environmental analyses and preparing environmental documents rather than on the apparently more efficient and effective option of monitoring the environmental effects of its decisions ? although the forest service is held accountable for developing forest plans that may be scientifically credible and legally defensible , it is not held accountable for developing them in a timely , orderly , and cost - effective manner . the agency itself pays for the time and costs associated with legal challenges to the scientific credibility and legal defensibility of its decisions , but others bear the costs of its indecision and delays . the american taxpayer bears the financial costs , while the costs associated with the uncertainty of not having an approved forest plan are borne by members of the public who are concerned about maintaining biological diversity but are precluded from forming reasonable expectations about the forest's health over time as well as those who are economically dependent on the tongass but are precluded from forming reasonable expectations about the future availability of the forest's uses . although the forest service has been shifting its emphasis from consumption to conservation on the tongass as well as nationwide , the tongass continues to play an important role in the economy of southeastern alaska , and the forest service retains a responsibility under its multiple - use and sustained - yield mandate to manage the tongass for other uses , including timber . while one long - term contract was terminated and the remaining long - term contract was recently modified to terminate no later than october 2000 , the agency has sold , and will continue to sell , timber from the forest to other companies . moreover , according to the forest service , many communities in southeastern alaska also depend on the tongass to provide natural resources for uses such as fishing , recreation , tourism , mining , and customary and traditional subsistence . however , without an approved revised plan , the communities and companies that are economically dependent on the tongass for goods and services cannot form the reasonable expectations about the future availability of forest uses that they need to plan or to develop long - range investment strategies .