3 and fig . larger airports potential shortfall of $1.5 billion represents 21 percent of their planned development costs , while smaller airports' potential shortfall of $1.4 billion represents 48 percent of their development costs . therefore , while larger and smaller airports' respective shortfalls are similar in size , the greater scale of larger airports' planned development causes them to differ considerably in proportion . figure 4 also indicates that $590 million in aip funding falls $74 million short of the estimated cost to meet faa's highest priorities for development — reconstruction , noise mitigation , and compliance with federal mandates . planned development 1997 through 2001 ( annualized ) . proposals to increase airport funding or make better use of existing funding vary in the extent to which they would help different types of airports and close the gap between funding and the costs of planned development . for example , increasing aip funding would help smaller airports more because current funding formulas would channel an increasing proportion of aip to smaller airports . conversely , any increase in pfc funding would help larger airports almost exclusively because they handle more passengers and are more likely to have a pfc in place . today's testimony focuses on three questions: ( 1 ) how much are airports spending on capital development and what are the sources of these funds ? ( 2 ) if current funding levels continue , how do they compare with airports' plans for development ? and ( 3 ) what effect will various proposals to increase or make better use of existing funding have on airports' ability to fulfill their capital development plans ? in 1998 , we reported that the 3,304 airports that make up the federally supported national airport system obtained about $7 billion from federal and private sources for capital development . the nation's 71 largest airports accounted for nearly 80 percent of the total funding . as a group , these airports are less dependent on federal grants: they received only about 10 percent of their funding from the airport improvement program . more than 90 percent of this funding came from three sources: tax - exempt bonds issued by states and local airport authorities ( $4.1 billion ) , federal grants from the airport improvement program ( $1.4 billion ) , and passenger facility charges paid on airline tickets ( $1.1 billion ) . the magnitude and type of funding varies with airports' size . by contrast , the 3,233 smaller airports in the national airport system relied on the airport improvement program for half of their funding . airports planned to spend as much as $10 billion per year for capital development for the years 1997 through 2001 , or $3 billion per year more than they were able to fund in 1996 . the difference between funding and the costs of planned development is greater for smaller commercial and general aviation airports than for their larger counterparts . smaller airports' funding would cover only about half the costs of their planned development , while larger airports' funding would cover about 4 / 5 of their planned development .