additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . epa plans for all states to have these agreements by fiscal year 1997 . in theory , the use of these agreements to increase state input and flexibility could improve epa's relations with its state partners and reduce the costs of implementing federal environmental programs . it is difficult to assess the effectiveness of the performance agreements thus far because implementation began only recently . as of february 1996 , 5 agreements have been completed ; 12 others are under discussion . one problem that epa and the states likely face with the agreements is that current law imposes requirements on epa that , at times , are inconsistent with the states' priorities . in our may 1995 testimony , we stated that providing epa with greater flexibility to integrate environmental requirements represents a key approach to reconciling state and federal environmental concerns . as we pointed out in our april 1995 report , many state officials believe that epa dominates the federal - state relationship , frequently imposing federal mandates over the states' priorities , routinely second - guessing the states' decisions , dictating the programs' activities , and failing to involve the states in major policy decisions . epa is charged with implementing these statutes and their associated regulations . epa , in turn , has delegated a growing number of its responsibilities to the states . since the 1970s , states have expressed concerns about the burden of epa's oversight and reporting requirements and the lack of flexibility in federal requirements to deal with local problems . these concerns have been exacerbated as the states have been given greater responsibility without a commensurate increase in federal assistance . the statutes , regulations , and requirements that epa places on the states are generally medium - specific . that is , a different set of statutory , regulatory , and epa requirements is generally established to protect the air , water , and land , often without adequate consideration of the impact of one set of requirements on another . the integrated environmental management concept allows the states the flexibility to manage their activities across programs or media to establish priorities and achieve efficiencies . they would also include new performance measures to simplify reporting requirements , while ensuring continued environmental protection .