, would not be eligible . eliminate or reduce the eligibility of facilities when the lack of reasonable pre - disaster maintenance contributes to the scope of the damage from a disaster . eliminate the eligibility of the credit toward the local share of the costs of public assistance for volunteer labor and donated equipment and material . increase the percentage of damage required for fema to replace a structure ( rather than repair it ) to a threshold higher than the current 50 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 6015 gaithersburg , md 20884-6015 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 301 ) 258-4066 , or tdd ( 301 ) 413-0006 . eliminate funding from fema for some water control projects . limit funding for permanent restoration to the eligible cost of upgrading only the parts of structures damaged by the disaster . ( applicants would bear the expense of upgrading undamaged parts of the structures. ) eliminate the eligibility of publicly owned facilities that are being rented out to generate income . for example , facilities owned by local governments and rented to the private sector for use as warehouses , restaurants , stadiums , etc. the national emergency management association proposed that considerable savings in the federal costs of public assistance could be realized by reducing the federal administrative structures . the association also endorsed for further consideration the following options , identified but not most strongly recommended by fema respondents: eliminate the eligibility of postdisaster “beach renourishment,” such as pumping sand from the ocean to reinforce the beach . limit the scope of emergency work to the legislative intent . ( the association believes that assistance for debris removal and emergency protective measures has been used for permanent repairs. ) eliminate the eligibility of revenue - producing recreational facilities , eg , golf courses and swimming pools . clearer and more comprehensive criteria ( supplemented with specific examples ) that are systematically disseminated could help ensure that eligibility determinations are consistent and equitable and could help control the costs of future public assistance . to the extent that the criteria are more restrictive , the costs of public assistance in the future could be less than they would otherwise be . in the 1990s , the potential adverse effects of a lack of clear criteria have become more significant because of ( 1 ) an increase in large , severe disasters and ( 2 ) the need to use temporary employees with limited training in the process of inspecting damage and preparing damage survey reports . further limited assurance is provided by audits . when fema approves a dsr , it obligates an amount equal to the estimated federal share of the project's cost . the obligation makes these funds available to the state to draw upon as needed by the subgrantees . if a subgrantee wishes to modify a project after a dsr is approved , or experiences cost overruns , it must apply through the state to fema for an amended or new dsr .