additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . faa has three separate efforts under way . first , faa is developing a standardized model for conducting airport vulnerability assessments , as the commission recommended . faa is working with several companies that are using different models for assessing the vulnerabilities at 14 major airports . faa has established a panel to review the assessment results and to select the best model for assessing a facility's vulnerabilities . the agency plans to make this model available to airlines and airports in march 1999 . although some delays have occurred in starting the assessments , they have not been significant . second , to address the reauthorization act's requirement for faa and the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) to jointly assess threats and vulnerabilities at high - risk airports , faa and fbi officials conducted their first assessment in december 1997 . in february 1998 , faa officials said they would begin conducting one to two assessments each month . the results of the joint assessments will be used for comparing threats and vulnerabilities at different airports . by having both threat and vulnerability information , faa and fbi officials should be able to determine which airports and which areas of airports present the highest risks . faa and fbi have agreed to a schedule for assessing 31 airports considered to be high - risk candidates by the end of calendar year 1999 . the reauthorization act , however , called for the initial assessments to be completed by october 9 , 1999 . the schedule faa and fbi agreed to calls for their reviews at 28 of the 31 airports to be completed by this date . third , the reauthorization act mandates that faa require airports and air carriers to conduct periodic vulnerability assessments . faa plans to require that airports and air carriers incorporate periodic assessments into their individual security programs . however , faa stated that before implementing this change , it intends to make the standardized model that it is developing available to both airports and air carriers for use in conducting these assessments . faa is a year behind schedule in deploying this equipment . these delays have been caused , in part , by the inexperience of the contractor hired to install the equipment and the ongoing or planned construction projects that must be completed before the equipment can be installed at certain airports . by december 1997 , faa originally planned to deploy 54 certified explosives detection systems to screen checked bags and 489 trace detection devices to screen passengers' carry - on bags at major airports . this area is one that recently has seen a substantial increase in funding . however , as of the end of april 1998 , faa had deployed only 21 of the certified explosives detection systems and only about 250 of the trace detection devices . faa now plans to have all of them installed and operational by december 1998 . at that time , still only a limited number of airports and a fraction of the flying public would be covered .