the plan . the listing may also prohibit the agency from implementing projects under the plans that may affect the species until the new round of consultations has been completed . for example , recent federal court decisions required the forest service to reinitiate consultations on several approved forest plans after a species of salmon in the pacific northwest and a species of owl in the southwest were listed as threatened under the endangered species act . the courts' rulings prohibited the agency from implementing projects under the plans that might affect the species until the new rounds of consultations with the fish and wildlife service and / or the national marine fisheries service had been completed . additionally , through differing judicial interpretations of the same statutory requirements , the courts have established conflicting requirements . for example , three federal circuit courts of appeals have held that the approval of a forest plan represents a decision that can be judicially challenged and prohibited from being implemented . conversely , two other federal circuit courts of appeals have held that a forest plan does not represent a decision and that only a project can be judicially challenged , at which time the adequacy of the plan's treatment of larger - scale environmental issues arising in the project can be reconsidered . requirements to consider new information and events , coupled with differing judicial interpretations of the same statutory requirements , have made it difficult for the forest service and other federal agencies to predict when any given decision can be considered final and can be implemented . agency officials perceive that the same issues are recycled under different planning and environmental laws rather than resolved in a timely manner . in addition , environmental laws generally address individual resources , such as endangered and threatened species , water , and air . conversely , planning statutes generally establish objectives for multiple resources , such as sustaining diverse plant and animal communities , securing favorable water flow conditions , and preserving wilderness . these different approaches to achieving similar environmental objectives have sometimes been difficult for the forest service and other federal agencies to reconcile , at least in the short term . for example , prescribed burning to restore the forests' health and to sustain diverse plant and animal communities may be appropriate under the national forest management act but may be difficult to reconcile in the short term with air quality standards under the clean air act . in march 1995 , the secretary of agriculture pledged to work with the congress to identify statutory changes to improve the processes for implementing the forest service's mission . however , neither his analysis nor options for changing the current statutory framework suggested by the forest service in 1995 have been sent to the congress . administration officials have said that they are hesitant to suggest changes to the procedural requirements of planning and environmental laws because they believe that the congress may also make substantive changes to the laws with which they would disagree .