additional copies are $2 each . orders should be sent to the following address , accompanied by a check or money order made out to the superintendent of documents , when necessary . visa and mastercard credit cards are accepted , also . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . the proposed bill does not specify details about how dot should implement this process . because of the sensitivities in making any reallocations , dot would need to carefully consider balancing the goals of increasing competition with fair treatment of affected parties . the bill also addresses the perimeter rule by requiring the secretary of transportation to grant exemptions to the existing 1,250 mile limit at washington national airport under certain circumstances . there are legitimate concerns about whether or not exemptions to the rule would negatively affect the noise , congestion , and safety at washington national , as well as air service to and from different communities within the perimeter . the bill addresses these concerns by specifying that only stage 3 aircraft ( aircraft that meet faa's most stringent noise standards ) can be used and that exemptions would not be allowed to affect the number of hourly commercial operations at national airport . the bill further specifies that the secretary certify that whenever exemptions to the rule are granted , noise , congestion , and safety will not deteriorate relative to their 1997 levels . the secretary must similarly certify that air service to communities within the existing perimeter will not worsen . finally , the bill also contains a provision intended to limit the time that dot has to respond to complaints of predatory behavior . as we noted previously , because of its concerns in this area , dot plans to announce a policy that will more clearly delineate the factors it will consider in pursuing remedies through formal enforcement actions . because a variety of factors has contributed to higher fares and poorer service that some small and medium - sized communities in the east and upper midwest have experienced since deregulation , a coordinated effort involving federal , regional , local , and private - sector initiatives may be needed . in addition to dot's planned actions and the proposed legislation , several public and private initiatives that are currently under way , as well as other potential options , are discussed below . if successful , these initiatives would complement , and potentially encourage , the increasing use of small jets by the commuter affiliates of established airlines — a trend that has the potential for increasing competition and improving the quality of service for some communities .