the geographical distribution of sbir awards . our statement highlights the message of that report . in summary , mr. chairman: it appears that agencies have adhered to the act's funding requirements . agency program officials reported that they are not using sbir funds to pay for administrative costs of the program such as salaries and support services used to process awards . the program officials also believe that they are adhering to the statutory requirement to fund the program at 2.5 percent of agencies' extramural research budget . however , some officials believe that agencies are using different interpretations of the “extramural budget” definition , which may lead to incorrect calculations of their extramural research budgets . in our report , we recommended that the small business administration provide additional guidance to the participating agencies on how to calculate their “extramural budgets.” the small business administration concurred with our recommendation . of the five agencies that we reviewed , only two — nsf and nasa — have conducted audits of their extramural budgets . in 1997 , the office of inspector general at nsf conducted an audit of the agency's extramural budget and found that it contained over $100 million of unallowable costs such as training and overhead . dod , nih , and doe have not conducted any audits of their extramural r&d budgets nor do they have plans to conduct any audits in the near future . while most of the sbir officials we interviewed said that neither the application review process nor current funding cycles have had an adverse effect on award recipients' financial status or ability to commercialize , some recipients have said that any interruption in funding awards , for whatever reason , affects them negatively . in response to these concerns over the continuity of funding , most of the participating sbir agencies have established programs to minimize funding gaps . companies responding to gao's and dod's surveys of award recipients reported that approximately 50 percent of their projects had sales of products or services related to the research or received additional developmental funding after receiving sbir funding . in both surveys , approximately 35 percent of the projects had resulted in sales of products or services , and approximately 45 percent of the projects received additional developmental funding . orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent . u.s. general accounting office p.o . box 37050 washington , dc 20013 room 1100 700 4th st. nw ( corner of 4th and g sts . nw ) u.s. general accounting office washington , dc orders may also be placed by calling ( 202 ) 512-6000 or by using fax number ( 202 ) 512-6061 , or tdd ( 202 ) 512-2537 . each day , gao issues a list of newly available reports and testimony . to receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days , please call ( 202 ) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone . a recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists .