section 202 of the social security act states that benefits are paid through the month before the month in which a beneficiary dies .

thus , no benefits are paid for the month of death .

this rule has been in the law since 1939 .

the rule does not apply to medicare , which provides benefits up to the date of death .

social security benefits are paid on a monthly basis .

the check ( or direct bank deposit ) for each month's benefit is issued in the following month .

for example , the check that an individual receives in february is the benefit payable for january .

this is referred to as a retrospective payment system .

if a beneficiary dies late in the month , family members or the executor of the estate may not notify the social security administration ( ssa ) in time to stop the payment .

subsequently , they are informed that the check must be returned to the government .

members of congress are asked often to support legislation that would provide a full or partial benefit payment for the month of death .

the following section presents common arguments for and against paying social security benefits for the month of death .

critics of the current policy argue that withholding benefits for the month of death does not make sense .

they maintain that a person's bills do not stop at the beginning of the month in which they die .

moreover , the deceased beneficiary's family members or estate have to pay funeral and burial expenses .

the unfairness of the policy is often illustrated with a comparison of the individual who dies on the last day of the month and receives no benefit for that month , and the individual who dies at 12:05 a.m. the next day and receives a full benefit for the preceding month .

critics complain that the current policy is cruel in that it adversely affects individuals who are already distressed by the death of a family member .

they find the circumstances in which a check must be returned to the government to be the most incomprehensible .

persons who are affected often ask questions such as do you mean my father ( or mother ) had to live each day of their final month to get a benefit for that month ? .

why are family members placed at a disadvantage when a beneficiary dies at the end of the month after having incurred living expenses throughout most of the month ? .

how could the government have established such a policy ? .

critics contend that the public views the policy as an anomaly — as a mistake in the design of the social security system .

if the policy was intended to reduce the cost of the system , they see it as a "poor" device to do so .

they argue that the policy discredits the system by creating the impression that it is arbitrary , unbending , and thoughtlessly bureaucratic .

they maintain that benefits should be paid at least for the part of the month that the beneficiary was alive .

supporters of the current policy argue that paying benefits for the month of death would be costly .

ssa estimates that paying full benefits for the month of death would cost $1.6 billion annually .

alternatively , paying 50% of the benefit if the beneficiary dies in the first half of the month , and a full benefit if the beneficiary dies in the second half of the month , would cost an estimated $1.2 billion annually .

pro - rating the benefit based on the number of days the beneficiary was alive during the final month would cost an estimated $800 million annually .

ssa also estimated the increase in benefit payments under a proposal in which ( 1 ) a full benefit for the month of death would be payable to a surviving spouse ( the surviving spouse would not be required to have been living with the beneficiary when the death occurred or to be entitled to benefits ) , or ( 2 ) if there is no surviving spouse , a pro - rated benefit based on the number of days the beneficiary was alive during the final month would be payable .

ssa estimated that the proposal would increase benefit payments by $13.2 billion over 10 years ( 2004-2013 ) .

supporters of the current policy also point out that the system pays benefits to an individual beginning with his or her first month of entitlement , regardless of when entitlement began during the month , and that this provides rough balance in the system for not paying benefits for the month of death .

moreover , survivor benefits are payable to eligible family members beginning with the deceased beneficiary's month of death , regardless of when the death occurred during the month .

in addition , the spouse who was living with the worker , or a spouse or child eligible for survivor benefits , may receive a social security lump - sum death payment of $255 .

they contend that there is little appreciation for the administrative difficulties ( and potential costs ) involved in determining who should receive the deceased beneficiary's benefit for the month of death .

because ssa cannot simply mail a check to the deceased beneficiary , ssa would have to determine who should receive the payment .

given that more than 2 million beneficiaries die each year , this would require a labor - intensive process , similar to the taking of regular benefit applications .

each case would have to be investigated , and if there are multiple family members , the payment may have to be split .

careful attention would have to be given to determining the proper payee ( s ) in each case .

