each house of the united states congress is expressly authorized within the constitution to "punish" its own members for misconduct , and the senate has exercised this authority in the past by imposing formal "censures," imposing restitution costs , and by expelling senators from the senate .

in imposing legislative discipline against their members , the senate and the house operate through their rulemaking powers , and the express provision for legislative discipline is specifically set out within the clause of the constitution establishing the rulemaking authority of each house of congress , at article i , section 5 , clause 2: each house may determine the rules of its proceedings , punish its members for disorderly behaviour , and , with the concurrence of two thirds , expel a member .

the underlying justification for legislative discipline has traditionally been to protect the integrity and dignity of the legislative institution and its proceedings , rather than merely to punish an individual ; and such internal legislative process is additional to any potential criminal or civil liability that a member might incur for any particular misconduct .

senators are subject to internal , congressional discipline for any conduct which the institution of the senate believes warrants such discipline .

the express constitutional authority drafted by the framers of the constitution was influenced by british parliamentary practice , as well as our own colonial legislative experiences , and reflects the principle and understanding that although the qualifications of members of congress were intentionally kept to a minimum to allow the voters the broadest discretion in sending whomever they please to represent them in congress , the senate and the house have the right to discipline those who breach their privileges or decorum , or who damage their integrity or reputation , even to the extent of expelling from congress a duly - elected member .

on several occasions , senate committees to whom censure or expulsion resolutions were referred have recommended certain discipline to the full body , but either the senate took no action , adjourned prior to consideration ( and the member was defeated in a subsequent election ) , the member resigned before senate action , or the senate simply did not act upon the particular recommendation or resolution .

additionally , it should be noted that the senate has delegated to the select committee on ethics the authority to investigate any "improper conduct" of a senator or employee "which may reflect upon the senate," and to recommend to the senate appropriate disciplinary action .

as part of the authority delegated to it , the senate select committee on ethics may issue , and has in the past issued , "a private or public letter of admonition" on the committee's own accord , without further senate action .

the focus of this report , however , is upon those disciplinary actions which were taken by the full senate against members .

expulsion is the form of action whereby the senate ( or the house ) , after a member has taken the oath of office , removes that senator ( or representative , in the case of the house ) from membership in the respective body by a vote of at least two - thirds of the members present and voting .

the authority to expel a member is expressly provided for in the constitution at article i , section 5 , clause 2 .

this grant of authority within the constitution for each house of congress to expel a member appears to have been influenced by the parliamentary practice in england whereby members of the house of commons were expelled , regardless of the nature or timing of the offense , as a disciplinary action , as well as a remedial measure to deal with those deemed "unworthy" or "unfit" for membership .

the term "censure," unlike the term "expel," does not appear in the constitution , although the authority is derived from the same clause in the constitution at article i , section 5 , clause 2 , concerning the authority of each house of congress to "punish its members for disorderly behaviour. .

the standing orders of the senate provide that the select committee on ethics may recommend to the senate disciplinary action against a member "including , but not limited to , in the case of a member: censure , expulsion , or recommendation to the appropriate party conference regarding such member's seniority or positions of responsibility ...." a "censure" in the senate has traditionally meant the "punishment" imposed by the senate when the full body formally disapproves of conduct or behavior of a member by way of the adoption , by majority vote , of a resolution expressing such condemnation or disapproval .

under senate rules , no forfeiture of rights or privileges automatically follows a "censure" by the senate , but the individual political party caucus or conference rules in the senate may have relevance to party and committee leadership positions .

the term "censure" is used to describe the formal action of the senate adopting a resolution expressing the body's "censure," "condemnation," "denouncement," or general disapproval of a member's conduct even when the word "censure" is not expressly included in the language of the resolution .

in the two earliest senate censure cases cited by historians and parliamentarians , the resolutions finally adopted by the senate did not use any specific term of disapproval , such as "censure," "condemn," or "denounce," but merely stated the relevant findings and the conclusion that senator pickering , in 1811 , "committed a violation of the rules of this body" ; and that senator tappan , in 1844 , was "guilty of a flagrant violation of the rules of the senate and disregard of its authority. .

during the floor discussion of the 1844 censure it was stated by a member of the select committee examining the matter that the use of no express word of disapproval in the previous censure resolution of senator pickering in 1811 was "evidently designed as a mild form of censure. .

senators bingham of connecticut , in 1929 , and mccarthy of wisconsin , in 1954 , were "condemned" by the full senate in a resolution ; while the resolutions adopted in the cases of senators mclaurin and tillman of south carolina , in 1902 , and thomas dodd of connecticut , in 1967 , used the term "censure. .

senator talmadge in 1979 , and senator durenberger in 1990 , were "denounced" in the resolutions adopted by the senate .

there is no precedent in the senate for the full senate to vote a resolution "reprimanding" a member for misconduct , nor for any committee to recommend that the senate "reprimand" a senator , although such an action has been considered by the senate and by at least one committee to which a disciplinary case was referred .

in the censure case of the late senator thomas dodd , senator tower introduced an amendment to substitute the word "reprimand" for that of "censure" in the resolution .

senator tower argued that this "would give us the opportunity to express our displeasure , our disapproval , and our disassociation , but at the same time avoid the severity of censure , which ... is one of the most severe penalties that we could impose. .

senator stennis , the chairman of the select committee on standards and conduct , argued against using the term "reprimand," contending that term had no historical context in senate procedure and thus was without meaning in the senate , and arguing that the term "censure" was appropriate to the facts and was less severe than using the term "condemn": mr. stennis .

.. .

the matter was given as careful consideration as our capacity on the subject permitted ; and we found that , uniformly , the legislative history of the united states had tended , for serious matters , always to use the word "censure" or the word "condemn" .

we found that there was some precedent , in the house of representatives , in connection with the use of the word "reprimand," after passing a resolution of censure , to require the member to present himself at the bar of the house and be publicly reprimanded there by the speaker .

*** [i]t has been the custom in the house of representatives in a censure resolution to require the member of the house , if he is so censured by resolution , to come down before the bar and be publicly "reprimanded" by word of mouth by the speaker .

however , that has never been done in the senate .

we did not like the idea of doing that .

*** members of the senate , i will put this in this way , as to what we found as to the meaning of "reprimand" in legislative parlance .

it just does not mean anything .

it means what you might call just a slap on the wrist .

it does not carry any weight .

*** we looked and looked and looked , and we feel certain that our research was complete , and therefore we totally rejected , for the reason i have given , the mild legislative word "reprimand," which has no meaning or means nothing more than just a disapproval , and put in the word "censure," which we thought was the mildest of the words that have a legislative meaning , and would carry the idea of the senate taking a stand with reference to the matter .

in the case of senators tillman and mclaurin who were "censured" by the full senate in 1902 for fighting on the floor of the senate , the committee to whom the matter was referred considered the options for the senate , including a "reprimand" of the members which it considered "only a more formal reiteration [of an earlier contempt vote and] .. not sufficiently severe," found that the conduct should be "condemned" by the senate and recommended a resolution which "censured" the members .

the committee explained: the senate may punish the senators from south carolina by fine , by reprimand , by imprisonment , by suspension by majority vote , or by expulsion with the concurrence of two - thirds of its members .

the offense is well stated in the majority report .

it is not grave enough to require expulsion .

a reprimand would be too slight a punishment .

the senate by a yea - and - nay vote has unanimously resolved that the said senators are in contempt .

a reprimand is in effect only a more formal reiteration of that vote .

it is not sufficiently severe upon consideration of the facts .

prior to the 1970s in the house of representatives , although there were some inconsistencies , the terms "reprimand" and "censure" were often considered synonymous and used together in a resolution .

in 1921 , for example , a resolution adopted by the house instructed the speaker to summon representative blanton of texas to the bar of the house "and deliver to him its reprimand and censure" .

more recently , however , there has come to be a distinction in the house whereby it is considered that a "reprimand" involves a lesser level of disapproval of the conduct of a member than that of a "censure" , and is thus a less severe rebuke by the institution .

procedurally in the house , a "censure" resolution will generally instruct the member to go to the well of the house and for the speaker of the house to read the resolution as a verbal castigation of the member .

in the case of a "reprimand," however , the resolution is merely adopted by a vote of the house .

such procedures are not relevant to the senate which merely adopts a censure resolution and does not require a member to "go to the well" for a verbal rebuke .

a resolution which is adopted by a formal vote of the senate using the word "reprimand" would thus have the same effect and be governed by the same procedures as a "censure" in the senate , and might thus possibly be considered as a "distinction without a difference" in the senate and , technically , a form of "censure" as have been the recent "denouncements" in the senate .

a resolution which uses the word "reprimand" in the senate , although without historical precedent , might , however , be publicly perceived as similar to the modern house practice , that is , a minor rebuke , and may arguably be seen by the public as a lesser form of institutional disapproval or discipline than would the use of the words "condemn," "censure," or "denounce. .

although not a disciplinary action employed by the full senate , the select committee on ethics may issue , and has issued a "reprimand" or other similar form of rebuke , in a report or in a letter to a particular member , which is not voted upon by the full senate .

the senate select committee on ethics issued such a "reprimand" in a report concerning senator cranston and the so - called "keating five" investigations in 1991 .

the committee found that the senator's conduct "deserves the fullest , strongest and most severe sanction which the committee has the authority to impose" and therefore the committee "does hereby strongly and severely reprimand" the senator .

the committee reprimand was reported to the full senate , and discussion was taken on the senate floor regarding the committee's action , but no formal senate action was required or taken by the full body .

under the current rules governing the senate select committee on ethics , the committee may "dispose of" an ethics matter by issuing a "letter of admonition" after a preliminary inquiry ( or after an adjudicatory review ) if the committee determines that a violation is "inadvertent , technical , or otherwise of a de minimis nature," and that such public or private letter "shall not be considered discipline. .

expulsions in the united states senate , as well as in the house of representatives , have been generally reserved for the most serious misconduct of a member of congress , historically concerning disloyalty to the government , or the conviction ( or evidence ) of an offense involving official corruption and / or the abuse of one's official position in congress .

other than expulsion , a formal "censure" by the senate is the strongest statement of disapproval and rebuke that the senate , as an institution , invokes upon one of its members .

it may be possible that in addition to a formal censure the senate may also require financial restitution from a member , limit a particular privilege of a member , or under current practice , recommend to the appropriate party conference the diminution of seniority status of a senator .

although there is no specific disability that automatically follows a censure by the senate , the public reprobation and formal rebuke by one's peers in the senate may have arguably contributed to the unsuccessful reelection efforts of senators subject to censure in recent times .

the action of the full united states senate formally adopting , by a vote requiring the majority of members present and voting , a resolution disapproving of a senator's conduct is considered by parliamentarians and historians as a "censure" of that member .

there is no precise , technical requirement concerning the required words in a resolution of censure , nor is there an official "hierarchy" or ranking of terms employed in such a resolution .

the senate has thus "censured" its members by way of a resolution "condemning" , "censuring" or "denouncing" the member or the conduct of the member , as well as by way of resolutions which do not include any express term of opprobrium .

in practice and perception , however , although there is no official ranking or officially recognized hierarchy of terms employed , it may be contended that the connotation of the verb "condemn" in a censure resolution is more severe than the term "censure," based in large part on the association of the term "condemn" with the discipline imposed by the senate on the late senator joseph mccarthy ; while the connotation of the term "denounce" in a censure resolution may be one of a less severe form of "censure" because of extenuating or mitigating circumstances that have been recognized in past disciplinary actions adopting that particular term .

the authority and grounds for censure extend to misconduct which may or may not violate an express statute or a written senate ethics rule .

the full senate has thus censured members when the conduct was found to be contrary to "acceptable norms of ethical conduct in the senate" , contrary to "good" or "accepted morals" and "senatorial ethics" , to "derogate from the public trust expected of a senator" , and / or to be "reprehensible" conduct which brings the senate into "dishonor and disrepute. .

