since the creation of the modern u.s. intelligence community after world war ii , neither congress nor the executive branch has made public the total extent of intelligence spending except for two fiscal years in the 1990s .

rather , intelligence programs and personnel have largely been contained , but not identified , within the capacious expanse of the budget of the department of defense ( dod ) .

this practice has long been criticized by proponents of open government .

the intelligence reform effort of the mid - 1970s that led to greater involvement of congress in the oversight of the intelligence community also generated a number of proposals to make public the amounts spent on intelligence activities .

many observers subsequently argued that the end of the cold war further reduced the need to keep secret the aggregate amount of intelligence spending .

according to this view , with the dissolution of the soviet union , there are few foreign countries that can take advantage of information about trends in u.s. intelligence spending to develop effective countermeasures .

terrorist organizations , it is argued , lack the capability of exploiting total intelligence spending data .

in recent years , proposals for making public overall totals of intelligence spending have come under renewed consideration .

in 1991 and 1992 legislation was enacted that stated the "sense of the congress" that "the aggregate amount requested and authorized for , and spent on , intelligence and intelligence - related activities should be disclosed to the public in an appropriate manner. .

nevertheless , both the house and the senate voted in subsequent years not to require a release of intelligence spending data .

during the clinton administration , director of central intelligence ( dci ) george tenet twice took the initiative to release total figures for appropriations for intelligence and intelligence - related activities .

despite the release of data for fiscal years 1997 and 1998 , however , no subsequent appropriations levels have been made public .

the issue has not , however , died .

the 9 / 11 commission , in its final report , recommended that "the overall amounts [or the "top line"] of money being appropriated for national intelligence and to its component agencies should no longer be kept secret .

congress should pass a separate appropriations act for intelligence , defending the broad allocation of how these tens of billions of dollars have been assigned among the varieties of intelligence work. .

a number of proposals for intelligence reform legislation in 2004 included provisions for making the budget public , but the legislation ultimately enacted as the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-458 ) [hereafter referred to as the intelligence reform act] did not include provisions for making budget numbers public .

more recently , the fy2007 intelligence authorization legislation ( s. 372 ) reported in the senate in january 2007 would require publication of budget totals for national , but not tactical , intelligence programs .

this report describes the constituent parts of the intelligence budget , past practice in handling intelligence authorizations and appropriations , the arguments that have been advanced for and against making intelligence spending totals public , a legal analysis of these issues , and a review of the implications of post - cold war developments on the question .

it also describes past congressional interest in keeping intelligence spending totals secret .

the meaning of the term "intelligence budget" is not easily described .

although some may assume it is equivalent to the budget of the central intelligence agency , in actuality it encompasses a wide variety of agencies and functions in various parts of the federal government that are involved in intelligence collection , analysis , and dissemination .

at the same time , some important information collection efforts ( such as reporting by u.s. embassies to the state department ) are not considered as intelligence activities and their funding is not included in the intelligence budget .

a further complication , to be addressed below , is the separate category of intelligence - related activities undertaken in dod that are included in overall intelligence spending categories .

for some purposes , it is sufficient to describe intelligence and intelligence - related activities as those authorized by annual intelligence authorization acts .

in the context of annual budget reviews , both the executive branch and congress have sought a comprehensive overview of all intelligence collection systems and activities .

thus , there emerged the concept of an intelligence community , not a monolithic organization but a grouping of governmental entities ranging in size from the cia and nsa down to the small intelligence offices of the treasury and energy departments .

except for the cia , this community consists of components that are integral parts of agencies that are not themselves part of the intelligence community and their budgets are subject to separate authorization processes .

thus , for instance , the state department's bureau of intelligence and research is both part of the intelligence community and an organizational component of the department of state .

its budget is considered as part of the overall intelligence budget and as a component of the state department budget .

similar situations apply , on a much larger and expensive scale , in the defense department .

since these intelligence components are closely tied to their parent departments and share facilities and administrative structure with them , it is not always possible to desegregate intelligence and non - intelligence costs with precision .

for the purposes of this discussion , the u.s. "intelligence budget" is considered to consist of those activities authorized by the annual intelligence authorization acts , viz .

the intelligence and intelligence - related activities of the following elements of the united states government: ( 1 ) the central intelligence agency ( cia ) ; ( 2 ) the national security agency ( nsa ) ; ( 3 ) the defense intelligence agency ( dia ) ; ( 4 ) the national geospatial - intelligence agency ( nga ) ( formerly the national imagery and mapping agency ( nima ) ) ; ( 5 ) the national reconnaissance office ( nro ) ; ( 6 ) the intelligence elements of the army , navy , air force , and the marine corps ( 7 ) the state department's bureau of intelligence and research ( inr ) ; ( 8 ) the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) ; ( 9 ) the department of homeland security ( dhs ) ; ( 10 ) the coast guard ; ( 11 ) the department of the treasury ; ( 12 ) the department of energy ; ( 13 ) the drug enforcement administration ( dea ) .

the parameters of the intelligence budget are , to some extent , arbitrary .

lines between intelligence and other types of information - gathering efforts can be fine .

as noted earlier , reporting by the state department's foreign service officers is an invaluable adjunct to intelligence collection , but is not considered an intelligence activity .

similarly , some reconnaissance and surveillance activities , mostly conducted in dod , are very closely akin to intelligence , but for administrative or historical reasons have never been considered as being intelligence or intelligence - related activities per se .

the intelligence budget as authorized by congress is now divided into two parts , the national intelligence program ( nip ) and the military intelligence program ( mip ) .

nip programs ( formerly categorized as the national foreign intelligence program ( nfip ) ) are those undertaken in support of national - level decision making and are conducted by the cia , dia , nsa , the nro , nga , and other washington - area agencies .

mip programs are those undertaken by dod agencies in support of defense policymaking and of military commanders throughout the world .

until september , 2005 , there were two sets of programs within dod — the joint military intelligence program ( jmip ) and tactical intelligence and related activities ( tiara ) .

jmip programs , established as a separate category in 1994 , supported dod - wide activities .

tiara programs were defined as "a diverse array of reconnaissance and target acquisition programs which are a functional part of the basic military force structure and provide direct support to military operations. .

in recent years the overlap among intelligence and intelligence - related activities has grown — satellite photography , for instance , can now be made immediately available to tactical commanders and intelligence acquired at the tactical level is frequently transmitted to national - level agencies .

as a result , jmip and tiara were combined by the defense department into the mip in september 2005 .

within the mip are programs that formerly constituted the jmip that support dod - wide intelligence efforts as well as programs directly supporting military operations that were formerly categorized as tiara .

the relationship of intelligence - related programs to regular intelligence programs is a complex one that is not likely to be understood by many public observers .

in 1994 , then - dci r. james woolsey described them as a "loose amalgamation of activities that may vary from year to year , depending on how the various military services decide what constitutes tactical intelligence. .

intelligence - related programs , which may constitute somewhere around a third of total intelligence spending , are integral parts of defense programs ; in many cases they are also supported by non - intelligence personnel and facilities .

 ( the administrative expenses , for instance , of a military base that has intelligence - related missions as well as non - intelligence functions would probably not be included in intelligence accounts. ) .

the role of intelligence - related programs is sometimes misinterpreted in public discussions of the multi - billion dollar intelligence effort .

with the passage of the intelligence reform act in 2004 , the director of national intelligence ( dni ) has extensive statutory authorities for developing and determining the nip and for presenting it to the president for approval .

the president in turn forwards the nip to congress as part of the annual budget submission in january or february of each year .

the office of the dni ( odni ) serves as the dni's staff for annual budget preparation and submission .

the dni participates in the development of the mip by the secretary of defense .

the under secretary of defense for intelligence ( usd ( i ) ) has the responsibility to "oversee all defense intelligence budgetary matters to ensure compliance with the budget policies issues by the dni for the nip. .

the usd ( i ) also serves as program executive for the mip and supervises coordination during the programming , budgeting , and execution cycles .

thus , in the development of both the nip and the mip essential roles are played by the office of the dni and the office of the usd ( i ) .

the two offices have overlapping responsibilities and close coordination is required .

since the creation of the modern intelligence community in the aftermath of world war ii , intelligence budgets have not been made public .

at the conclusion of hostilities in august 1945 , intelligence activities were transferred from the office of strategic services ( oss ) to the army , navy , and state departments , which assumed responsibility for their funding .

meeting the expenses of the cig , created in 1946 , required the establishment of a "working fund," as noted above , which received allocations from the three departments .

this pattern was continued when the cia was established the following year ( although there may have been relatively few , if any , transfers from the state department ) .

the transfer of appropriated funds was done secretly , reportedly at the insistence of members of congress .

there are several parts of the intelligence budget that are made public .

the costs of the intelligence community management account ( cma ) are specified in annual intelligence authorization acts as are the costs of the cia retirement and disability system ( ciards ) .

the cma includes staff support to the dni role and the ciards covers retirement costs of cia personnel not eligible for participation in the government - wide retirement system .

for fy2005 , $310.4 million was authorized for 310 full - time cma personnel and $239.4 million was authorized for ciards .

in addition , the budget for the state department's bureau of intelligence and research is made public and some , but not all , tactical intelligence programs are identified in unclassified dod budget submissions .

careful scrutiny of officially - published data on intelligence expenditures would not , however , provide a valid sense of the size and content of the intelligence budget .

the church and pike committees both called for public disclosure of the total amounts of each annual intelligence budget .

the then dci , george h.w .

bush , and president ford both appealed to the senate not to proceed with disclosure and the question was referred to the newly created ssci .

after conducting hearings , ssci recommended ( by a one vote margin ) in may 1977 ( s.res .

207 , 95 th congress ) that aggregate amounts appropriated for national foreign intelligence activities for fy1978 be disclosed .

the full senate did not , however , act on this recommendation .

hpsci , established by house rule xlviii after the termination of the pike committee , made an extensive study of the disclosure question .

after conducting hearings in 1978 ( and despite the willingness of then dci stansfield turner to accept disclosure of "a single inclusive budget figure" ) the house committee concluded unanimously that it could find "no persuasive reason why disclosure of any or all amounts of the funds authorized for the intelligence and intelligence - related activities of the government would be in the public interest. .

with the failure of either chamber to take action , the disclosure question receded into the background as efforts ( ultimately unsuccessful ) were underway during the carter administration to draft a legislative charter for the entire intelligence community .

the reagan administration showed markedly less interest in such questions as it launched a major expansion of intelligence activities .

the issue would return during the clinton administration after the end of the cold war and again in the recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission as noted below .

it should be understood that with the establishment of the two intelligence committees in the 1970s , members have been able to review budget figures contained in the classified annexes accompanying reports intelligence authorization bills , although rules of both chambers prevent the divulging of classified information .

an issue that arises in considering whether or not to disclose an aggregate intelligence budget figure is whether the statement and account clause of the united states constitution requires such disclosure .

the pertinent constitutional language is contained in article i , section 9 , clause 7 , which states: no money shall be drawn from the treasury , but in consequence of appropriations made by law ; and a regular statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time .

[emphasis added. .

a brief examination of the history of this language and of the scant case law interpreting the statement and account clause may be of assistance in placing the disclosure issue in context .

the end of the cold war had a significant effect on intelligence budgets .

since the country does not face the relentless challenge of an enemy superpower with its own hostile intelligence services , significant reductions in intelligence spending were enacted and criticisms of the continued need for budgetary secrecy were raised anew .

senator robert kerrey stated in november 1993: "openness is the order of the day , and unless a threat as formidable and as lethal as the old soviet union comes along , our society and government will steadily become more open .

our task is to make intelligence more useful to more americans , not hoard it. .

some also maintained that the alleged failures of intelligence agencies to appreciate the essential fragility of the soviet system or to collect intelligence on the iraqi nuclear capabilities , warrant a significant overhaul and downsizing of collection and analytical efforts .

reductions in defense spending across the board affected intelligence spending in two ways .

first , it was assumed that a smaller military force structure reduced requirements for intelligence infrastructure ; fewer forces would likely require fewer intelligence support personnel .

this argument was countered by some who argued that leaner force structures actually required stronger intelligence support to ensure their most effective and efficient use .

secondly , as the bulk of intelligence funding continued to be "hidden" within the dod budget , reductions in overall defense spending required either proportional reductions in intelligence programs or disproportionate reductions in non - intelligence programs to compensate for maintaining intelligence spending at existing levels .

the latter alternative engendered strong resistance among defense planners already hard pressed to maintain other priority programs .

in short , as defense spending contracted , it became more difficult to launch new intelligence efforts or even to maintain intelligence programs .

this debate over future requirements for intelligence programs was related to ( albeit not identical with ) the continuing controversy over the desirability of public disclosure of intelligence spending levels .

some opposed to existing or higher levels of intelligence spending consider that public knowledge of the high costs of intelligence spending would lead to demands that they be drastically reduced .

efforts to reduce funding levels in intelligence authorization bills are complicated by the question of shared oversight .

in 1991 , there was concern that reductions in fy1992 intelligence programs were reallocated to other defense programs rather than being used to reduce the deficit .

with the end of the cold war , the question of the desirability of making public the extent of the intelligence budget re - emerged in congressional debates and floor votes for the first time since 1975 .

in the consideration of the fy1992 intelligence authorization bill , the ssci reported a bill ( s. 1539 ) that would have mandated disclosure of three different versions of the total intelligence and intelligence - related budget figure: the aggregate amount requested by the president ; the aggregate amount authorized to be appropriated by the conference committee on the intelligence authorization act ; and the aggregate amount actually obligated by the executive branch .

 ( the ssci eschewed publication of the amount appropriated because it doubted "that such a figure could be tallied ... by the time a conference committee issued its report , due to the large number of line - items in which the intelligence appropriation is found. ) .

the senate armed services committee , which received the bill by sequential referral , noted that these requirements represent major departures from past practices of both congress and the executive branch that have "profound implications for the conduct of united states intelligence activities and the formulation of intelligence policy which have not been considered in detail by all of the committees of jurisdiction. .

the armed services committee proposed that the effective date of these provisions be postponed until fy1993 to allow for detailed consideration .

the hpsci version of the bill ( h.r .

2038 ) had no provision relating to public disclosure of the intelligence spending .

the conference committee "while agreeing with the objective of the senate provisions" chose to avoid mandating disclosure by law and stated its hope that the "[intelligence] committees , working with the president , will , in 1993 , be able to make such information available to the american people , whose tax dollars fund these activities , in a manner that does not jeopardize u.s. national security interests. .

section 701 of the final version of the legislation as enacted ( p.l .

102-183 ) stated: it is the sense of congress that , beginning in 1993 , and in each year thereafter , the aggregate amount requested and authorized for , and spent on , intelligence and intelligence - related activities should be disclosed to the public in an appropriate manner .

opposition by the george h.w .

bush administration may have exerted an important influence on the dropping of mandatory disclosures .

bush , himself a former dci who had argued against public disclosure in 1977 , stated upon signing the final version , "because secrecy is indispensable if intelligence activities are to succeed , the funding levels authorized by the act are classified and should remain so. .

this was the administration position , despite the statement by robert gates at his confirmation hearing for the dci position in september 1991 that " ... from my personal perspective — and it's not ultimately my decision , i suppose , but the president's — i don't have any problem with releasing the top line number of the intelligence community budget .

i think we have to think about some other areas as well .

but , as i say , it's controversial. .

the following year , the two intelligence committees were focused on proposals to reorganize the intelligence community and held extensive hearings on the question .

the senate version of the fy1993 intelligence authorization bill ( s. 2991 ) included the same "sense of congress" provision that had previously appeared in the fy1992 legislation .

although the house version ( h.r .

5095 ) again did not contain a similar provision , the conference committee included the senate provision ( as section 303 in the final version ) and there was no dissent among conferees who "reiterate[d] their hope that the intelligence committees , working with the president , will , in 1993 , be able to make available to the american people , in a manner that does not jeopardize u.s. national security interests , the total amounts of funding for intelligence and intelligence - related activities. .

in the midst of the election campaign president bush signed the legislation ( p.l .

102-496 ) on october 24 , 1992 , without comment .

with the advent of the clinton administration in january 1993 , some observers believed that the question would be revisited with a different conclusion .

senator howard metzenbaum , a member of the ssci , wrote to the president on february 24 , 1993 , urging the public disclosure of the intelligence budget .

woolsey , the newly appointed dci , testified to hpsci on march 9 , 1993 , of his concerns regarding making the intelligence budget public: there is no electronic or data fence around the united states or around american citizens .

disclosing that [intelligence spending levels] and the ensuing debate publicly means disclosing it to the people overseas who [ sic ] we target our intelligence assets on .

my real sense of skepticism about this derives principally from the fact that coming forth with a single number communicates really nothing until one knows what goes into the number ; and , therefore , proposals either to reduce or to increase that number would require a public debate .

in such a debate , it is inconceivable to me that we wouldn't release information and details as the public and the congress debated these issues in public and that would be damaging .

clinton himself responded to metzenbaum on march 27 asking for the opportunity to "evaluate both the benefits and legitimate concerns which are associated such public disclosure. .

the house version of the fy1994 intelligence authorization bill ( h.r .

2330 ) contained no provision regarding public disclosure , but for the first time in three years the senate version ( s. 1301 ) also lacked such a provision .

according to senator arlen specter , the provision was not included "on the expectation that there would be a stronger resolution compelling disclosure. .

on august 4 , 1993 , the house , considering h.r .

2330 under an open rule , debated an amendment offered by representative barney frank mandating disclosure of "the aggregate amounts requested and authorized for , and spent on , intelligence and intelligence - related activities" beginning in 1995 .

the amendment failed on a vote of 169-264 .

many of those who voted for the frank amendment supported other amendments aimed at reducing the size of the intelligence budget and many observers hoped or feared , depending on their point of view , that making the budget public would lead to public demands for spending cuts .

this view was not , however , universal .

in the senate an amendment to the fy1994 defense appropriation bill ( h.r .

3116 ) was introduced on october 18 , 1993 , by senator daniel p. moynihan to require "a separate , unclassified statement of the aggregate amount of budget outlays for the prior fiscal year for national and tactical intelligence activities .

this figure shall include , without limitation , outlays for activities carried out under the department of defense budget to collect , analyze , produce , disseminate or support the collection of intelligence. .

although senator moynihan , a critic of the intelligence community who had also introduced legislation ( s. 1682 ) to transfer the functions of the cia to the state department , withdrew the amendment shortly after introducing it , the proposal drew support from senator daniel inouye , then the chairman of the appropriations committee subcommittee on defense .

three weeks later , on november 10 , 1993 , the senate debated an amendment to the fy1994 intelligence authorization bill offered by senator metzenbaum to include essentially the same "sense of congress" language as included in the two previously enacted intelligence authorization bills .

although the provision had not been controversial in the senate on the two earlier occasions , in 1993 , the incoming republican vice chairman of the ssci , senator john warner , spoke out against the proposal .

after lengthy debate , the senate first voted not to table the metzenbaum amendment by a vote of 49-51 and then voted 52-48 to incorporate it into the fy1994 intelligence authorization bill ( s. 1301 ) .

the amendment passed with the support of senator deconcini , the new ssci chairman .

the committee of conference on the two intelligence authorization bills subsequently met , but it did not include the provision regarding public disclosure of the intelligence budget in the final version .

the conference report stated: "house conferees were of the view that , in light of the house vote [on the frank amendment] , they could not agree to the inclusion in the conference report of the senate's 'sense of the congress' provisions and therefore voted to insist on the house position. .

thus , the fy1994 intelligence authorization act ( p.l .

103-178 ) that was signed by president clinton on december 3 , 1993 , did not address the question of public disclosure of the intelligence budget .

along with the strong opposition to public disclosure by senator warner , the vice chairman of the ssci ( unlike his predecessor , senator frank murkowski , who supported disclosure ) , an important factor was opposition from the clinton administration .

during the november 10 , 1993 , debate , senator warner inserted into the congressional record sections of a letter from the office of management and budget , dated october 18 , 1993 , that stated , "... the administration opposes any change to s. 1301 [the senate version of the fy1994 intelligence authorization bill] that would disclose , or require the disclosure of , the aggregate amount of funds authorized for intelligence activities .

the current procedure that provides for the authorization of appropriations in a classified annex continues to be appropriate. .

the issue did not disappear .

the conference committee had indicated that both intelligence committees had agreed to hold hearings on the question of disclosure in early 1994 "in preparation for thoroughly evaluating a provision to require disclosure of the aggregate intelligence budget figure which may be considered during preparation of the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 1995. .

shortly after final passage of the fy1994 authorization bill on november 20 , 1993 , a group of senior congressional leaders , including speaker of the house foley , senate majority leader mitchell , and other present and former leaders of committees having intelligence oversight responsibilities , signed a letter to the president urging a change in administration policy to permit public disclosure of intelligence spending .

the members stated that , "the level of intelligence spending ( although not the details ) must be open to the public. .

further , "[t]he norms of our democratic system require that the public be informed. .

the president , replying in a december 27 , 1993 letter to representative glickman , noted his opposition to the proposal in 1993 "because i believed that the cost of disclosure outweighed the benefits. .

he added , however , that he had asked anthony lake , the national security adviser , in concert with the dci and others , to "look carefully at our position in light of your arguments and in consultation with congress. .

by january 1994 , both the executive and legislative branches were committed to review the advisability of making intelligence spending levels public .

congressional hearings were scheduled for 1994 and an nsc - level review was underway .

at the hpsci hearings conducted on february 22-23 , 1994 , dci woolsey repeated his opposition to budgetary disclosure .

he emphasized the difficulty of conducting a debate on intelligence programs and priorities in public and his concern that it would be impossible to avoid moving from one aggregate number to disaggregated details that would educate "the rulers of north korea , iran , iraq , libya , terrorist groups , and others about our plans and programs. .

the 1994-1995 debate took place in the context of declining budgets and an intelligence community grappling with a world that , in the oft - quoted phrase used by dci woolsey in his confirmation hearings , has seen the slaying of the soviet dragon , but still contained jungles "filled with a bewildering variety of poisonous snakes. .

nevertheless , on july 19 , 1994 , the house voted ( in the committee of the whole ) 194-221-24 to reject an amendment to the intelligence authorization bill ( h.r .

4299 ) proposed by representative glickman , chairman of the permanent select committee on intelligence , to amend the national security act of 1947 to require annual reports of amounts expended and amounts requested for intelligence and intelligence - related activities .

the senate version did not address the question of making intelligence spending levels public .

a similar scenario unfolded in subsequent years .

on september 13 , 1995 the house voted ( in the committee of the whole ) 154-271-9 to reject an amendment to the intelligence authorization bill ( h.r .

1655 ) proposed by representative frank to disclose aggregate amounts requested and authorized for intelligence and intelligence - related activities .

again , the senate bill had no provision relating to the question .

the senate did support disclosure in 1996 , when it passed its version of the fy1997 intelligence authorization bill ( s. 1718 ) with a provision requiring the president to include with the annual budget submission the aggregate amount appropriated for the current year for intelligence and intelligence - related activities and the amount requested for the next year .

on may 22 , 1996 , however , the house voted ( in the committee of the whole ) 176-248-9 to reject an amendment to the intelligence authorization bill ( h.r .

3259 ) proposed by representative conyers to require the president to submit a separate , unclassified statement of the appropriations and proposed appropriations for national and tactical intelligence activities .

the subsequent conference committee acceded to the house and dropped the provision .

on july 9 , 1997 the house voted 192-237-5 ( in the committee of the whole ) to reject an amendment to the fy1998 intelligence authorization bill ( h.r .

1775 ) offered by representatives conyers that would require the president to submit a separate , unclassified statement of the appropriations and proposed appropriations for the current fiscal year , and the amount of appropriations requested for the fiscal year for which the budget is submitted for national and tactical intelligence activities .

the senate voted shortly thereafter , on june 19 , 1997 , 43-56-1 , to reject an amendment to the fy1998 intelligence authorization bill ( s. 858 ) proposed by senator torricelli to require the president to submit annual aggregate figures on amounts requested and amounts appropriated for intelligence and intelligence - related activities .

despite these congressional votes interest in and pressure for public release of intelligence spending levels persisted .

the commission on the roles and capabilities of the u.s. intelligence community , known as the aspin - brown commission , established pursuant to the fy1995 intelligence authorization act ( p.l .

103-359 ) , recommended in 1996: ... that at the beginning of each congressional budget cycle , the president or a designee disclose the total amount of money appropriated for intelligence activities for the current fiscal year ( to include nfip , jmip , and tiara ) and the total amount being requested for the next fiscal year .

such disclosures could either be made as part of the president's annual budget submission or , separately , in unclassified letters to the congressional intelligence committees .

no further disclosures should be authorized .

responding to the commission's recommendations , on april 23 , 1996 president clinton authorized congress to make public the total appropriation for intelligence at the time the appropriations conference report was approved .

such action was not , however , taken by the legislative branch .

in october 1997 , dci tenet announced that president clinton had authorized him to release the aggregate amount appropriated for intelligence and intelligence - related activities for fy1997 ( $26.6 billion ) .

his press release indicated that the decision was based on two important points: first , disclosure of future aggregate figures will be considered only after determining whether such disclosures could cause harm to the national security by showing trends over time .

second , we will continue to protect from disclosure any and all subsidiary information concerning the intelligence budget: whether the information concerns particular intelligence agencies or particular intelligence programs .

in other words , the administration intends to draw a firm line at this top - line , aggregate figure .

beyond this figure , there will be no other disclosures of currently classified budget information because such disclosures could harm national security .

the press release took note of the lawsuit filed earlier under the freedom of information act and indicated that the president had preferred to take action concerning the declassification of the intelligence budget "in concert with the congress," but "the present circumstances related to this lawsuit do not allow for joint action. .

the following march , tenet announced that the aggregate amount appropriated for intelligence and intelligence - related activities for fy1998 was $26.7 billion .

in the announcement tenet stated that the determination that "this release will not harm national security or otherwise harm intelligence sources and methods. .

the release of the figure for fy1998 was , however , the final such release .

after litigants had sought to require the release of the amount requested for intelligence ( in addition to the amount appropriated which had been made public ) , tenet declined to make public the amount appropriated for fy1999 .

some observers speculate tenet may have been reluctant to address the substantial additional intelligence funds that were reportedly incorporated in the supplemental appropriation act ( p.l .

105-277 ) , enacted on october 21 , 1998 .

in any event , no such releases have been made subsequently .

after decades of debate , the issues surrounding the question of public disclosure of the intelligence budget have not changed .

there is a question of the degree to which the constitution requires such budgetary information to be made public .

another question centers on whether limited budgetary data can be made public without leading to detailed revelations of properly classified programs and whether information might be made available to adversaries who will use it against the u.s .

beyond these questions , there is an issue of how to frame an informed public debate on the extent of intelligence spending .

how do you provide a sense of how the complex and disparate u.s. intelligence community fits together without revealing the extensive detail that almost all observers would consider unwise .

even sophisticated outside analysts are unlikely to appreciate some of the finer ( and , in some cases , arbitrary ) distinctions among military and national programs and the relationship of non - intelligence communications and reconnaissance programs to the overall intelligence effort .

funding for intelligence - related activities presents special difficulties ; budgetary totals can fluctuate from year to year solely because certain dod programs are transferred into or out of intelligence accounts .

making public only the figure for national intelligence programs would simplify the task , but would not give the public an accurate understanding of the extent of the whole intelligence effort .

there will continue to be philosophical and political disagreements concerning how much , if any , information regarding the intelligence budget should be provided .

the disagreements may in some cases mask policy objectives .

some argue for as inclusive a number as possible , pointing to the size of the total as the basis for urging its reduction in order to transfer funds to what they consider more important governmental functions or to reduce the federal deficit .

others will seek to show bare - bones intelligence spending and urge more rather than less intelligence spending to cope with the uncertainties of the current international environment .

ultimately , the fundamental issue is whether adequate resources are being devoted to intelligence given the extent of requirements by policymakers , military commanders , and other government officials .

the more immediate issue for congress is how to ensure that there is enough information available to inform this public debate without placing intelligence sources and methods at risk .

