the davis - bacon act was adopted in early 1931 .

it was amended during the middle 1930s and , then , quietly became a part of federal contract practice .

during the middle 1950s , however , it gained more visibility as the davis - bacon "prevailing wage principle" was added to various federal program statutes .

for more than 4 decades now , and continuing into the 21 st century , davis - bacon has been almost constantly a focus of public policy concern: as legislation , through administrative rulemaking , and in litigation before the courts .

as amended , the davis - bacon act of 1931 requires , among other things , that construction contracts entered into by the federal government specify minimum wages to be paid to the various classes of laborers employed under those contracts .

minimum wages are defined as those determined by the secretary of labor ( a ) to be prevailing ( b ) in the locality of the project ( c ) for similar crafts and skills ( d ) on comparable construction work .

the concept of wage was expanded in 1964 to include a fringe benefit component .

the act has a coverage threshold of $2,000 .

in addition to direct federal construction contracts , the davis - bacon prevailing wage "principle" has been written into more than 50 federal program statutes .

the act is supplemented by the 1934 copeland "anti - kickback" act ( which requires weekly reporting of wages actually paid and an affirmation from employers that any deductions from wages due to employees have been proper ) and by federal overtime pay and health and safety standards statutes .

further , some states have enacted "little davis - bacon" acts within their respective jurisdictions .

the rhetoric , for and against the act , has changed little through the years .

does the act protect workers , help stabilize the construction industry , and serve the federal contracting community ? .

or , is it anti - competitive , preventing flexible workforce utilization ? .

has it been administered effectively and , if not , can it be administered in an equitable fashion ? .

is there sufficient objective information concerning the act to allow for fair assessment of the statute and its impact ? .

this report examines policy issues the act has sparked through the years and which remain a part of the davis - bacon debate into the 21 st century .

these include such questions as: wage rate determination procedures , reporting requirements under the copeland act , an appropriate threshold for activation of the statute , interagency relationships with respect to davis - bacon enforcement and compliance activity , administrative or judicial appeals procedures , the use of "helpers" and other low - skilled workers on covered projects , and the right of a president to suspend the statute as well as the conditions under which such a suspension may occur .

that the fundamental premise of the act remains in contention after 75 years may be , itself , part of the public policy debate .

historically , the act has enjoyed strong bipartisan support ; but , at the same time , especially since the middle 1950s , it has provoked militant criticism .

federal agencies have disagreed , publicly , concerning the usefulness and administration of the act .

it has been subjected to judicial review and interpretation , each new application becoming , in turn , a matter for further examination .

although the department of labor ( dol ) has made certain changes in the act's administration , the statute itself has remained largely unchanged since 1935 .

through the years , however , congress has extended the act's provisions to cover an ever wider segment of federal and federally assisted construction ; and , at least during the past several decades , such extensions of coverage have provided an opportunity for renewed debate concerning the act and its impact .

prevailing wage protection , under public contracts , seems to have commenced at the state level and , later , to have been adopted by the federal government .

dissatisfaction with the act was soon rife , both with labor and contractors .

the initial enactment had been a brief and relatively simple statement of policy .

armand thieblot , who has written extensively about the act , suggests that it "lacked effective mechanisms for either policing or enforcing" its requirements , and that "no provisions were made for informing laborers of the protections afforded them" under the new statute .

trade unionists were concerned that the scope of the act might leave too many workers unprotected .

the threshold had initially been set at $5,000 , sparking labor's fear that contracts might be fragmented in order to escape the act's requirements — a matter of special concern for the painting and decorating crafts .

the afl's executive council noted that the davis - bacon act "will prove a great benefit so far as it goes ," adding that "[a]mendments to further benefit the building trades will be submitted at future sessions of congress. .

among industry objections , perhaps the most critical was the fact that wage rate determinations were made after bids were submitted .

thieblot , joining in the early reservations of comptroller general mccarl , noted above , explains: "postdetermination of wages meant that a contractor could be forced to pay wages which , upon determination by the secretary of labor , were higher than the rate on which his bid was based. .

in effect , contractors ( and , perhaps , especially those from outside of the area of work ) were bidding blindly: agreeing to pay whatever wage rate the secretary might determine to be prevailing in the locality .

and , in the beginning , it may not have been entirely clear what was meant by "prevailing" and certain other terms used in the act .

early in the 1960s , major federal construction programs commenced in defense and space and federal contract labor standards requirements took on a new importance .

there was also a perception , whether or not justified , that the federal construction program was beset with labor - management problems .

some argued that vital projects were being delayed by clashes between rival unions with jurisdictional disputes erupting into strikes or walkouts .

and it was argued that such labor troubles were adding , unnecessarily , to the cost of public construction .

there were allegations of disputes over turf , involving both workers and contracting or supply firms , which , in turn , affected the applicability of federal contract labor standards laws .

the original davis - bacon act of 1931 contained a provision which "[i]n the event of a national emergency" authorized the president to suspend the statute .

but , the authors of the davis - bacon act had legislated in broad terms .

the concept of "national emergency" was not defined , nor was it clear how long a suspension might last .

before considering the nixon suspension of the davis - bacon act in 1971 , it may be useful to review , briefly , franklin roosevelt's suspension of the act in 1934 .

davis - bacon had been more - or - less continuously a focus of attention for the policy community since the middle 1950s .

during and shortly after the carter administration , however , the act passed through a period of somewhat higher visibility with arguments , pro and con , voiced with unusual vigor .

the basis of this period of tension extends back to the original debates over the prevailing wage legislation .

with growing davis - bacon reform pressure , the carter administration ( december 1979 ) published proposed regulations governing the act .

dol then reviewed , through many months , the comments that it received and , on january 16 , 1981 , during the closing days of the carter presidency , published the regulations in final form to take effect on february 14 , 1981 .

as was discussed above , two suspensions occurred during the first 6 decades of the act's history .

in 1934 , president roosevelt suspended the act , briefly , for reasons that seem to have amounted to administrative convenience .

in 1971 , president nixon suspended the act , again briefly , justifying his action in economic terms: to apply pressure upon construction contractors and building trades unions as part of his wage / price control strategy .

in early 1992 , there were published reports that a third suspension of the statute might be under consideration: this time under the authority of president george bush .

such consideration seems to have commenced during the first months of that year .

in june , it was reported that a nationwide suspension was "more likely than not. .

but , months passed and the issue seemed to drop from view .

the davis - bacon act would continue as a source of contention through the 1990s .

some aspects of the reagan administrative changes remained unresolved , notably the "helper" issue .

questions continued to be raised concerning the wage rate determination process .

simultaneously , some urged that the statute be repealed while others argued that it needed to be strengthened .

and , with each congress , the issues were raised anew .

in late august 2005 , hurricane katrina gathered strength in the caribbean and moved toward florida and the gulf coast .

the result was one of the greatest natural disasters in the history of the united states .

gradually , the impact of the hurricane was assessed .

new orleans had been especially hard hit .

diverse public and private funding was made available to the areas affected , while thousands of people were displaced from their homes , often to other states .

although the davis - bacon act has been in place for 75 years , it remains a focus of controversy .

through the closing years of the 20 th century and into the 21 st century , aspects of its administration remain in contention , but most areas of dispute have roots in the enactments of 1931 and 1935 .

when the initial davis - bacon legislation was under consideration , few appeared to have entertained doubts that the department of labor would be able , rather easily , to render wage rate determinations whenever the stakeholders , employers and workers , were unable to agree with respect to what the locally prevailing wage actually was .

in practice , wage rate determination has remained a core issue with respect to the davis - bacon act — and remains as yet unresolved .

similarly , classification of workers has remained an issue , emerging most notably with proposals from the late 1970s to define treatment of "helpers" and to assess an appropriate pattern of utilization of apprentices: two quite distinct groups of workers .

how workers are classified largely determines the rate at which they will be paid .

it may also reflect the attitude of the employing firm toward trade unions and collective bargaining .

other classification issues have arisen along with the definition of various statutory provisions .

what , for example , is meant by the "site of the work" for davis - bacon purposes ? .

how should "off - site" work , however defined , be treated ? .

should truck drivers be davis - bacon covered ? .

what ought to be the inter - relationship between davis - bacon and the other procurement statutes: i.e. , the walsh - healey act ( setting labor standards for goods produced under federal contracts ) and the mcnamara - o'hara act ( setting labor standards for service workers engaged under federal contracts ) ? .

annexation of the davis - bacon act to a variety of program statutes ( or inclusion of a davis - bacon prevailing wage provision within such statutes ) has added further complexities and opportunities for dispute , pro and con .

for example , does a davis - bacon prevailing wage provision , added to a program statute , insure protection for the workers involved ? .

it may or it may not , depending upon the phrasing of coverage and the relationship of the davis - bacon provision to the core statute .

when project funding is not directly provided to a grant / loan recipient through appropriated funds but through a revolving fund or tax credits , etc. , is davis - bacon coverage modified or might the work be completely davis - bacon exempt ? .

finally , through the 1990s and beyond , dispute remains about the economic impact of the davis - bacon act .

were davis - bacon repealed , how much might the federal agencies save — presumably by paying construction workers at lower rates ? .

or , would elimination of davis - bacon have implications that could augment both labor and total project costs ? .

does davis - bacon , with its associated regulations , encourage a higher quality of workmanship , enhanced productivity , and a reduced need for remedial work ? .

is there a connection between skill - transfers ( apprenticeship training ) and davis - bacon ? .

how are various groups of workers — women , minorities , the unskilled , non - union workers — affected by the operation of the statute ? .

after 75 years , as one reads through the hearings and floor discussions , it would seem that the verdict is still out .

indeed , there would also seem to be very little solid data upon which to base an assessment .

still ( often , normally , on several occasions during each session of the congress ) , the issue of davis - bacon is raised anew amid largely unqualified assertions of impact , pro and con , frequently without supporting empirical evidence .

since the 1930s , doubts have been raised about the need for the davis - bacon act and about the ability of the department of labor to implement the statute in a reasonable manner .

through most of its history , however , such criticism seems to have been muted .

in the 1950s , as davis - bacon provisions were increasingly added to program statutes , critics became more vocal , and increasingly so during the 1960s through the 1980s .

in the mid - 1990s , there seemed to be some suggestion that critics were making inroads on the act , and that repeal ( or significant revision ) was likely .

then , suddenly , the climate changed , and through the past dozen years , debate has cooled , though criticism has not entirely disappeared .

the act has been the focus of numerous hearings , scores of floor debates , and has sparked an extended body of literature: studies , reports , analyses .

but , the thrust of congressional policy has been consistently toward expanded coverage and a strengthening of the act .

through the years , certain policy issues with respect to davis - bacon have remained under discussion ; and , to the extent that these questions continue to be raised , they can be said to be unresolved .

indeed , some issues that were subjects of debate in the 1930s continued to be debated , largely in the same terms , and to provoke similar demands for administrative and / or legislative action .

the growing davis - bacon literature , pro and con , with refutations and counter - critiques , seems to offer little that is new and appears to have left critical aspects of the act , its administration and its impact , unilluminated .

the davis - bacon act has now become an institutional part of wage structure and contracting practice within the construction industry .

what the impact of repeal or significant modification of the act might be is not entirely clear .

should any change with respect to davis - bacon , whether pro or con , be extended to the related federal contract labor standards statutes: the walsh - healey act and the mcnamara - o'hara act ? .

this may be an area in which further study could be productive .

as the 21 st century advances , several additional elements may be added to the debate over davis - bacon or have an effect upon the character of that debate .

first .

some perceive a gradual weakening of the trade union movement , both in actual membership and in political influence .

this could translate into a diminished public and congressional support for davis - bacon .

and , if that perception is accurate , it could result in some refocusing of labor's legislative priorities .

at the same time , it should be recalled that the davis - bacon act was intended to promote stability within the construction industry as well as to protect labor standards .

might elimination of davis - bacon adversely impact industry , producing uncertainties with respect to wages as an element of the bidding process , alter manpower utilization patterns , increase the risk of accidents in the workplace , or render less effective skill development and transfer now commonly resolved through apprenticeship programs where there is davis - bacon coverage ? .

second .

there has been a gradual change , over time , in demographics .

members of congress , policy analysts , trade union leaders , with others , may no longer fully share or appreciate the experience of the pre - world war ii era .

with the retirement of the generations of the 1930s and 1940s ( and attendant loss of certain historical perspectives ) , there may no longer be a broad understanding of the rationale for certain statutes — for protection of workers — that an older generation may have taken for granted .

thus , if these labor standards statutes ( such as davis - bacon ) are to survive , they may need to be justified anew , either through education or through experience , some of it perhaps painful .

but , on the other hand , might it be that there may really be no longer a need for statutes such as the davis - bacon act ? .

or , might it be feasible to re - codify davis - bacon ( with the several related statutes ) as a more general federal contract labor / management standards enactment ? .

third .

the reemergence of the federal deficit and budgetary constraints resulting from security concerns may provoke a more critical review of assumptions made during earlier periods of our national experience .

as a result , where certain statutes are criticized as imposing unnecessary costs or as presenting significant enforcement and compliance problems , there may be increased willingness to alter or to dispense with these older , perhaps less well understood , laws and to replace them with programs and regulations judged to be more vital to a younger constituency .

for all of these reasons , it may be useful to review the evolution of the davis - bacon act ( and of other federal contract labor standards statutes as well ) in order to provide a rational foundation for their reassessment and for the development of future directions of public policy .

