the supplemental security income ( ssi ) program , title xvi of the social security act , was enacted in 1972 and implemented in 1974 to assure a minimum cash income to all aged , blind , or disabled persons .

ssi is provided to eligible aged or disabled individuals or couples who have limited income and resources .

for adults , disability is defined as the inability to engage in substantial gainful activity ( sga ) by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment expected to result in death or last at least 12 months .

in general , the worker must be unable to do any kind of work that exists in the national economy , taking into account age , education , and work experience .

a child under the age of 18 may qualify as disabled if he or she has an impairment that results in "marked and severe" functional limitations .

adults aged 65 or older may qualify for ssi benefits without being disabled .

ssi is administered by the social security administration ( ssa ) and operates in the 50 states , the district of columbia , and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands .

to qualify for ssi , a person must be a citizen of the united states or a "qualified alien" and either a resident of the united states or the northern mariana islands , a child of a person in the military stationed outside the united states , or a student temporarily abroad .

other requirements related to residence in certain public institutions , absence from the united states , filing for other potential benefits , and fugitive felon and probation / parole violator status also apply .

in december 2013 , the ssi program had more than 8.3 million recipients , who received over $4.6 billion in benefit payments .

of these recipients , more than 1.3 million were children under the age of 18 , almost 5.0 million were adults between the ages of 18 and 64 , and just over 2.1 million were adults aged 65 or older .

the maximum federal ssi payment , referred to as the federal benefit rate , is $721 per month for an individual living independently and $1,082 for a couple living independently in 2014 .

all but six states and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands supplement the federal ssi benefit with additional payments .

fourteen states and the district of columbia have state supplements that are either partially or wholly administered by the ssa , and 34 states self - administer their supplements .

federal ssi benefit maximums are adjusted annually using the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) to reflect changes in the cost of living .

after a 1.7% increase in 2013 , a 1.5% cola was applied for 2014 .

most ssi recipients have other income ; their countable income is subtracted from the federal benefit rate to determine their ssi eligibility and payment amount .

in calculating countable income , ssi provides for certain income exclusions ( eg , the first $20 of monthly unearned income ; the first $65 plus one - half of remaining monthly earned income ) .

in december 2013 , the average monthly federally administered ssi payment was $630.98 for children under the age of 18 , $546.38 for adults aged 18 to 64 , and $425.09 for adults aged 65 or older .

ssa generally sends the monthly ssi payments directly to the recipient .

however , ssa assigns representative payees to ( 1 ) minors , ( 2 ) individuals incapable of physically or mentally managing their own benefits , and ( 3 ) individuals declared legally incompetent by a court .

ssi recipients living alone or in households in which all members receive ssi benefits are also automatically eligible for the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) .

in most cases an ssi recipient is eligible for medicaid .

the ssi program generally counts all types of income in determining eligibility and payment amounts .

in some cases , the income and resources of non - recipients are counted in determining ssi eligibility and benefit amounts .

this process is called "deeming" and is applied in cases in which an eligible child lives with an ineligible parent , an eligible individual lives with an ineligible spouse , or an eligible non - citizen has a sponsor .

in general , an ssi recipient can have assets , with the exception of a home , car , and household items , worth no more than $2,000 and beneficiary - couples can have countable assets worth no more than $3,000 .

federal ssi benefits and administrative costs are paid from federal general revenues and state supplements are paid from state funds .

for fy2013 , the net cost of the ssi program ( including administrative expenses and benefit payments ) was 53.2 billion .

funding for the ssi program is provided by congress in the annual departments of labor , health and human services , education and related agencies appropriations bill .

