94-459 - - the u.s .

occupation of haiti , 1915-1934 may 26 , 199 .

in the early twentieth century , haiti suffered from a tumultuous political life and from chronic financial mismanagement .

eighty percent of the haitian budget went to debt service , and u.s. government officials wereconcernedthat financial obligations to its own citizens might not be met .

there was greater fear , also , that one among thewarring european countries - - especially france or germany - - might establish a position of influence in the country,leading to naval bases that could endanger access to the newly constructed panama canal .

these concerns wereheightened after the outbreak of world war i , when haitian authority collapsed into bloody factional struggles inthesummer of 1915 ; the administration of woodrow wilson determined to take action .

in july 1915 , admiral williamb .

caperton , then embarked on the battleship washington , was directed to land forces to establish orderandassume responsibility for administering the customhouses .

with virtually no resistance , a landing party of some 330 sailors and marines took control of the capital within a few hours .

 ( there were only two u.s. fatalities , and these may have resulted from friendly fire ; haitian fatalitieswere also minimal. ) .

admiral caperton called upon additional u.s. forces to take control of other coastal areas ; resistance by guerrilla bands in the more mountainous areas of the country was temporarily put down , ending withthecapture of fort rivière in mid - november .

by the end of 1915 , the marine presence was reduced to 100officers and some 1,600 enlisted men .

although the marine brigade was extensively deployed to help put downresurgentguerrilla activity in 1918-1920 , for most of the rest of the occupation , the 1,200-1,400 marines were assignedgarrison duty , with some patrolling of the countryside .

once firmly established in the major population centers , u.s. officials quickly ensured the election by the haitian national assembly of an amenable president , philippe sudre dartiguenave , who had served as the presidentof thehaitian senate .

as a result of continuing unrest , admiral caperton also established censorship and promulgatedmartial law .

these emergency measures were not rescinded for over ten years .

in another move to ensure an orderlygovernment , the united states presented the haitians with a treaty that permitted a u.s. - nominated official to collecttaxes and make debt repayments and other disbursements .

the treaty , ( 1 ) ratified by haiti in november 1915 andby the u.s. senate the following february , also created a constabulary ( or gendarmerie ) composed of native haitiansunder american direction to serve both as haiti's military and police force .

the treaty was to remain in force forten years and could be extended for another ten "if the purpose of this treaty has not been fully accomplished. .

inmarch 1917 , the duration of the 1915 treaty was officially extended to twenty years .

despite the treaty , the haitian national assembly was uncooperative in its relationship with u.s. officials .

the state department drafted a new haitian constitution which would have validated the occupation and allowedforeigners to own property in haiti .

the assembly , unwilling to ratify the document , was dissolved when lt. col.smedley d. butler , a u.s. marine officer serving with the haitian gendarmerie , entered the capitol in june 1917,toread a dissolution order that dartiguenave had been pressured to sign .

unwilling to risk the election of anotherassembly , u.s. authorities effected the approval of the new constitution by plebiscite ( only 769 votes out of 100,000were negative ) in june , 1918 .

the new constitution created a council of state , whose members were appointed bythe haitian president , to perform all legislative functions until an assembly could be reconstituted at a time to bedetermined .

although the united states occupied the principal towns of the country , guerrilla bands remained in the mountainous interior of the country .

known as cacos ( named after a haitian bird of prey ) , these bandshad long played asignificant role in haitian politics , fighting at times on behalf of one or more factions within the dominantfrancophone elite .

renewed attacks by guerrillas commenced in october 1918 , and persisted for a number ofmonths ( including a raid on port - au - prince in october 1919 ) , until the marines and the gendarmerie were able to neutralizethem by frequent patrolling , paying bounties for weapons turned in , and by eliminating their leaders .

after 1920,there were only occasional outbreaks of caco violence .

the gendarmerie , whose name was changed in 1928 to the garde d'haiti , became an essential part of the administrative structure of the country .

officered at first by americans - - largely enlisted marines - - who were paidboth by theu.s .

marine corps and by haiti , the gendarmerie , numbering 2,000-2,600 members , was deployed throughout thecountry and became largely responsible for maintaining law and order , settling disputes , and supporting publicworksprojects .

it also served as haiti's military force .

gradually , u.s. officers were replaced by haitians , a process thatwas accelerated after 1929 .

historians , otherwise critical of the occupation , acknowledge that haitians had moresecurity intheir persons and property than they had ever previously known and that the gendarmerie , during the occupation,functioned as an effective and impartial agency .

 ( after u.s. forces departed in 1934 , haitian officers would becomemuchmore involved in political activities. ) .

throughout the occupation , u.s. forces suffered minimal casualties , totaling 10 killed and 26 wounded ( with 172 other casualties ) .

complaints of brutality against native haitians led the u.s. congress to conduct hearings onhaiti and thedominican republic in 1922 .

 ( 2 ) the specialcommittee rejected the more serious charges and concluded that most of the abuses occurred during the effort to putdown the caco insurrection in 1918-1919 .

the counterinsurgency effortresulted in the deaths , by some estimates , of over 2,000 cacos .

 ( 3 ) although affirming that cruelty was not officially countenanced , the committeenoted that there were at least ten instances of illegal executions by americans .

once the caco rebellion was suppressed , there were virtually no physical attacks by haitians on u.s. marines or civilians .

after the 1922 congressional investigation criticized lack of coordination among u.s. officials in haiti , u.s. civilian and military authority was consolidated .

the senior u.s. representative from 1922 to 1930 , general johnh .

russell,usmc , served both as the senior marine in haiti and as the u.s. high commissioner , responsible to the statedepartment .

reporting to him were u.s. officials ( technically appointed by the president of haiti ) dealing withfinance , publicworks , sanitation , and agriculture , as well as the chief of the gendarmerie .

general russell , described as aconscientious and somewhat imperious officer , became the most powerful figure in the country .

he was laterappointedcommandant of the u.s. marine corps .

the onset of the great depression and declining markets for haitian products , especially coffee , produced economic hardships and contributed to increased unrest among a population long denied a political role .

december1929 riots inles cayes threatened to spread throughout the country .

a detachment from the marine brigade in port - au - princewas sent to restore order , but a confrontation led to the deaths of at least 12 haitians .

subsequent incidents wereendedwithout loss of life , but the hoover administration was concerned that it might become involved in hostilities thatu.s .

public opinion would not support .

in early 1930 , president hoover appointed a bipartisan commission headed by w. cameron forbes , formerly the governor general of the philippines , to investigate conditions in haiti .

 ( 4 ) after several weeks in the country during whichtestimony was taken from all sectors of the society , the commission submitted a report that argued that the unitedstates could not relinquish its responsibilities for ensuring the financial stability of haiti , but made several proposalsforchanges , especially the separation of civil and military responsibilities , increasing the number of haitians in thegovernment , and , in general , for less intervention in haitian domestic affairs .

 ( 5 ) in november , general russell was replaced bya state department official , dana g. munro , who was appointed minister rather than high commissioner .

anexecutive agreement was negotiated in 1932 providing for the complete haitianization of the garde by october1934 and forthe withdrawal of the marine brigade , two years prior to the expiration of the extended 1915 treaty .

washington was nonetheless determined to pull out of haiti at an earlier date .

arrangements were made for the election of a temporary haitian president and the subsequent holding of national elections in october 1930 thatreturned astrongly nationalistic majority .

the complete haitianization of the garde was completed .

president franklinroosevelt paid an official visit to cap - haitien in july 1934 and the last marines departed the following month .

nonetheless , au.s .

financial adviser would remain until 1941 to oversee payments on the haitian debt .

the u.s. occupation in large measure accomplished its goals of stabilizing haitian finances .

security for investors was a key concern of the u.s. government and to a large extent became the justification for the occupationonce thepotential threat of european intervention disappeared with the conclusion of world war i .

a $16-million u.s. loanwas negotiated in 1922 to consolidate haiti's outstanding foreign debts .

efficient collection of duties and prompt,evenadvance , payment of debts owed to u.s. banks soon restored the country's financial standing .

eventually , some 60% of haitian revenues were expended under u.s. supervision , the greatest percentage going to debt repayment .

some critics , including the forbes commission , argued that monies used for advance repaymentof debtscould have been more usefully allocated to domestic projects .

there is consensus , however , that haitian financeswere honestly handled during the occupation and that steps were taken to insure that foreign interests did not takeadvantageof the country .

 ( 6 ) in the 1920s , annual haitiangovernment revenues of $8-10 million were double that of the pre - occupation period ; coffee production and smallbusinesses grew significantly , but little progress was made in establishing asound permanently economic base for the country .

the occupation also resulted in the completion of a significant number of public works projects , mostly after 1920 .

most important was the construction of roads and bridges throughout the country ( some of which wascompleted through ahighly unpopular system of forced labor or corvée ) .

although most of the 800 miles of roadswere not hard - surfaced , they greatly facilitated transportation between coastal areas and the rural uplands at a timewhen automobiles and truckswere being introduced into haiti in significant numbers .

a number of port facilities were erected , lighthouses wereconstructed , and a number of harbors were dredged .

efforts to improve agricultural productivity were complicatedby thesmall size of land holdings and a lack of accurate legal titles .

the united states undertook a major effort to provide access to modern health care to the mass of the haitian population that in some cases had never come into contact with trained doctors and nurses .

a national publichealth servicewas created with a network of some 153 rural clinics and 11 hospitals supervised by u.s. navy doctors , and effortswere made to provide basic medical instruction to the population .

this effort was financed by the haitiangovernment atu.s .

encouragement .

the united states did not assume a responsibility to "build democracy," and u.s. officials did not devote significant efforts towards the encouragement of local self - government .

prior to the occupation , the haitiangovernment had beenlargely the province of a narrow elite consisting of about 5 percent of the population .

the haitian presidents whoserved during most of the occupation , dartiguenave ( 1915-1922 ) , louis borno ( 1922-1930 ) , and eugene roy , whoserved astemporary president from may - november 1930 , were elected by the council of state at the instigation of u.s.authorities .

they , in turn , appointed members of the council of state .

there were no national elections held untiloctober1930 , and local elections that produced unsuitable winners were invalidated .

newspapers were censored , andoffending editors jailed .

inattention to efforts to promote democracy stemmed , in part , from a knowledge that any election might produce results hostile to u.s. interests and probably from racial attitudes that considered haitians unsuited forself - government .

theyears of the haitian occupation coincided with widespread racial segregation in the united states and oppositionby a majority of u.s. whites to a political role for blacks .

these attitudes , brought to haiti by the occupation , ledto social aswell as political discrimination against haitians , even the educated and politically active elite , that was bitterlyresented and undercut well - intentioned development projects .

to a large extent , u.s. racial attitudes ensured thatthere was nosignificant element of the haitian populace that supported the u.s. presence .

 ( 7 ) education was also largely neglected during the occupation .

schooling in haiti had been traditionally divided between francophone instruction for the elite and a very few rudimentary elementary schools for others .

little effortto changethis situation was undertaken .

the mass of the population remained illiterate , and the elite continued to seek aneducation that did not lead to careers in commerce and industry .

efforts to provide technical training to developtheagricultural and industrial potential of the country ( the service technique ) were not warmly receivedand did not reach a large number of students .

