hedge funds are essentially unregulated mutual funds .

they are pools of invested money that buy and sell stocks and bonds and many other assets , including foreign currencies , precious metals , commodities , and derivatives .

some funds follow narrowly defined investment strategies ( eg , investing only in mortgage bonds , or east asian stock markets ) , while others , the so - called macro funds , invest their capital in any market in the world where the fund managers see opportunities for profit .

hedge funds are structured to avoid sec regulation .

to avoid becoming public issuers of securities , subject to extensive disclosure requirements , they accept funds only from "accredited investors," defined by sec regulations as persons with assets of $1 million or more .

hedge funds also avail themselves of statutory exemptions in the investment company act of 1940 , which governs public mutual funds .

mutual funds must comply with a comprehensive set of regulations designed to protect small , unsophisticated investors .

these regulations include limits on the use of borrowed money , strict record keeping and reporting rules , capital structure requirements , mandated adherence to specified investment goals and strategies , bonding requirements , and a requirement that shareholder approval be obtained ( through proxy solicitation ) for certain fund business .

an investment company becomes subject to this regulation only if it has 100 or more shareholders ; hedge funds therefore generally limit themselves to 99 investors .

 ( the national securities market improvement act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-290 ) broadened this exemption by permitting hedge funds to have an unlimited number of partners , provided that each is a "qualified purchaser" with at least $5 million in total invested assets. ) .

most hedge funds are structured as limited partnerships , with a few general partners who also serve as investment managers .

hedge fund managers are often ex - employees of large securities firms , who strike out on their own in search perhaps of greater entrepreneurial freedom and certainly in search of greater financial rewards .

those rewards , even by wall street standards , can be extremely high .

in addition to the return on his or her own capital , the typical hedge fund manager takes 15% - 25% of all profits earned by the fund plus an annual management fee of 1% - 2% of total fund assets .

data on hedge funds are available from several private sources , but estimates as to the size of the hedge fund universe vary considerably .

before the financial crisis that began in 2007 , estimates were in the range of 8,000-9,000 funds , with about $2 trillion in assets under management .

large numbers of funds have closed as a result of severe losses in the bear markets of 2008 ; george soros , one of the best - known hedge fund managers , has estimated that the value of capital under management may shrink by 75% .

starting a hedge fund is relatively simple , and , with a few quarters of good results , new hedge fund managers can attract capital and thrive on performance and management fees .

because many of them make risky investments in search of high returns , hedge funds also have a high mortality rate .

studies find that the rate of attrition for funds is about 20% per year , and that the average life span is about three years .

estimates of the average annual return earned by hedge funds differ .

some studies find that they generally outperform common benchmarks such as the standard & poor's 500 , but others conclude that they have lagged .

the short life span of many funds creates obvious difficulties for measurement , including a strong survivorship bias: the many funds that shut down each year are not included in return calculations .

annual return figures of course conceal a wide variation from year to year and from fund to fund .

in any period , the law of averages dictates that at least a few funds will do extremely well .

these success stories may explain the continued popularity of hedge funds with investors , despite the high fees that they charge , and the high risk of loss .

hedge funds are understood to be high - risk / high - return operations , where investors must be prepared for losses .

investors who accept the risks are seeking high returns or a means to diversify their portfolio risk .

as long as these investors are sophisticated and wealthy , as current law requires , hedge fund losses or even failures should not be a public policy concern .

however , a 1998 case provided an exception to this rule .

long - term capital management ( ltcm ) , a fund headquartered in connecticut and chartered in the cayman islands , opened in 1994 and produced annual returns of over 40% through 1996 .

it was billed as a "market - neutral" fund , that is , its positions were based not on predictions of the direction of interest rates or other variables , but on the persistence of historical price relationships , or spreads , among different types of bonds .

in 1998 , however , turmoil in world markets , stemming from financial crises in asia and russia , proved to be too much for its computer models: during the month of august 1998 alone , the fund lost almost $2 billion , or about half its capital .

by late september , ltcm was on the verge of collapse , whereupon the new york fed stepped in and "facilitated" a rescue package of $3.6 billion cash contributed by 13 private financial institutions , who became 90% owners of the fund's portfolio .

why was government intervention needed ? .

the fed cited concerns about systemic risk to the world's financial markets — while ltcm's capital was a relatively modest $3-$4 billion ( during the first half of 1998 ) , it had borrowed extensively from a broad range of financial institutions , domestic and foreign , so that the total value of its securities holdings was estimated to be about $80-$100 billion .

in addition , the fund supplemented its holdings of stocks and bonds with complex and extensive derivatives positions , magnifying the total exposure of the fund's creditors and counterparties , and making the effect of a general collapse and default difficult to gauge .

if the fund ( or its creditors ) had tried to liquidate its assets and unwind its derivative positions in the troubled market conditions that prevailed , the result might have been extreme price drops and high volatility , with a negative impact on firms not directly involved with ltcm .

critics of the fed's action expressed concerns about moral hazard — if market participants believe they will be rescued from their mistakes ( because they are "too big to fail" ) , they may take imprudent risks .

to the fed , however , the immediate dangers of system - wide damage to financial markets , and possibly to the real economy as well , clearly outweighed the risks of creating perceptions of an expanded federal safety net .

in the wake of the long - term capital management episode , systemic risk emerged as the major policy issue raised by hedge funds .

the funds had demonstrated an ability to raise large sums of money from wealthy individuals and institutions , and to leverage those sums , by borrowing and through the use of derivatives , until they become so large that even u.s. financial markets may be at risk if they fail .

not all hedge funds borrow heavily and not all follow high - risk strategies .

but many do , and there is no reason to think that other hedge funds will not amass positions as large and complex as ltcm's .

in time , some of them can be expected to suffer equally spectacular losses .

the systemic risk concerns may be summarized as follows: failing funds may sell billions of dollars of securities at a time when the liquidity to absorb them is not present , causing markets to "seize up" ; lenders to hedge funds , including federally insured banks , may suffer serious losses when funds default — ltcm raised questions about their ability to evaluate the risks lending to hedge funds ; default on derivatives contracts may disrupt markets and may threaten hedge fund counterparties in ways that are hard to predict , given the lack of comprehensive regulatory supervision over derivative instruments ; and since little information about hedge fund portfolios and trading strategies is publicly available , uncertainty regarding the solvency of hedge funds or their lenders and trading partners may exacerbate panic in the markets .

ltcm illustrates the dangers of hedge fund failure .

however , the funds' successes can also worry policymakers and regulators .

particularly in foreign exchange markets , manipulation by hedge funds has been blamed as a cause of instability ( eg , the european currency crises in the early 1990s and the asian devaluations of 1997-1998 ) .

hedge funds and other speculators can borrow a currency and sell it , hoping to profit if the currency is devalued ( allowing them to repay with cheaper money ) .

if the size of these sales or short positions is significant in relation to the target country's foreign currency reserves , pressure to devalue can become intense .

to defend the currency's value may call for painful steps such as sharp increases in domestic interest rates , which have negative effects on the stock market and economic growth .

in the united states , which has not been the target of such speculative raids , many argue that blaming hedge funds for crises is like shooting the messenger who brings bad news , and that speculators' profit opportunities are often created by bad economic policies .

the effect of speculation on price volatility is an unresolved question in finance .

while there has never been a conclusive demonstration that speculation causes volatility , the two are frequently observed together .

hedge funds , as the most visible agents of speculation in today's global markets , are looked upon by some regulators and market participants with a fair amount of suspicion .

in april 1999 , the president's working group on financial markets , which includes the fed , the sec , the cftc , and treasury , issued a report on hedge funds .

the report cites the ltcm case as demonstrating that a single excessively leveraged institution can pose a threat to other institutions and to the financial system , and found that the proprietary trading operations of commercial and investment banks follow the same strategies in the same markets as the hedge funds , and they are much larger and often more highly leveraged .

the general issue , then , is how to constrain excessive leverage .

the working group concluded that more disclosure of financial information by hedge funds was desirable .

the report recommended that large funds be required to publish annual disclosure statements containing a "snapshot" of their portfolios and a comprehensive estimate of the riskiness of the fund's position , and that public companies and financial institutions should include in their quarterly and annual reports a statement of their financial exposure to hedge funds and other highly leveraged entities .

in 2003 , in response to continued rapid growth in hedge fund investment , an sec staff report recommended that hedge funds be required to register as investment advisers .

the staff set out several benefits to mandatory registration: funds registered as investment advisers would become subject to regular examinations , permitting early detection and deterrence of fraud ; the sec would gain basic information about hedge fund investments and strategies in markets where they may have a significant impact ; and the sec could require registered hedge funds to adopt uniform standards and improve disclosures they make to their investors .

on october 26 , 2004 , the sec adopted ( by a 3-2 vote ) a rule to require hedge funds to register under the investment advisers act .

the rule was controversial: opponents argued that hedge fund investors are sophisticated and know the risks , that the sec already has authority to pursue hedge fund fraud , that systemic risk concerns are overstated , and that instead of trying to circumscribe hedge funds , the sec ought to be encouraging registered mutual funds to adopt hedge fund investment techniques .

the regulation fell short of what some critics of hedge fund behavior would have liked to see .

the sec would still not be able to monitor hedge fund trading in real time , and the possibility of another ltcm remains .

however , the sec explicitly decided against this course — the 2003 staff report found "no justification for direct regulation" and the adopted rule had "no interest in impeding the manner in which a hedge fund invests or placing restrictions on a hedge fund's ability to trade securities , use leverage , sell securities short or enter into derivatives transactions. .

the rule took effect on february 1 , 2006 , and some basic information on registering hedge funds appeared on the sec website .

however , on june 23 , 2006 , an appeals court found that the rule was arbitrary and not compatible with the plain language of the investment advisers act , vacated it , and returned it to the sec for reconsideration .

sec chairman cox instructed the sec's professional staff to provide the commission with a set of alternatives for consideration .

another issue involves the "retailization" of hedge funds .

as noted above , all fund investors must meet an "accredited investor" standard: they must have incomes of at least $200,000 and assets of $1 million .

this threshold was established in the 1980s , and a much larger fraction of the population now meets the test , particularly since the $1 million includes the value of the investor's residence .

the sec has been concerned that relatively unsophisticated households may be putting their money in hedge funds , encouraged by market developments such as the introduction of funds - of - hedge funds , which accept smaller investments than traditional funds .

a related investor protection issue arises from the fact that pension funds and other institutional investors are placing more of their money with hedge funds , meaning that unsophisticated beneficiaries may be unwittingly at risk of significant hedge fund - related losses , if the plan fiduciaries are not prudent and cautious .

on december 13 , 2006 , the sec proposed a regulation that would raise the accredited investor threshold from $1 million to $2.5 million in assets ( excluding the value of the investor's home ) .

if adopted , the rule would significantly reduce the pool of potential hedge fund investors , but would not be expected to have a strong impact on the largest funds , which do not depend on "mere" millionaires .

the sec received many unfavorable comments from investors who meet the current standard but would be excluded under the new limits: these investors do not wish to be protected from risks that the sec might view as excessive .

the sec has yet to adopt a final rule raising the accredited investor standard .

in february 2007 , the president's working group issued an "agreement among pwg and u.s. agency principals on principles and guidelines regarding private pools of capital. .

the document expresses the view that policies that support market discipline , participant awareness of risk , and prudent risk management are the best means of protecting investors and limiting systemic risk .

the agreement does not call for legislation to give regulators new powers or authorities to regulate hedge funds .

in december 2008 , the revelation that a firm registered as both a broker / dealer and an investment adviser with the sec , bernard l. madoff investment securities , had operated a multi - billion dollar ponzi scheme raised new questions about the efficacy of market self - regulation .

a number of hedge funds and funds - of - funds had placed billions of their clients' money with madoff , but failed to detect the fraud .

the madoff case prompted calls for more stringent regulation of investment advisers , including hedge funds .

the obama administration's 2009 white paper , financial regulatory reform: a new foundation , recommends that advisers to hedge funds ( and other private pools of capital , including private equity funds and venture capital funds ) whose assets under management exceed some modest threshold should be required to register with the sec under the investment advisers act .

the advisers should be required to report information on the funds they manage that is sufficient to assess whether any fund poses a threat to financial stability .

in the 109 th congress , the house passed h.r .

6079 ( representative castle ) , which directed the president's working group to study the growth of hedge funds , the risks they pose , their use of leverage , and the benefits they confer .

the senate did not act on the bill .

in the 111 th congress , h.r .

711 ( representatives capuano and castle ) would remove the exemption in the investment advisers act for firms with fewer than 15 clients , which was the figure at the center of the 2006 goldstein decision .

this would require hedge funds with more than $25 million in client funds to register as investment advisers with the sec .

h.r .

712 ( representative castle ) would require defined benefit pension plans to disclose their investments in hedge funds .

h.r .

713 ( representative castle ) directs the president's working group on financial markets to conduct a study of the hedge fund industry , and report to congress with any recommendations regarding hedge fund regulation .

s. 344 ( senator grassley ) would limit the exemptions available under the investment company act , requiring hedge funds with more than $50 million under management to register with the sec .

s. 506 and h.r .

1265 would change the tax treatment of offshore funds .

s. 1276 would require managers of hedge funds to register as investment advisers , private equity firms , and venture capital funds , and would authorize the sec to collect systemic risk data from them .

hedge funds are not seen as a principal cause of the financial crisis that erupted in 2007 .

they are , however , widely viewed as part of the "shadow" financial system that includes over - the - counter derivatives , non - bank lending , and other lightly regulated or non - regulated financial sectors .

as part of sweeping regulatory reform legislation before the house and senate in the 111 th congress , certain hedge funds would be required to register with the sec and to provide information about their positions and trading strategies to be shared with the systemic risk authorities .

under h.r .

4173 , passed by the house on december 11 , 2009 , managers of funds with more than $150 million under management would be required to register as investment advisers with the sec .

they would be required to report ( on a confidential basis ) certain portfolio information of interest to the federal reserve or other systemic risk authorities .

the bill provides exemptions for advisers to venture capital funds and small business investment corporations ( sbics ) .

senator dodd's restoring american financial stability act , as ordered reported by the senate banking committee on march 22 , 2010 , includes similar provisions regarding registration and reporting of systemic risk data .

the senate version also exempts venture capital funds , private equity funds , and sbics .

it sets the sec registration threshold for all investment advisers at $100 million in assets under management .

advisers below that figure would register with the states .

