the site of the ancient bronze age civilization of dilmun , bahrain was a trade hub linking mesopotamia and the indus valley until a drop in trade from india caused the dilmun civilization to decline around 2,000 b.c .

the inhabitants of bahrain converted to islam in the 7 th century .

bahrain subsequently fell under the control of islamic caliphates based in damascus , then baghdad , and later persian , omani , and portuguese forces .

the al khalifa family , which is sunni muslim and generally not as religiously conservative as the leaders of neighboring saudi arabia , has ruled bahrain since 1783 .

that year , the family , a branch of the bani utbah tribe , left the saudi peninsula and captured a persian garrison controlling the island .

in 1830 , the ruling family signed a treaty establishing bahrain as a protectorate of britain , which was then the dominant power in the persian gulf .

in the 1930s , reza shah pahlavi of iran unsuccessfully sought to deny bahrain the right to grant oil concessions to the united states and britain .

as britain reduced its military presence in the gulf in 1968 , bahrain and the other smaller persian gulf emirates ( principalities ) sought a permanent status .

a 1970 u.n. survey ( some refer to it as a "referendum" ) determined that bahrain's inhabitants did not want to join with iran , a finding that was endorsed by u.n. security council resolution 278 and recognized formally by iran's parliament .

bahrain negotiated with eight other persian gulf emirates during 1970-1971 on federating with them , but bahrain and qatar each decided to become independent , and bahrain became independent on august 15 , 1971 .

the seven other emirates formed the united arab emirates ( uae ) .

u.s. - bahrain ties are long - standing and have deepened over the past several decades .

the american mission hospital was established in 1903 as the first hospital in what is now bahrain .

a u.s. embassy opened in manama , bahrain's capital , immediately after bahrain became independent .

hundreds of bahraini students come to the united states each year to study .

the bilateral security relationship dates to the end of world war ii , well before bahrain's independence , and remains central to the u.s. ability to address regional threats such as those posed by iran and by terrorist movements .

there are about 7,000 u.s. military personnel deployed in bahrain , mostly navy , implementing various missions discussed below , including against the islamic state .

bahrain signed a formal defense cooperation agreement ( dca ) with the united states in 1991 .

in march 2018 , then - secretary of defense james mattis met with king hamad and crown prince salman in bahrain and expressed "appreciation for bahrain's continued support of the u.s. military presence in the kingdom since shortly after world war ii. .

secretary of state pompeo made similar comments after his january 11 , 2019 meeting with king hamad .

as a gcc member , bahrain also engages in substantial defense cooperation with other gcc states .

bahrain also has formal relations with nato under a 2004 nato - gcc "istanbul cooperation initiative" ( ici ) .

as do the other gcc members in that forum ( kuwait , uae , and qatar ) , bahrain has opened a diplomatic mission at nato headquarters in brussels .

the u.s .

ambassador to bahrain is justin siberell , a career diplomat .

bahrain's foreign policy is similar to several other gcc states , particularly on iran .

bahrain's economy has been affected by the domestic unrest and by the decline in oil prices during 2014-2018 .

hydrocarbons still account for about 80% of government revenues , mostly from oil exports from a field that saudi arabia shares equally with bahrain , the abu safa field , which produces 300,000 barrels per day .

bahrain's oil and gas reserves are the lowest of the gcc states , estimated respectively at 210 million barrels of oil and 5.3 trillion cubic feet of gas .

however , bahrain's energy export potential might be revived if bahrain's 2018 discovery of a shale oil field containing an estimated 80 billion barrels of shale oil proves commercially viable .

the decline in oil prices from 2014 levels has caused bahrain to cut subsidies of some fuels and some foodstuffs .

the financial difficulties have also contributed to a lack of implementation of government promises to provide more low - income housing ( presumably for shias , who tend to be among the poorer bahrainis ) .

to try to diversify , bahrain is investing in its banking and financial services sectors ( about 25.5% of gdp combined ) .

to help bahrain cope with its budgetary difficulties , saudi arabia , kuwait , and the uae announced in early october 2018 a $10 billion aid package .

a comprehensive assessment of bahrain's economy is provided in economist intelligence unit country reports .

u.s. - bahrain economic relations have expanded , even though the united states buys virtually no oil from bahrain .

the major u.s. import from the country is aluminum: that product and other manufacturing account for the existence in bahrain of a vibrant middle and working class , which consists mostly of shia bahrainis .

about 180 u.s. companies do business in bahrain .

in concert with crown prince salman's visit to washington , dc , in november 2017 , bahrain - based companies in several sectors signed trade deals with u.s. based firms , including a memorandum of understanding between aluminum bahrain ( alba ) and general electric .

more than 200 american companies operate in bahrain , and amazon web services is slated to open its first regional headquarters in bahrain .

to encourage reform and signal u.s. appreciation , the united states and bahrain signed an fta on september 14 , 2004 .

implementing legislation was signed january 11 , 2006 ( p.l .

109-169 ) .

however , in light of the unrest , the afl - cio has urged the united states to void the fta on the grounds that bahrain is preventing free association of workers and abridging their rights .

in 2005 , total bilateral trade was about $780 million , and , as depicted in the table below , u.s. - bahrain trade has more than doubled since the u.s. - bahrain fta to about $2 billion in 2017 .

some u.s. funds have been used to provide assistance to bahrain for purposes that are not purely security related .

in 2010 , mepi supported the signing of a memorandum of understanding between the small business administration and bahrain's ministry of industry and commerce to support small and medium enterprises in bahrain .

mepi funds have also been used to fund u.s. department of commerce programs ( "commercial law development program" ) to provide bahrain with technical assistance in support of trade liberalization and economic diversification , including modernization of the country's commercial laws and regulations .

