immigration has been a contentious issue since the nation's inception .

during periods of substantial immigration , it has not been unusual for the native - born population to raise objections on many grounds — cultural , religious , ethnic , and economic .

the focus of the latest national debate over high levels of immigration is largely on its economic effects , that is , whether immigration provides net economic benefits to society .

the current debate has been concerned with the impact of immigration on the public budget and the private economy .

in terms of budgetary effects , the question is whether immigrants receive more in public services than they pay in taxes .

immigrants also affect the private economy in their capacity as workers: if the admission of foreign - born workers lowers wages , which , in turn , results in more goods being produced at lower prices , then u.s. consumers would benefit ; however , if immigration results in lower wages , u.s. workers would be harmed .

the debate over immigration policy has been devoted more to the well - being of u.s. workers than to consumer welfare .

the report opens with a discussion of how to analyze the impact of immigrants on the pay and job opportunities of native - born workers .

it then uses this framework to examine and interpret the empirical literature on the subject .

the report concludes with a discussion of policy implications .

before the entrance of foreign - born workers to the u.s. labor market , the amount of labor that workers are willing to supply to employers is represented by the curve labeled s 1 in figure 1 .

the supply curve is upward sloping because workers are willing to offer more labor ( eg , work more hours ) in response to higher real wages .

employers' demand for labor is represented by the curve labeled d , which slopes downward because each worker that is hired contributes less to the firm's revenues than the prior worker .

a firm stops hiring workers when the last employee added to the payroll contributes as much to revenues as the wage the employee is willing to accept .

this is represented by point a , with total pre - immigration employment equal to e 1 and natives' real wage equal to w 1 .

the increase in the supply of labor due to the addition of foreign - born workers is represented by s 2 .

at any given wage rate , more workers now are willing to offer their services to employers .

because the contribution of the last worker hired ( e 1 ) to the firm's revenues is greater than his asking wage ( w * , which is lower than the pre - immigration wage , w 1 ) , the firm is willing to expand employment beyond e 1 .

the firm once again continues to add workers to the payroll until the contribution of the last employee hired is just equal to the wage the employee is willing to accept .

this is represented by point b , with total post - immigration employment equal to e 2 and the wage rate of native - and foreign - born workers equal to w 2 .

in summary , supply - and - demand theory predicts that the real wage rate for all workers will fall from w 1 to w 2 after the entrance of immigrants to the u.s. labor market .

in the process , total u.s. employment expands from e 1 to e 2 , native - born employment contracts from e 1 to e 3 , and foreign - born employment increases from zero to e 2 minus e 3 .

does the theory sketched in figure 1 translate into fact ? .

the model suggests that some native - born workers may be made worse off through lower wages or diminished job prospects because immigration increases the supply of labor available to the nation's employers .

but , theory also suggests that immigration would make consumers ( including the above - mentioned native - born workers ) better off because it holds down wages and thereby holds down prices of goods and services .

the empirical issue is how best to measure the existence and magnitude of the potential wage and employment effects of immigration that the model describes .

some policymakers have proposed further strengthening the u.s. border with mexico to curtail the entrance of unauthorized aliens and improving enforcement of more stringent sanctions against employers who hire these predominantly low - skilled workers , based in part upon the belief that immigration does , in fact , have substantial adverse consequences for low - skilled native - born workers .

it also has been suggested that congress address the distributional issue some empirical studies have raised by changing the composition of legal immigration .

if , for example , individuals permanently admitted to the united states under the employment - based category are largely high - skilled , while those admitted under one or more of the other categories ( i.e. , family preference , immediate relatives , diversity , or refugees and asylees ) are largely low - skilled , then the current numerical limits on the latter might be lowered to mitigate immigration's presumed adverse consequences for less - skilled natives .

indeed , if the skill levels of immigrants do differ by admission category , then an across - the - board cutback in the number of foreign - born persons allowed into the united states would not be an effective remedy for the poor labor market performance of low - skilled natives in recent decades .

only if foreign - born workers who enter under each of the categories has roughly the same skill distribution would an untargeted reduction in the overall level of immigration assist less - skilled u.s. workers .

yet , changing the composition of immigration may not be the most effective way to improve the plight of low - skilled native - born workers .

as noted earlier in this report , several explanations have been offered for the increase in u.s. wage inequality .

if other factors ( eg , skill - biased technological change ) have played a greater role than the inflow of low - skilled foreign - born workers , then curtailing the immigration of this group may not much affect the wage and employment outcomes of low - skilled u.s. workers .

moreover , a policy that shifts the composition of foreign - born persons who legally enter the united states — through permanent admissions or temporary worker programs — toward the more skilled might have unintended consequences .

an increase in the supply of foreign - born workers to high - skilled occupations might adversely affect the wage and job opportunities of native - born workers in those fields and dissuade students from majoring in them .

despite the considerable debate that preceded amendments to the professional specialty ( h - 1b visa ) guest worker program made by congress to increase the arguably inadequate supply of native - born workers qualified to fill information technology jobs , little research has been undertaken to assess the effects of the policy changes on native - born workers .

perhaps not surprisingly , in light of the conflicting results of the previously discussed literature , there is no consensus among the few studies that have looked specifically at the impact on high - skilled native - born workers of an increase in the supply of comparable foreign - born workers .

one researcher tentatively concluded that while allowing into the country h - 1b workers with information technology ( it ) skills may not depress the wages of u.s. workers in computer - related occupations , the program might adversely affect the group's unemployment rate .

another analysis similarly estimated that an increase in temporary and permanent immigrants does not negatively affect the wages of u.s. workers in professional occupations .

although a third study determined that h - 1b workers in computer programming occupations typically are paid much less than u.s. workers similarly employed in the same state , perhaps the number of h - 1b programmers in a given state is not sufficiently large to lower the wages of native - born programmers in a given state .

in contrast , yet another empirical study found that an increase in the supply of labor to a particular doctoral field caused by an influx of foreign students reduced the earnings of competing science and engineering ph.d. students who graduated at about the same time .

the economist attributed "roughly half of the adverse wage impact of immigration on high - skill labor markets ... to the increased use of low - pay postdoctoral appointments [in science and engineering] as a way of adjusting to the increase in [labor] supply. .

if the composition of foreign - born workers were shifted toward the high - skilled , it could make it more difficult to utilize one means commonly suggested to mitigate any adverse distributional effects of immigration .

students and low - skilled native - born workers often have been encouraged to become complements of rather than substitutes for foreign - born workers .

expressed differently , they have been urged to obtain a bachelor's degree or undertake retraining at community colleges , for example , to acquire higher order skills expected to remove them from competition with low - skilled immigrants .

but with the admission of more high - skilled foreign - born workers , just obtaining higher skill levels may not be sufficient to avoid potential wage suppression and displacement , based upon the results of at least some of the above - described empirical literature .

