this report explains the major provisions of the federal estate , gift , and generation - skipping transfer taxes as they apply to transfers in 2014 .

the enactment of the economic growth and tax relief reconciliation act of 2001 phased out the estate and generation - skipping transfer taxes over a 10-year period , leaving the gift tax as the only federal transfer tax in 2010 .

the tax relief , unemployment insurance reauthorization , and job creation act of 2010 temporarily ( through the end of 2012 ) reinstated the estate and generation - skipping transfer taxes with lower top rates and larger exemptions and reunified the estate and gift taxes .

the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 permanently extended the estate tax rules enacted by the 2010 act except for the top tax rate , which increased from 35% to 40% .

the federal estate and gift taxes are unified as they utilize the same rate structure .

federal estate and gift taxes also share a lifetime transfer credit .

for 2014 , this unified credit covers an applicable amount of $5,340,000 per individual .

the federal estate , gift , and generation - skipping transfer tax laws are rather lengthy and complex .

this report discusses those major internal revenue code ( irc ) and internal revenue service ( irs ) regulation provisions which play the dominant role in the determination of estate , gift , and generation - skipping transfer tax liability .

this discussion relates only to the taxation of united states citizens and resident aliens while different rules apply to the taxation of nonresident alien individuals .

for a discussion on transfer taxes for nonresident aliens , see crs report r43576 , estate and gift taxes for nonresident aliens , by [author name scrubbed] .

the federal estate tax is a tax on the estate of a decedent , levied against and paid by the estate .

contrastingly , the inheritance tax is imposed on and paid by the heirs of the decedent based upon the money or property that they receive .

the determination of federal estate tax liability involves a series of adjustments and modifications of a tax base known as the "gross estate. .

certain allowable deductions reduce the gross estate to the "taxable estate. .

then , the total of all lifetime taxable gifts made by the decedent is added to the taxable estate before tax rates are applied .

the result is the decedent's estate tax which , after reduction for certain allowable credits , is the amount of tax paid by the estate .

this discussion will divide the federal estate tax into three components: the gross estate , deductions from the gross estate , and computation of the tax , including allowable tax credits .

the federal gift tax is a tax imposed on an annual basis on all gratuitous transfers of property made during life .

the tax seeks to account for transfers of property that would otherwise reduce the estate and accordingly estate tax liability at death .

the donor's tax liability on the gift depends upon the value of the "taxable gift. .

the taxable gift is determined by reducing the gross value of the gift by the available deductions and exclusions .

the gift tax liability created on the basis of the donor's taxable gifts may be reduced by the available unified transfer tax credit .

this discussion will divide the federal gift tax into two components: the taxable gift and the computation of the gift tax .

the tax reform act of 1986 repealed the original generation - skipping transfer ( gst ) tax , enacted in 1976 , because of its complexity and replaced it with a simplified flat - rate tax .

the purpose of the resulting gst tax is the same as its predecessor , to close a loophole in the estate and gift tax system where property could be transferred to successive generations without paying multiple estate or gift taxes .

the traditional generation - skipping transfers were trusts established by a parent for the lifetime benefit of the children with the remainder passing to the grandchildren .

if properly drafted , an estate or gift tax would not be imposed when the trust corpus passed from the settlor's children to the settlor's grandchildren because the estate tax is not imposed on interests that terminate at death .

this discussion will divide the generation - skipping transfer tax into two components: generation - skipping transfers and the computation of the tax .

the gst tax is a flat - rate tax .

the rate is set at the highest estate tax rate , currently 40% .

this tax rate is applied to three different transfer events: a direct skip , a taxable termination , or a taxable distribution .

a direct skip is a transfer to a skip person .

a skip person is a person assigned to a generation two or more generations below the transferor's .

a transfer to a trust is a direct skip if all the interests in the trust are held by skip persons .

a taxable termination is a termination by death , lapse of time , release of power , or otherwise of an interest in property held in trust .

a taxable termination does not occur if immediately after the termination a non - skip person has an interest in the property or if after the termination , the trust makes a distribution to a skip person .

a taxable distribution is a distribution from a trust , other than a taxable termination or direct skip , to a skip person .

an important step in determining the gst tax is to assign all persons involved to a specific generation level , as outlined in the irc .

persons related to the transferor or spouse are assigned along family lines .

for example , the transferor , spouse , and brothers and sisters are in one generation , their children in the next , and grandchildren in the next .

lineal descendants of a grandparent of the transferor or spouse are assigned to generations on the same basis .

anyone ever married to a lineal descendant of the transferor's grandparent or the spouse's grandparent are assigned to the level of their spouse who was a lineal descendant .

non - relatives of the transferor are assigned generations measured from the birth of the transferor .

persons not more than 12½ years younger are treated as members of the same generation as the transferor .

each 25-year period thereafter is treated as a new generation .

a grandchild of the transferor or spouse is moved up one generation if his parents are deceased at the time of the transfer .

the first step in calculating the gst tax is to determine the taxable amount .

for direct skips , the taxable amount is the value of the property received by the transferee .

the gst tax on direct skips is tax - exclusive , meaning that the amount of tax paid is proportional to the pretax value of the transferred property .

contrastingly , the taxable amount for taxable terminations and distributions is tax - inclusive .

the taxable amount for these property transfers is determined by including the tax value with the value of the property before applying the tax rate .

the second step in calculating the gst tax is to apply the applicable rate .

the applicable rate is the maximum federal estate tax rate ( 40% for 2014 ) and the inclusion ratio of the transfer .

the inclusion ratio is figured by subtracting from one ( "1" ) the following fraction: the portion of the gst exemption allocated to the transfer as the numerator and the value of the property transferred as the denominator .

to compute the generation - skipping tax , the value of the transfer is multiplied by the tax rate ( 40% ) and by the inclusion ratio .

the irc provides several exemptions and exclusions for the gst tax .

unlike the estate and gift taxes , the gst tax does not use the unified credit .

instead , a $5,340,000 gst exemption is allowed to each individual for generation - skipping transfers during life or at death .

the exemption is doubled for married individuals who elect to treat the transfers as made one - half by each spouse .

an indirect skip property transfer automatically triggers the gst exemption .

an indirect skip occurs when the generation one level below the decedent ( eg , children ) receives some beneficial interest in the property before the property passes to the generation two or more levels below ( eg , grandchildren ) .

the exclusions for tuition and medical expense payments from the gift tax also apply to the generation - skipping tax .

additionally , the $14,000 per donee annual exclusion from the gift tax is recognized against taxation of direct skips only ( i.e. , where the property passes directly to the generation two or more levels below the decedent ) .

the liability for the tax is determined by the type of transfer .

in the case of a taxable distribution , the tax is paid by the transferee .

the tax on taxable terminations or direct skips from a trust is paid by the trustee .

direct skips , other than those from a trust , are taxed to the transferor .

