a complicated body of rules , precedents , and practices governs the legislative process on the floor of the house of representatives .

the official manual of house rules is more than 1,000 pages long and is supplemented by 30 volumes of precedents , with more volumes to be published in coming years .

yet there are two reasons why gaining a fundamental understanding of the house's legislative procedures is not as difficult as the sheer number and size of these documents might suggest .

first , the ways in which the house applies its rules are largely predictable , at least in comparison with the senate .

some rules are certainly more complex and more difficult to interpret than others , but the house tends to follow similar procedures under similar circumstances .

even the ways in which the house frequently waives , supplants , or supplements its standing rules with special , temporary procedures generally fall into a limited number of recognizable patterns .

second , underlying most of the rules that representatives may invoke and the procedures the house may follow is a fundamentally important premise — that a majority of members should ultimately be able to work their will on the floor .

although house rules generally recognize the importance of permitting any minority — partisan or bipartisan — to present its views and sometimes propose its alternatives , the rules do not enable that minority to filibuster or use other parliamentary devices to prevent the majority from prevailing without undue delay .

this principle provides an underlying coherence to the various specific procedures discussed in this report .

article i of the constitution imposes a few restrictions on house ( and senate ) procedures — for example , requirements affecting quorums and roll - call votes — but otherwise the constitution authorizes each house of congress to determine for itself the "rules of its proceedings" ( article 1 , section 5 ) .

this liberal grant of authority has several important implications .

first , the house can amend its rules unilaterally ; it need not consult with either the senate or the president .

second , the house is free to suspend , waive , or ignore its rules whenever it chooses to do so .

by and large , the speaker or whatever representative is presiding usually does not enforce the rules at his or her own initiative .

instead , members must protect their own rights by affirmatively making points of order whenever they believe the rules are about to be violated .

in addition , house rules include several formal procedures for waiving or suspending certain other rules , and almost any rule can be waived by unanimous consent .

thus , the requirements and restrictions discussed in this report generally apply only if the house chooses to enforce them .

if for no other reason than the size of its membership , the house has found it necessary to limit the opportunities for each representative to participate in floor deliberations .

whenever a member is recognized to speak on the floor , there is always a time limit on his or her right to debate .

the rules of the house never permit a representative to hold the floor for more than one hour .

under some parliamentary circumstances , there are more stringent limits , with members being allowed to speak for no more than 5 minutes , 20 minutes , or 30 minutes .

furthermore , house rules sometimes impose a limit on how long the entire membership of the house may debate a motion or measure .

most bills and resolutions , for instance , are considered under a set of procedures called "suspension of the rules" ( discussed later in this report ) that limits all debate on a measure to a maximum of 40 minutes .

under other conditions , when there is no such time limit imposed by the rules , the house ( and to some extent , the committee of the whole as well ) can impose one by simple majority vote .

these debate limitations and debate - limiting devices generally prevent a minority of the house from thwarting the will of the majority .

house rules also limit debate in other important respects .

first , all debate on the floor must be germane to whatever legislative business the house is conducting .

representatives may speak on other subjects only in one - minute speeches most often made at the beginning of each day's session , special order speeches occurring after the house has completed its legislative business for the day , and during morning hour debates that are scheduled on certain days of the week .

second , all debate on the floor must be consistent with certain rules of courtesy and decorum .

for example , a member should not question or criticize the motives of a colleague .

when a house committee reports a public bill or resolution that had been referred to it , the measure is placed on the house calendar or the union calendar .

in general , tax , authorization , and appropriations bills are placed on the union calendar ; all others go to the house calendar .

in effect , the calendars are catalogues of measures that have been approved , with or without proposed amendments , by one or more house committees and are now available for consideration on the floor .

placement on a calendar does not guarantee that a measure will receive floor consideration at a specified time or at all .

because it would be impractical or undesirable for the house to take up measures in the chronological order in which they are reported and placed on one of the calendars , there must be some procedures for deciding the order in which measures are to be brought from the calendars to the house floor — in other words , procedures for determining the order of business .

clause 1 of rule xiv lists the daily order of business on the floor , beginning with the opening prayer , the approval of the journal ( the official record of house proceedings required by the constitution ) , and the pledge of allegiance .

apart from these routine matters , however , the house never follows the order of business laid out in this rule .

instead , certain measures and actions are privileged , meaning they may interrupt the regular order of business .

in practice , all the legislative business that the house conducts comes to the floor by interrupting the order of business under rule xiv , either by unanimous consent or under the provisions of another house rule .

every bill and resolution that cannot be considered by unanimous consent must become privileged business if it is going to reach the floor at all .

there is no one single set of procedures that the house always follows when it considers a public bill or resolution on the floor .

instead , there are several modes of consideration , or different sets of procedural rules , that the house uses .

in some cases , house rules require that certain kinds of bills be considered in certain ways .

by various means , however , the house chooses to use whichever mode of consideration is most appropriate for a given bill .

which of these modes the house uses depends on such factors as the importance and potential cost of the bill and the amount of controversy the bill has generated among members .

the differences among these sets of procedures rest largely on the balance that each strikes between the opportunities for members to debate and propose amendments , on the one hand , and the ability of the house to act promptly , on the other .

regardless of which procedure the house uses to consider legislation , the house majority party leadership generally tries to post the text of measures coming to the chamber floor in advance on an internet website created for that purpose .

before any bill can become law , both the house and the senate must pass it , and the two houses must agree on each and every one of its provisions .

this basic constitutional requirement means that the house must have procedures to respond when the house and senate pass different versions of the same bill .

for example , the house may pass a senate bill with house amendments , or the senate may pass a house bill with senate amendments and then send its amendments to the house .

in either case , the two houses must resolve their differences over these amendments before the legislative process is completed .

there are essentially two ways to approach this stage of the process: ( 1 ) by dealing with the amendments individually through a process of exchanging amendments between the chambers , with the bill being sent back and forth between the house and senate , or ( 2 ) by dealing with the amendments collectively through a conference committee of representatives and senators who negotiate a series of compromises and concessions that are compiled in a conference report that the two houses can vote to accept .

because the process of resolving differences between the houses can be quite complicated , only some of its basic elements are summarized here .

the house normally considers senate amendments to a house bill by unanimous consent or by suspension of the rules ; the house may accept the amendments ( concur in them ) or amend them ( concur in them with house amendments ) .

alternatively , the committee with jurisdiction over the bill may authorize its chair to move that the house disagree to the senate's amendments and send them to a conference committee .

when the house amends and passes a senate bill , it may request a conference with the senate immediately , or it may simply send its amendments to the senate in the hope that the senate will accept them .

if the senate refuses to do so , it may request a conference with the house instead .

on the other hand , if the house and senate can reach agreement by proposing amendments to each other's positions , the bill can be sent to the president for his signature or veto without the need to create a conference committee .

this method of resolving differences is sometimes colloquially called "ping - pong," because each chamber acts in turn , shuttling the legislation back and forth as each proposes amendments to the position of the other .

if the house and senate agree to send their versions of the bill to a conference committee , the speaker appoints the house conferees .

these conferees are usually drawn from the standing committee ( or committees ) with jurisdiction over the bill , although the speaker may appoint some other representatives as well .

when the house and senate conferees meet , they are to deal only with provisions of the bill on which the two houses disagree .

they should not insert new provisions or change provisions that both houses have already approved .

furthermore , as the conferees resolve each provision or amendment in disagreement , they accept the house position , the senate position , or a compromise between them .

like almost all other house rules , the rules limiting the authority of conferees are enforced only if members make points of order at the appropriate time .

the house may also adopt a special rule , reported by the rules committee , waiving points of order against a conference report .

to complete their work successfully , a majority of the house conferees and a majority of the senate conferees must sign a report that recommends all the agreements they have reached .

the conferees also sign a "joint explanatory statement" that describes the original house and senate positions and the conferees' recommendations and is the functional equivalent of a legislative committee report .

after representatives have had three days to examine a conference report , it is privileged for floor consideration ; it may be called up at any time that the house is not already considering something else .

the report may be debated in the house under the hour rule , so the vote almost always occurs after no more than one hour of debate .

no amendments to the report are in order .

in practice , however , the house almost always considers conference reports under the terms of a special rule from the rules committee that waives all points of order against the report and its consideration .

the conference report is a proposed package settlement of a number of disagreements , so the house and senate may accept it or reject it , but they may not change it .

if the two houses agree to the report by simple majority vote , all their differences have been resolved and the bill is then "enrolled," or reprinted , for formal presentation to the president .

in rare instances , conferees cannot reach agreement on one or more of the amendments in conference , or they may reach an agreement that they cannot include in their conference report because their proposal exceeds the scope of the differences between the house and senate positions ( and thus violates the rules governing the content of conference reports ) .

in either case , the conferees may report back to the two houses with an amendment ( or amendments ) in disagreement .

after acting on the conference report and dealing collectively with all the other amendments that were sent to conference , the house acts on each of the amendments in disagreement by considering motions such as a motion to accept the senate's amendment or a motion to amend it with a new house amendment .

the senate takes similar action until the disagreements on these amendments are resolved or until the two houses agree to create a new conference committee only to address the remaining amendments that are still in disagreement .

the bill cannot become law until the two houses resolve all the differences between their positions .

whenever representatives vote on the floor , there is almost always first a "voice vote," in which the members in favor of the bill , amendment , or motion vote "aye" in unison , followed by those voting "no. .

before the speaker ( or the chair of the committee of the whole ) announces the result , any representative can demand a "division vote," in which the members in favor stand up to be counted , again followed by those opposed .

but before the result of either a voice vote or a division vote is announced , a member may try to require another vote in which everyone's position is recorded publicly .

this recorded vote is taken by using the house's electronic voting system .

in committee of the whole , an electronic vote is ordered when 25 members request it .

in the house , such a vote occurs when demanded by at least one - fifth of the members present .

alternatively , any member can demand an electronically recorded vote in the house if a quorum of the membership is not present on the floor when the voice or division vote takes place .

the constitution requires that a quorum must be present on the floor when the house is conducting business .

in the house , a quorum is a majority of the representatives ; in committee of the whole , it is only 100 members .

however , the house has traditionally assumed that a quorum is always present unless a member makes a point of order that it is not .

the rules restrict when members can make such points of order , and they occur most often when the house or the committee of the whole is voting .

in the house , for example , a representative can object to a voice or division vote on the grounds that a quorum is not present and make that point of order .

if a quorum is not present , the speaker automatically orders an electronically recorded vote during which members record their presence on the floor by casting their votes .

the issue is decided and a quorum is established at the same time .

a voice or division vote is valid even if less than a quorum participates in the vote so long as no one makes a point of order that a quorum is not present .

for this reason , members can continue to meet in their committees or fulfill their other responsibilities off the floor when the house is doing business that does not involve publicly recorded votes .

on most days , the house will meet two hours prior to scheduled legislative business for morning hour debate , a period in which members can make speeches of up to five minutes on subjects of their choosing .

later , the house will meet for legislative session .

after the opening prayer on each day by the house chaplain ( or perhaps by a guest chaplain ) , the speaker announces approval of the journal of the previous day's proceedings .

a member may require a recorded vote on agreeing to the speaker's approval of the journal .

following the pledge of allegiance , some members may then ask unanimous consent to address the house for one minute each on whatever subjects they wish , including subjects unrelated to the scheduled legislative business of the day .

the ability to set the house's floor schedule is one of the primary powers and responsibilities of the majority party leaders , and in doing so they often consult with minority party leaders .

generally speaking , to the extent possible , majority party leaders and the committee chairmen arrange the legislative schedule for each week in advance .

during the last floor session of the week , the majority leader normally announces the expected schedule for the coming week in a traditional "wrap - up" colloquy with a minority party leader .

changes in the schedule may be announced as they are made .

on a monday , tuesday , or wednesday , the house will commonly consider multiple measures under the "suspension of the rules" procedure .

typically , recorded votes on such measures , if requested , are clustered together and taken at the end of the day .

on other days of the week , the house will usually consider a major bill pursuant to a special rule reported by the house committee on rules .

such a special rule would be debated in the house under the hour rule , at the end of which the majority manager of the special rule would "move the previous question," which , when adopted , brings the resolution to a vote .

once adopted , the house would ordinarily consider a measure in committee of the whole pursuant to the terms for general debate and amendment established by the special rule .

following consideration in the committee of the whole , the house would take the final votes on the measure after voting on the amendments recommended by the committee and on a minority motion to recommit , which would likely be made with amendatory instructions .

as each item of business is completed , the speaker anticipates which member should be seeking recognition to call up the next bill or resolution .

if another representative requests to be recognized instead , t he speaker may ask , "for what purpose does the gentleman seek recognition ? .

the speaker may decline to recognize that member if the speaker wants the house to consider another privileged measure , motion , or report .

at the end of legislative business on most days , some members address the house for as much as an hour each on subjects of their choice .

these "special order" speeches are arranged in advance and organized by the party leadership .

in this way , representatives can comment at length on current national and international issues and discuss bills that have not yet reached the house floor .

the house often adjourns by early evening , although it may remain in session later when the need arises or when the end of the annual session or some other deadline approaches .

the house rules for each congress are published in a volume often called the house manual but officially entitled constitution , jefferson's manual and rules of the house of representatives .

a new edition of this collection is published each congress .

the precedents of the house established through 1935 have been compiled in the 11-volume set of hinds' and cannon's precedents of the house of representatives .

more recent precedents are published as deschler's or deschler - brown - johnson precedents of the u.s. house of representatives ; 18 volumes of this set now are available .

volume 1 of a fourth series of house precedents , precedents of the united states house of representatives , was initiated in 2017 , and additional volumes are expected in the future .

the house's procedures are summarized in house practice: a guide to the rules , precedents and procedures of the house , by charles w. johnson , john v. sullivan , and thomas j. wickham jr. , parliamentarians of the house .

the most recent version of house practice was published in 2017 .

the parliamentarian and his assistants welcome inquiries about house procedures and offer expert assistance compatible with their other responsibilities .

crs report 98-995 , the amending process in the house of representatives , by christopher m. davis .

crs report rl32200 , debate , motions , and other actions in the committee of the whole , by bill heniff jr. and elizabeth rybicki .

crs report 97-552 , the discharge rule in the house: principal features and uses , by richard s. beth .

crs report rl30787 , parliamentary reference sources: house of representatives , by richard s. beth and megan s. lynch .

crs report 98-696 , resolving legislative differences in congress: conference committees and amendments between the houses , by elizabeth rybicki .

crs report 97-780 , the speaker of the house: house officer , party leader , and representative , by valerie heitshusen .

crs report 98-314 , suspension of the rules in the house: principal features , by elizabeth rybicki .

crs report 98-870 , quorum requirements in the house: committee and chamber , by christopher m. davis .

