the fair housing act ( fha ) was enacted "to provide , within constitutional limitations , for fair housing throughout the united states. .

the original 1968 act prohibited discrimination on the basis of "race , color , religion , or national origin" in the sale or rental of housing , the financing of housing , or the provision of brokerage services .

in 1974 , the act was amended to add sex discrimination to the list of prohibited activities .

the last major change to the act occurred in 1988 when it was amended to prohibit discrimination on the additional grounds of physical and mental handicap , as well as familial status .

however , legislation that would amend the fha is routinely introduced in congress , including proposals to extend the act's anti - discrimination provisions to prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation , gender identity , marital status , source of income , and status as a military servicemember or veteran ; and to make clear that the act does not support disparate impact discrimination claims .

this report provides an overview of the types of discriminatory practices barred by the fha , as well as certain activities that are exempted from the act's coverage .

it also analyzes various legal tests applied by courts to assess both intentional ( a.k.a. , disparate treatment ) discrimination and disparate impact discrimination claims brought under the act .

additionally , the report addresses several specific types of discrimination that have been the source of fair housing litigation , including how the act's proscription on discriminating against families with children interplays with housing communities for older persons ; how the prohibition against discriminating on the basis of sex can provide protections to lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( lgbt ) individuals who are not expressly protected under the act ; and the intersection of local zoning laws , group homes , and the fha's protections against discrimination on the basis of mental and physical disabilities .

the report concludes with an overview of how the act can be enforced , as well as the potential remedies available to victims of unlawful discrimination and potential penalties that can be assessed against violators .

the fha prohibits discrimination on the basis of race , color , religion , sex , handicap , familial status , or national origin in the sale or rental of housing , the financing of housing , the provision of brokerage services , or in residential real estate - related transactions .

in general , the fha applies to a broad assortment of housing , both public and private , including single family homes , apartments , condominiums , mobile homes , and others .

the act's coverage extends to "residential real estate - related transactions," which include both the "making [and] purchasing of loans ... secured by residential real estate [and] the selling , brokering , or appraising of residential real property. .

thus , the provisions of the fha extend to the secondary mortgage market .

hud regulations elaborate upon the types of housing practices in which discrimination is prohibited and provide illustrations of such practices .

under the regulations , the housing practices in which discrimination is prohibited include the sale or rental of a dwelling ; the provision of services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling ; other conduct which makes dwellings unavailable to persons ; steering ; advertising or publishing notices with regard to the selling or renting of a dwelling ; misrepresentations as to the availability of a dwelling ; blockbusting ; and the denial of "access to membership or participation in any multiple - listing service , real estate brokers association , or other service ... relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings. .

yet another provision makes it unlawful to "coerce intimidate , threaten , or interfere with" individuals for exercising , or aiding others in the exercise of their rights under the fha .

finally , as noted above , the fha applies to public as well as private housing .

as a result , a number of lawsuits over the years have challenged the fair housing practices of state and local housing authorities and even hud itself , particularly with respect to discrimination in low - income public housing .

for example , in one 2005 case , african american residents of public housing in baltimore sued hud and various local agencies on race discrimination grounds .

the court ultimately held that hud had violated the fha "by failing adequately to consider regional approaches to ameliorate racial segregation in public housing in the baltimore region. .

in july 2015 , hud issued final regulations designed to implement an fha mandate that executive agencies administering hud programs , as well as hud - grantees and other recipients of hud funding , further the fha's goals of reducing segregation and housing barriers .

the rule was issued in response to recommendations expressed in a government accountability office ( gao ) report on hud's oversight of grantees' compliance with these mandates .

among other things , hud's affirmatively furthering fair housing rule requires covered entities to "identify and evaluate fair housing issues" in a standardized fashion through an "assessment of fair housing" ( afh ) plan ; incorporate housing data accumulated and publicly disseminated by hud , when establishing housing - related goals , plans , and decisions ; and allow members of the public "to provide input about fair housing issues , goals , priorities , and the most appropriate use of hud funds ...." the rule went into effect on august 17 , 2015 ; however , participants will have at least one year to submit their first afh plan , with smaller participants being given more time .

fha discrimination claims fall into two broad categories: intentional , also referred to as disparate treatment discrimination , and disparate impact discrimination .

courts apply different legal tests to assess the validity of intentional versus disparate impact discrimination claims .

disparate treatment claims allege that a defendant made a covered housing decision based on "a discriminatory intent or motive. .

disparate impact claims , on the other hand , involve allegations that a covered practice has "a disproportionately adverse effect on [a protected class] and [is] otherwise unjustified by a legitimate rationale. .

these two categories of discrimination are explored in turn .

this section addresses several different types of discrimination that have been the source of a significant number of legal disputes or otherwise raise unique legal issues under the fha .

the secretary of hud , the attorney general , and victims of discrimination may each take action to enforce the fha's protections against discrimination .

hud has primary administrative enforcement authority of the act , which it typically fulfills through administrative adjudications .

however , the department of justice may also bring actions in federal court under certain circumstances .

within one year of the occurrence or end of an alleged discriminatory housing action , a harmed party may file a complaint with the secretary , or the secretary may file a complaint on his own initiative .

when a complaint is filed , the secretary must , within 10 days , serve the respondent — the party charged with committing a discriminatory practice — with notice of the complaint .

the respondent must then answer the complaint within 10 days .

from the filing of the complaint , the secretary has 100 days , subject to extension , to complete an investigation of the alleged discriminatory actions .

during this time , the secretary must , "to the extent feasible , engage in conciliation with respect to" the complaint and , as warranted , the secretary may enter into a conciliation agreement , which can include binding arbitration and the harmed party being awarded monetary damages or other relief .

at the completion of the investigation , the secretary must determine whether "reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur. .

if he finds no reasonable cause , then he must dismiss the complaint .

if he finds reasonable cause , then he must file a charge on behalf of the harmed party in the absence of a conciliation agreement .

if a charge is filed , then the secretary or any party to the dispute may elect to have the case heard in a federal district court .

otherwise , the case shall be heard by an administrative law judge ( alj ) .

in such a hearing , parties may appear with legal representation , have subpoenas issued , cross examine witnesses , and submit evidence .

the alj must initiate a hearing within 120 days of a charge being issued , unless adhering to that time frame is impracticable .

he also must "make findings of fact and conclusions of law within 60 days after the end of the hearing ... unless it is impracticable to do so. .

"if the [alj] finds that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice," the alj is to order the harmed party relief , which can include monetary damages , civil penalties , and injunctive or other equitable relief .

the alj may also impose a civil penalty of up to $10,000 for a first offense or more if it is not a first offense .

the alj's orders , findings of fact , and conclusions of law may be reviewed by the secretary .

parties also are authorized to appeal administrative orders to the federal courts .

the secretary may seek enforcement of an administrative order in a federal court of appeals .

such court may "affirm , modify , or set aside , in whole or in part , the order , or remand" it to the alj for additional proceedings .

the court also may grant any party "such temporary relief , restraining order , or other order as the court deems just and proper. .

reasonable attorney's fees also may be awarded to a prevailing party , except where the united states is the prevailing party .

the attorney general ( ag ) may bring a civil action in federal district court if ( 1 ) the ag has reasonable cause to think that an individual or a group is "engaged in a pattern or practice" of denying one's rights under the fha and "such denial raises an issue of general public importance" ; or ( 2 ) the secretary refers to him a case involving a violation of a conciliation agreement or of housing discrimination .

in such a civil action , the court may issue preventive relief , such as an injunction or a restraining order ; provide monetary damages ; issue civil penalties ; or provide some other appropriate relief .

in some instances , prevailing parties may be able to recover reasonable legal costs and fees .

individuals who use force or the threat of force to "willfully injur[e] , intimdiate[] or interfere[] with ..." a person's ability to own , rent , sell , or otherwise engage in housing - related activities because that person's race , color , national origin , handicap , sex , religion , or familial status also could be subject to criminal penalties .

an "aggrieved person" may initiate a civil action , in either a federal district or a state court , within two years of "the occurrence or the termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice , or the breach of a conciliation agreement. .

if the secretary has filed a complaint , an aggrieved person may still bring a private suit , unless a conciliation agreement has been reached or an administrative hearing has begun .

the ag may intervene in a private suit if he determines that the suit is of "general public importance. .

if the court determines that discrimination has occurred or is going to occur , it may award punitive damages , actual damages , equitable relief ( eg , restraining order , injunction ) , or other appropriate relief .

in some instances , prevailing parties may be able to recover reasonable legal costs and fees .

