the united states remains the only major industrialized country in which a nonmetric measurement system is predominantly employed .

thus , while miles , pounds , and degrees fahrenheit ( i.e. , the english system of measurement ) are widely used in the united states , kilometers , grams , and degrees celsius are favored throughout the rest of the industrialized world .

voluntary use of the metric system , also known as the international system of units or si , has been legal in the united states since 1866 , and certain segments of society ( particularly scientists and industries involved in international trade ) have embraced metric units for many years .

calls for widespread metric conversion intensified during the mid - 1960s , particularly after the united kingdom began its conversion from the english system to metric .

in 1968 , congress passed the metric study act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-472 ) which authorized a three - year department of commerce study on the feasibility of metric conversion in the united states .

the study concluded that conversion to the metric system was in the best interests of the nation , particularly in view of the increasing importance of technology and international trade to the u.s. economy .

in 1975 , the metric conversion act ( p.l .

94-168 ) was passed by congress .

the act established a u.s .

metric board whose purpose was to coordinate and plan a process of voluntary metric conversion throughout the nation .

however , there appeared to be widespread public antipathy to conversion to the metric system and the metric board's efforts were largely ignored ( and in some instances , vociferously opposed ) by the american public .

in 1982 , the metric board was abolished by the reagan administration .

by the late 1980s , however , concern over u.s. industrial competitiveness in world markets led congress to again encourage metric conversion , this time by requiring federal agencies to go metric in their respective activities .

section 5164 of the omnibus trade and competitiveness act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-418 ) amended the metric conversion act of 1975 to designate the metric system as the "preferred system of weights and measures for united states trade and commerce. .

the amended act required all federal agencies to begin using the metric system in procurements , grants , and other business - related activities , except when such use is impractical or is likely to cause significant inefficiencies or loss of markets to u.s. firms .

agencies were also required to report annually to congress on actions taken to implement fully the metric system of measurement .

as follow - up to p.l .

100-418 , executive order 12770 ( "metric usage in federal government programs" ) , issued in 1991 by president bush , further required federal agencies to formulate and implement metric conversion plans .

federal agencies were initially slow in responding to the metric conversion mandate .

a march 1990 general accounting office ( gao ) report found that most federal agencies had not shown a commitment to metric conversion .

after executive order 12770 was issued , agency compliance measurably improved .

a committee print issued december 1993 by the house committee on science , space and technology , reported that 29 out of 36 federal agencies had reported their metric activities to congress ( as required by p.l .

100-418 ) .

the study concluded that a "general commitment toward converting to the metric system by each federal government agency reporting appears clearly evident. .

meanwhile , a january 1994 gao report on metric conversion found that while federal preparations for metric conversion were well underway , basic problems limited federal metric procurement ; grants and other business activities showed mixed progress ; and federal agencies indicated a need for greater support from the private sector and the public .

the metric program at the department of commerce's national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) is responsible for coordinating the metric transition activities of all federal agencies .

nist chairs the interagency committee on metric policy ( icmp ) and is required by executive order 12770 to report to the president annually regarding metric conversion progress made by individual federal agencies .

the most recent report , the 1993 metric progress report , concluded that metric conversion progress among agencies is widely variable , and depends upon the metric readiness of the industries a particular agency's programs affect , budget limitations , and the amount of visible high level leadership within the agency .

notable examples of metric conversion activities in the federal government include: the proposed metric conversion of federal highways ( discussed below ) , a requirement that all new federal building construction projects be conducted in metric units , and a federal trade commission ( ftc ) rule requiring consumer product packaging to be labeled with dual ( english and metric ) units .

other agencies , however , have determined it unfeasible or unpractical to convert particular activities to metric at this time .

the gao found that "[metric conversion] problems encountered by federal agencies frequently involve opposition from the private sector or the public .

generally speaking , the more directly a proposed conversion affects the private sector or the public , the greater the resistance. .

thus , for example , the secretary of agriculture has granted a general exemption from metric conversion for projects or programs that directly affect individual farmers or farm programs .

the national weather service in the department of commerce , while gathering all of its data in metric units , converts back to the inch - pound system before providing its data to the public .

similar to the metric provisions of the national highway system designation act , much of the metric - related legislation introduced in the 104 th congress sought to limit metric conversion activities in the federal government , particularly in cases where the federal government is seen to be imposing metric conversion mandates on the states .

section 302 of the unfunded mandate reform act of 1995 ( p.l .

104-4 ) , signed into law on march 22 , 1995 , directed the advisory commission on intergovernmental relations ( acir ) to study specific federal mandates , including "requirements of the departments , agencies , and other entities of the federal government that state , local , and tribal governments utilize metric systems of measurement. .

on january 24 , 1996 , the acir issued its preliminary report on federal mandates .

the commission identified fhwa metric conversion requirements for federal highway construction as a federal mandate , and recommended the repeal of "requirements that state and local governments convert to metric on a federal timetable as a condition of receiving federal aid. .

metric proponents have objected to the acir findings , asserting that metric conversion has already been implemented by most states , that the metric system is becoming increasingly accepted by the construction community , and that metric conversion costs constitute a tiny percentage of total federal highway funds received .

other legislation in the 104 th congress sought to amend the metric conversion act .

the federal reports elimination and sunset act of 1995 ( p.l .

104-66 ) , which was signed into law on december 21 , 1995 , repeals section 12 of the metric conversion act requiring federal agencies to report to the congress on their metric conversion activities .

a further amendment to the metric conversion act was included in department of commerce dismantling legislation , which was attached to the house version of the debt limit extension bill ( h.r .

2586 , subsequently vetoed by the president ) .

this provision would have repealed the provision of the metric conversion act which requires federal agencies to use the metric system in their procurements , grants , and other business - related activities .

additionally , the metric program at nist would have been abolished .

finally , a bill passed by the 104 th congress ( p.l .

104-289 ) sought to curb some federal agency requirements that businesses convert their modular construction products to a hard metric specification in order to supply federal construction contracts .

while the vast majority of products procured for federal construction are soft converted ( which means that an existing product is relabeled in metric units but does not change size ) , some modular products are required in hard metric sizes in order to be dimensionally coordinated with other building components .

a hard metric conversion requires , in addition to the expression of the dimensions of a product in metric units , a physical change in the dimension of that product in order to conform to a rounded metric unit .

certain construction materials industries ( primarily makers of concrete masonry block and recessed lighting fixtures ) objected to hard metric requirements , arguing instead for soft metric conversion .

the savings in construction act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-289 ) , signed into law on october 11 , 1996 , applies only to concrete masonry units and recessed lighting fixtures .

the law prohibits federal agencies from specifying hard metric dimensions for concrete block and lighting fixtures , unless certain criteria are met , including a determination by the agency that the costs of the modular metric components are estimated to be equal to or less than the total installed price of using non - hard metric products .

additionally , p.l .

104-289 directs each executive agency awarding construction contracts to designate a metrication ombudsman who will respond to industry complaints and concerns regarding construction metrication issues .

in the 105 th congress , metric related legislation remains focused on the federal highway construction issue .

h.r .

813 ( introduced by representative bachus ) would remove the extended deadline of september 30 , 2000 from the national highway system designation act ( p.l .

104-59 ) , thereby indefinitely prohibiting fhwa from requiring the states to convert their federal highway projects to metric units .

section 303 of the surface transportation authorization and regulatory streamlining act ( s. 532 , introduced by senator baucus ) , contains identical language .

similarly , there are plans in the house to attach such language to legislation reauthorizing the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act ( istea ) .

proponents of removing the federal mandate for metric conversion cite the costs of conversion experienced by highway contractors , and maintain that metric conversion decisions should be left to the states .

opponents of h.r .

813 , including the department of transportation , point out that over 40 states are already surveying and designing their new projects in metric units , and that states have spent nearly $71 million to convert standard plans , specifications , and computer programs .

removing the federal mandate , they argue , would create confusion in the highway construction industry , and reverse progress that most states have already made in converting to the metric system .

