in 1979 , following decades of increasingly vigorous argument about the davis - bacon act , the carter administration agreed to review and , ultimately , to revise the federal regulations governing administration of the statute .

this set in motion a quarter - century of administrative rulemaking , litigation , legislative oversight and proposed amendment of the act .

the process continued through the reagan and bush administrations to the close of the clinton administration — and beyond .

to a large degree the core issues from the 1970s and 1980s , associated with the davis - bacon act , remain controversial .

among these is the question of the employment of helpers on davis - bacon covered federal and federally - assisted contract construction work .

for example , how is the concept of helper to be defined for davis - bacon purposes ? .

what distinguishes a helper from other construction workers ? .

on davis - bacon work , should they be integrated into the regular construction crew ? .

should helpers receive training to enhance their skills and , if so , how should such training be structured ? .

how should their wage rates compare with those of other project workers ? .

these questions quickly became a source of contention .

through more than 2 decades , employment of helpers ( as a separate category of worker on projects covered by the davis - bacon act ) remained a matter of dispute .

then , in april 1999 , the department of labor published a proposed rule on the use of helpers that would , essentially , revert to the 1970s practice of the department so far as the use of helpers was concerned .

a comment period on the proposal closed on june 8 , 1999 .

meanwhile , legislation was introduced that would have provided a statutory definition of helper — but no legislative action was taken .

under date of november 17 , 2000 , the department issued a final rule on the helper issue — to take effect on january 19 , 2001 , during the closing hours of the clinton administration .

in effect , the final rule reaffirmed departmental practice of the 1970s: the issue had come full circle .

although the new rule ( and confirmation of ongoing practice ) is now in place , some appear to be unhappy with the outcome .

thus , the issue may not yet be entirely resolved .

speaking broadly of the construction industry , a helper might be viewed as a general utility employee who assists a more skilled or specialized construction worker .

normally , the helper would be unskilled — though , in fact , he ( or she ) could have a wide range of skills but , not having gone through a formal training program , would not be recognized as skilled .

a helper could also be a craftsman , a journeyman , down on his luck , and forced by economic necessity to accept general utility work below his level of training .

normally , the helper is unlikely to be a trade union member ( or , if a member , not employed under a collectively bargained contract ) .

he may usually be paid a wage lower than that of a skilled worker ; though , for particular types of work , he may perform equally as well as a skilled craftsman .

because he is cheaper to employ and more flexible in the types of work he may be willing to accept ( working outside of craft ) , he can be a useful addition to a work crew .

where a manager carefully supervises the work to be done , the less expensive helper can be assigned to perform narrow aspects of an otherwise complex task .

 ( this process has been referred to as craft fragmentation. ) .

at the worksite , one might expect to find , in the absence of workrules that would preclude it , a battery of helpers working under the guidance of a more highly paid journeyman .

whether such an arrangement is economical , in terms of productivity and quality of workmanship , is a subject of intense and on - going debate .

an apprentice or a trainee ( enrolled in a formal program ) could be expected to rotate throughout the worksite , receiving on - the - job training and , in the case of the former , outside instruction as well .

in contrast , the helper would normally receive the narrowest possible training , no more extensive than is absolutely required for the task at hand .

and , in large measure , the helper is regarded as a temporary worker rather than a permanent member of his employer's crew .

as the davis - bacon act has been implemented by the secretary of labor , the department has recognized apprentices and trainees in formal programs as a classification of workers for wage rate purposes .

it has not , generally , recognized the category of helper , however , on the assumption that to do so would undercut the locally prevailing wage structure and skills system that the davis - bacon act was designed to protect .

the davis - bacon act ( 1931 , as amended ) requires that the "advertised specifications" for construction contracts in excess of $2,000 to which the government of the united states or of the district of columbia is a party: ... shall contain a provision stating the minimum wages to be paid various classes of laborers and mechanics which shall be based upon the wages that will be determined by the secretary of labor to be prevailing for the corresponding classes of laborers and mechanics employed on projects of a character similar to the contract work in the city , town , village , or other civil subdivision of the state in which the work is to be performed.... ( emphasis added. ) .

congress left to the secretary the task of working out the precise manner in which the act should be applied .

it also left up to the secretary the responsibility for defining such concepts as "wages" and "prevailing" and "project of a character similar" and the scope of the locality in which the work was to be performed .

each of these concepts has been , intermittently , a focus of contention ( and , often , of litigation ) , of rulemaking and of congressional debate through more than 60 years .

by the late 1970s , a campaign was underway for reform or repeal of davis - bacon .

ultimately , the effort would take two forms: direct legislation or , conversely , reform through the regulatory process .

the former , of course , would require action by congress which , while it had often reviewed the davis - bacon act , had not altered it substantially .

the latter , regulatory reform , could be undertaken unilaterally by the administration .

notwithstanding the decision of the department to implement the helper regulation during the summer of 1992 , such implementation remained in abeyance .

both within the congress and in the broader policy community , debate continued concerning the wisdom of the helper regulation and its various effects: in terms of manpower utilization , and in terms of labor , administrative and project costs .

in november 1993 , the department , under mandate from congress , had suspended the helper regulation .

the spending prohibition , through a series of legislative actions , continued until the middle of fiscal 1996 , but "no such prohibition" was imposed during the latter half of fiscal 1996 nor for fiscal 1997 .

in the federal register for april 9 , 1999 , dol published notice of a new proposed rule on the use of helpers on davis - bacon projects .

the wage and hour division affirmed that the rule would re - institute "its longstanding policy" on the helper issue and would reflect "current" practice .

it would allow the use of helpers on covered projects only where " ( 1 ) the duties of the helper are clearly defined and distinct from those of the journeyman or laborers , ( 2 ) the use of such helpers is an established prevailing practice in the area , and ( 3 ) the term 'helper' is not synonymous with 'trainee' in an informal training program. .

the notice reviewed the various departmental initiatives: the proposals and counter - proposals , the fate of each before the courts , and the restraints imposed by the congress upon implementation of a new helper rule — even when sustained by the courts .

it recalled that , in crafting the helper proposals of the early 1980s , dol had operated on the expectation that the new policy ( a ) would more closely reflect private sector industry practice , ( b ) that it would "effect significant savings in federal construction costs," and ( c ) that it would "provide additional job and training opportunities to unskilled workers , in particular women and minorities. .

however , after nearly 2 decades of hearings and analysis , the agency had come to a quite different set of conclusions: namely , ( a ) that the suspended rule ( the result of the various earlier proposals ) "likely ... cannot be enforced effectively," ( b ) that the use of helpers in the private sector is not so widespread as had earlier been assumed , and ( c ) that the suspended rule , "if fully implemented , could have a negative impact on apprenticeship and training. .

late in the 105 th congress , representative norwood introduced legislation ( h.r .

4546 ) to establish by statute that "helpers of laborers and mechanics" be recognized as a separate classification of worker under the davis - bacon act and "paid the prevailing wage" of helpers on similar projects in the locality .

no action was taken on the norwood bill .

early in the 106 th congress , representative norwood reintroduced the proposal ( h.r .

1012 ) .

it defined "helper" as "a semi - skilled worker ( other than a skilled journeyman mechanic ) " who: ( 1 ) works under the direction of and assists a journeyman ; ( 2 ) under the journeyman's direction and supervision , performs a variety of duties to assist the journeyman such as preparing , carrying , and furnishing materials , tools , equipment , and supplies , maintaining them in order , cleaning and preparing work areas , lifting , positioning , and holding materials or tools , and other related semi - skilled tasks as directed by the journeyman ; and ( 3 ) may use tools of the trade at and under the direction and supervision of the journeyman .

introduced march 4 , 1999 , the bill was referred to the committee on education and the workforce and , subsequently , to the subcommittee on workforce protections .

no action was taken on the norwood proposal .

in presenting it proposed rule of april 1999 , however , dol ( without referring directly to h.r .

1012 ) reviewed the approach taken in the legislation .

it concluded that language such as that represented by the proposed legislation , was imprecise and would result in significant administrative burdens .

 ( see discussion above. ) .

under date of november 17 , 2000 , the dol issued a final rule on the use of helpers on davis - bacon projects .

in its opening summary of the new regulation , the department affirmed that it was amending the regulations "to incorporate the wage and hour division's longstanding policy" with respect to the recognition of helpers as a separate category of workers .

the regulation took effect on january 19 , 2001 , during the closing hours of the clinton administration .

at the beginning of the 21 st century , the last outstanding rule from the reagan administration had been dealt with .

however , interest in restructuring the regulation dealing with helpers continued in the congress .

in the 107 th congress on may 23 , 2001 , representative norwood again introduced legislation dealing with the helper issue ( the "helpers job opportunity act," h.r .

1972 ) .

no action was taken in the 107 th congress on the norwood proposal .

on june 2 , 2003 ( the 108 th congress ) , representative marsha blackburn ( r - tn ) , with representatives norwood and steve king ( r - ia ) , introduced h.r .

2283 : again , the "helpers job opportunity act. .

the proposal mandated that helpers "of laborers and mechanics shall be considered to be a separate classification" for davis - bacon purposes and "shall be paid the prevailing wage of helpers and laborers or mechanics employed on projects which are of a character similar" to the project in question in the locality of the construction work .

under the blackburn proposal , a "helper" was defined as "a semi - skilled worker ( other than a skilled journeyman mechanic ) " ( a ) who "works under the direction of and assists a journeyman" ( b ) who , "under the journeyman's direction and supervision," assists the journeyman in a series of specified tasks , and ( c ) who "may use tools of the trade at and under the direction and supervision of the journeyman. .

the bill was referred to the committee on education and the workforce and , subsequently , to the subcommittee on workforce protections , but no action was taken on the proposal .

on september 27 , 2005 ( the 109 th congress ) , representative blackburn , with representative norwood , reintroduced the "helpers job opportunities act" ( h.r .

3907 ) .

the measure was assigned to the committee on education and the workforce , and subsequently to the subcommittee on workforce protections ; but no action was taken on the measure .

thus far , the specific issue of helpers does not appear to have reemerged during the 110 th congress — though davis - bacon has frequently emerged .

the davis - bacon act had been subjected to substantive review by the congress in the early 1960s and has remained a focus of public policy debate since that time: frequently the subject of congressional hearings , reports from gao , and expressions of concern by the parties directly at interest: contractors and the building trades unions .

the only major change in the act , however , that this oversight produced was the expansion of the concept of prevailing wage to include a fringe benefit component ( 1964 ) .

a new round of review of davis - bacon occurred in the late 1970s during the carter administration , resulting in rulemaking , a process that continued to the final days of the carter presidency and carried over into the reagan administration .

the carter regulations were withdrawn and , in 1981 , new regulations were proposed .

these dealt , in part , with the issue of helpers .

litigation followed .

portions of the proposed rule won court approval and , through the years , were implemented .

the helper provision won such approval only in 1992 , a decade after it was first proposed .

at that point , congress intervened and , through the appropriations process , blocked enforcement of the helper regulation until the middle of 1996 .

by that time , dol was having second thoughts about the use of helpers on davis - bacon construction .

the regulation , now , was simply not enforced .

indeed , dol declared the regulation to be "non - administrable" and suspended it for further review .

when the associated builders and contractors sought a court order for enforcement of the regulation ( summer 1996 ) , the department reopened the rulemaking process and , in december 1996 , suspended implementation of the regulation until further notice .

in so doing , dol reverted to the status quo prior to the reagan administration: that is , to the late 1970s .

in issuing its final ( december 1996 ) suspension of the helper regulation , the department indicated that new evidence had been developed that would make it advisable for the agency to reassess the basis upon which the original rule ( and its subsequent amended editions ) had been issued .

during july 1997 , the united states district court for the district of columbia ruled that the department had acted appropriately in its withdrawal of the helper regulation .

then , on april 9 , 1999 , the department published in the federal register notice of a new proposed rule .

essentially , the new rule would reinstate the department's longstanding practice with respect to the use of helpers .

a comment period was set , expiring after june 8 , 1999 .

on november 20 , 2000 , the department published its final helper rule which took effect on january 19 , 2001 , just hours before the end of the clinton administration .

to this point , the process of defining appropriate wage treatment of helpers employed on davis - bacon projects had consumed over 2 decades .

through that period , the regulation had never fully been implemented , though through a brief period in the mid - 1990s , implementation was allowed .

between 1981 and 1993 , the department defended , at times vigorously , different versions of its proposed administrative reforms .

then , after 1993 , it began to reassess its position , becoming increasingly critical of its own earlier efforts .

with publication of its new rule in april 1999 , the department would revert to its longstanding ( 1970s ) practice where helpers were concerned .

with the release of a final rule in november 2000 , dol would largely repudiate its helper policy of the 1980s and 1990s — and the documentation upon which it was based .

congress had followed the administrative proposals dealing with the "helper" issue .

variously , it had entered into the debate and , at times , had endorsed the new helper classification .

in the 109 th congress , legislation ( h.r .

3907 ) was introduced by representative blackburn , with representative norwood , once again proposing recognition of a separate "helper" classification on davis - bacon projects .

however , the blackburn - norwood bill died at the close of the 109 th congress .

to date , the issue has not reemerged in the 110 th congress .

