history , proximity , commerce , and shared values underpin the relationship between the united states and canada .

americans and canadians fought side by side in both world wars , korea , and afghanistan , and continue to collaborate on international political and security matters , such as the campaign against the islamic state .

the countries also share mutual security commitments under the north atlantic treaty organization ( nato ) , cooperate on continental defense through the binational north american aerospace defense command ( norad ) , maintain a close intelligence partnership through the "five eyes" group of nations , and coordinate frequently on law enforcement efforts , with a particular focus on securing their shared 5,500-mile border .

bilateral economic ties , which were already considerable , have deepened markedly over the past three decades as trade relations have been governed by the 1989 u.s. - canada free trade agreement and , since 1994 , by the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

canada is the second - largest trading partner of the united states , with total two - way cross - border goods and services trade amounting to over $1.6 billion per day in 2017 .

the united states is also the largest investor in canada , while canada is an important source of foreign direct investment in the united states .

the countries have a highly integrated energy market , with canada being the largest supplier of u.s. energy imports and the largest recipient of u.s. energy exports .

unlike with many countries , whose bilateral relations are conducted solely through foreign ministries , the governments of the united states and canada have deep relationships , often extending far down the bureaucracy , to address matters of common interest .

initiatives between the provinces and states are also common , such as the 2013 pacific coast action plan on climate and energy among california , oregon , washington , and british columbia , or various initiatives to manage transboundary environmental and water issues .

nevertheless , bilateral relations have been strained from time to time by individual matters , such as canada's decision not to participate in the iraq war in 2003 and the obama administration's rejection of the keystone xl pipeline in 2015 .

although the canadian government welcomed the trump administration's march 2017 decision to revive keystone xl , several other areas of contention have emerged .

canadian officials have been particularly frustrated by the trump administration's approach to renegotiating nafta and other trade disputes , such as the administration's decision to impose tariffs on canadian steel and aluminum .

u.s. policy shifts also have affected the opinions of canadian citizens , 76% of whom disapproved of the "job performance of the leadership of the united states" in 2017 .

this could hinder efforts to conclude bilateral agreements or obtain canadian support for u.s. initiatives moving forward .

with a population and economy one - tenth the size of the united states , canada has always been sensitive to being swallowed up by its southern neighbor .

whether by repulsing actual attacks from the united states during the war of 1812 , or by resisting free trade with the united states for more than the first century of its history , it has sought to chart its own course in the world , yet maintain its historical and political ties to the british commonwealth .

some in canada question whether u.s. investment , regulatory cooperation , border harmonization , or other public policy issues cede too much sovereignty to the united states , while others embrace a more north american approach to its neighborly relationship .

canada is a constitutional monarchy with queen elizabeth ii as sovereign .

in canadian affairs , she is represented by a governor - general ( since october 2017 , julie payette ) , who is appointed on the advice of the prime minister .

the canadian government is a parliamentary democracy with a bicameral westminster - style parliament that includes an elected , 338-seat house of commons and an appointed , 105-seat senate .

members of parliament are elected from individual districts ( "ridings" ) under a first - past - the - post system , which only requires a plurality of the vote to win a seat .

the party winning the most seats typically is called upon to form a government .

a government lasts as long as it can command a parliamentary majority for its policies , for a maximum of four years .

canada's 10 provinces and 3 territories are each governed by a unicameral assembly .

justin trudeau was sworn in as canada's prime minister on november 4 , 2015 .

his liberal party won a majority in the house of commons in october 2015 parliamentary elections , defeating prime minister stephen harper's conservative party , which had held power for nearly a decade .

the liberals' dominant position in the house of commons has enabled them to implement much of their campaign platform , including measures intended to foster inclusive economic growth , address climate change , and reorient canada's foreign policy .

nevertheless , trudeau's approval rating has declined substantially since early 2017 and the liberal party is now polling slightly behind the conservatives .

the next federal election is due by october 2019 .

canada views a rules - based international order as essential for its physical security and economic prosperity .

historically , the country has sought to promote international peace and stability by leveraging its influence through alliance commitments and multilateral diplomacy .

although the harper government broke with its predecessors to a certain extent , demonstrating more skepticism toward multilateral institutions and a greater willingness to engage in unilateral actions , trudeau has restored canada's traditional approach to foreign affairs .

his government quickly reemphasized multilateral engagement by ratifying the paris agreement on climate change and announcing canada's bid for a temporary seat on the u.n. security council for the 2021-2022 term .

in june 2017 , canadian foreign minister chrystia freeland asserted that canada must set its "own clear and sovereign course" to renew and strengthen the international order given that the united states appeared to be withdrawing from its global leadership role .

president trump's actions at the june 2018 group of seven ( g - 7 ) meeting have reinforced canadian concerns about the u.s. government's commitment to the rules - based , multilateral system ( see text box below ) .

the trudeau government also has reaffirmed canada's support for international security efforts .

it unveiled a new defense policy in june 2017 , which asserts that as a result of changes in global security dynamics , defending canada and canadian interests "not only demands robust domestic defense but also requires active engagement abroad. .

under the new policy , canada will increase defense spending by 73% in nominal terms over the next decade from c$18.9 billion ( about $14.6 billion ) in 2016-17 to c$32.7 billion ( about $25.2 billion ) in 2026-2027 .

the additional resources will be used to acquire new aircraft , ships , and other equipment ; expand the canadian armed forces by 3,500 personnel ; and invest in new capabilities .

the canadian economy experienced a shallower recession and initially recovered faster from the 2008 global economic crisis than the united states , but growth in both countries has picked up in recent years .

in 2017 , the canadian economic growth outpaced that of the united states: 3.0% in canada and 2.3% in the united states .

in 2018 , economist intelligence unit and ihs global insight forecasters expect canada's gdp to grow by 2.0% and 2.4% , respectively , and for u.s. gdp to achieve growth of 2.0% and 2.7% .

the canadian economy disproportionately depends on the global market for exporting commodities ; however , in recent years growth has been dependent on personal consumption , especially in the still - buoyant housing sector .

in canada , the unemployment rate , which hit a generational low of 5.8% in january 2008 , peaked at 8.7% in august 2009 , but gradually has fallen back to a cycle low of 6.3% in april 2018 .

canada is the united states' largest supplier of imported energy — including oil , uranium , natural gas , and electricity .

in 2016 , canada was the world's fourth - largest petroleum producer ; its reserves are believed to be the third largest in the world after those of venezuela and saudi arabia .

in 2017 , the value of u.s. petroleum and natural gas imports from canada was $53 billion , declining from a peak of $115.7 billion in 2014 .

this figure largely represents the falling value of crude oil and natural gas , in part due to growing production in the united states from shale .

while the value of crude oil imports has dropped , the volume of trade has continued to increase ( see table 2 ) .

in 2017 , canada provided 51.2% of u.s. crude oil imports ( up from 22% in 2009 ) — about 1.2 million barrels / day — and supplied 57.9% of u.s. natural gas imports ( up from 51.2% in 2009 ) .

canada is the largest supplier to the united states of processed uranium .

canada also is a net exporter of electricity to the united states through a heavily connected north american electricity grid .

canada is particularly valued because it is considered a reliable source of energy , as it is not a member of opec .

one consequence of the bilateral oil and gas relationship is a lesser dependence on the rest of the world .

canada and the united states have experienced similar political debates over whether and how to address greenhouse gas - induced climate change .

both populations emit among the highest levels of greenhouse gases ( ghg ) per person worldwide due to a number of factors , including high income and consumption levels , dependence on personal vehicles , long travel distances , and cold winters .

further , national infrastructures were constructed in the context of inexpensive and generally abundant fossil fuels , which are responsible for the majority of ghg emissions .

both countries have regions strongly dependent on producing and processing fossil fuels .

other regions depend on importing energy from other provinces or countries , or use hydropower for electricity generation .

regulation of energy is primarily a provincial or state authority in both canada and the united states .

environmental protection authorities are shared by the federal and subfederal levels in both countries .

canada has typically sought policies compatible with those of the united states with the understanding that there could be significant benefits in harmonizing aspects of ghg and other pollution control strategies in order to facilitate trade and make compliance easier for transnational businesses .

both nations also perceive certain vulnerabilities to climate change , including increasing forest losses and fires , effects on public health of heat episodes and expanding disease vectors , increasing costs of cooling , and risks to coastal communities due to more intense storms and sea level rise .

shrinking sea ice extent in the arctic brings opportunities and concerns for both countries due to the effects on indigenous populations , increased commercial activity , shipping , tourism , and risks of associated accidents , as well as dramatically changing ecosystems .

the paris agreement ( pa ) is a subsidiary agreement to the 1992 united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) .

the paris agreement entered into force on november 4 , 2016 , and was signed by both the united states ( august 29 , 2016 ) and canada ( april 22 , 2016 ) .

the pa requires that nations submit pledges to abate their ghg emissions , set goals to adapt to climate change , and cooperate toward these ends , including mobilization of financial and other support .

the negotiators intended the pa to be legally binding on its parties , though not all provisions in it are mandatory .

some are recommendations or collective commitments to which it would be difficult to hold an individual party accountable .

on june 1 , 2017 , president trump , citing a campaign promise , announced his intention to withdraw from the pa. three months later , in august 2017 , the u.s. state department submitted an official notice to the united nations declaring its intent to withdraw from the accord .

under the pa , the united states may formally submit its intent to withdraw in november 2019 , and the withdrawal would take effect one year after that notice .

prime minister trudeau called president trump's decision "disheartening," stating that "canada stands united with all the other parties," and pledged that "canada will continue to work with the united states at the state level , and with other u.s. stakeholders , to address climate change and promote clean growth. .

in december 2016 , canada adopted the "pan - canadian framework on clean growth and climate change" ( pcf ) , a comprehensive strategy that addresses climate change and long - term economic growth .

the pcf provides guidance on issues such as carbon pricing , climate resilience , and green technology innovation .

a core element of the framework is for each province to price carbon emissions by 2018 , either through a fee on carbon dioxide - equivalent ( co 2 e ) emissions , an emissions cap - and - trade system , or a hybrid approach of the two .

under the pcf , the carbon price of pollution is to start at a minimum of c$10 ( about $7.70 ) per ton this year ( 2018 ) , and rise to c$50 ( about $38 ) per ton in 2022 .

if a province does not place a price on carbon , the federal government will impose a backstop carbon price and return any revenue to the province .

the government deems that this policy will "reduce ghg emissions at lowest cost to business and consumers and support innovation and clean growth" while allowing jurisdictions flexibility to design their own approaches .

in tandem with the release and adoption of the pcf , the government of canada submitted an updated nationally determined contribution ( ndc ) to the paris agreement .

according to its ndc , canada intends to reduce ghg emissions by 30% below 2005 levels by 2030 .

canada's commitment is economy - wide in scope , covering 100% of canada's ghg inventory .

this includes carbon dioxide ( co₂ ) , methane ( ch₄ ) , nitrous oxide ( n₂o ) , sulfur hexafluoride ( sf₆ ) , perfluorocarbons ( pfcs ) , hydrofluorocarbons ( hfcs ) , and nitrogen trifluoride ( nf₃ ) emissions from all sectors covered by the internationally accepted guidelines of the intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) .

canada has taken several steps to achieve these ghg emission reductions .

since 2006 , the canadian government has established more stringent emissions standards for heavy duty vehicles , passenger automobiles , and light trucks , and instituted renewable fuels regulations that require gasoline to contain an average of 5% renewable fuel content .

it also has implemented electricity sector regulations that ban the construction of traditional coal - fired generating units and will phase out existing coal - fired units that are unable to capture and store carbon .

the government announced a september 1 , 2018 , deadline for each province to outline its implementation strategy .

all provinces and territories except saskatchewan have agreed to implement a plan , although some have not announced details .

saskatchewan has challenged the law , asking the saskatchewan court of appeal whether federal legislation , the greenhouse gas pollution pricing act ( bill c - 74 ) , is "unconstitutional in whole or in part. .

in 2017 , the states and provinces of the conference of new england governors and eastern canadian premiers ( neg / ecp ) adopted a regional climate action plan , an update of the initial climate change action plan of 2001 , the world's first international , multigovernment effort to tackle climate change , which was largely achieved by 2010 .

the new plan aims to decrease ghg emissions by 35% - 45% below 1990 levels by 2030 .

the new target is meant to orient the provinces and states in their long - term goal , to reach 75% - 85% of 2001 emission levels by 2050 .

the western climate initiative is the administrator for a linked greenhouse gas emissions trading program among the state of california and the provinces of ontario and quebec .

nova scotia joined the initiative on may 14 , 2018 , although it remains a separate cap - and - trade program from the other three jurisdictions .

the columbia river treaty ( crt , or treaty ) is an international agreement between the united states and canada for the cooperative development and operation of the water resources of the columbia river basin to provide for flood control and power .

the treaty was the result of more than 20 years of negotiations between the two countries and was ratified in 1961 .

implementation began in 1964 .

the treaty provided for the construction and operation of three dams in canada and one dam in the united states whose reservoir extends into canada .

together , these dams more than doubled the amount of reservoir storage available in the basin and provided significant flood protection benefits .

in exchange for these benefits , the united states agreed to provide canada with lump - sum cash payments and a portion of downstream hydropower benefits that are attributable to canadian operations under the crt , known as the "canadian entitlement. .

some have estimated the canadian entitlement to be worth as much as $335 million annually .

the crt has no specific end date , and most of its provisions would continue indefinitely without action by the united states or canada .

beginning in september 2024 , either nation can terminate most provisions of the treaty with at least 10 years' written notice ( i.e. , starting as early as 2014 ) .

to date , neither country has given notice of termination , but both countries have indicated a preliminary interest in modification of the treaty .

if the crt is not terminated or modified , most of its provisions would continue , with the exception of its flood control provisions ( which are scheduled to transition automatically to "called - upon" operations at that time , meaning the united states would request and compensate canada for flood control operations as necessary ) .

perspectives on the crt and its review vary .

some believe the treaty should include stronger provisions related to tribal resources and flows for fisheries that are not in the treaty ; others disagree and focus on the perceived need to adjust the canadian entitlement to reflect actual hydropower benefits .

the u.s. army corps of engineers and the bonneville power administration , in their joint role as the u.s .

entity overseeing the treaty , undertook a review of the crt from 2009 to 2013 .

based on studies and stakeholder input , they provided a regional recommendation to the state department in december 2013 .

they recommended continuing the treaty with certain modifications , including rebalancing the crt's hydropower provisions , further delineating called - upon flood control operations after 2024 , and incorporating into the treaty flows to benefit columbia river fisheries .

for its part , the canadian entity ( the province of british columbia ) released in march 2013 a recommendation to continue the crt with modifications "within the treaty framework. .

it disputed several assumptions in the u.s .

entity's review process .

following a two - year federal interagency review of the u.s .

regional recommendation , the state department finalized its negotiating parameters and authorized talks with canada in october 2016 .

the first round of negotiations took place may 29-30 , 2018 , with the next round of talks scheduled for august 2018 .

the great lakes contain 85% of north america's fresh water .

they serve as the primary source of drinking water for more than 40 million people , and support a wide range of economic activities , including farming , fishing , manufacturing , and tourism .

decades of heavy manufacturing and other human activity have altered the lakes , however , leading to degraded water quality and diminished habitat for native species .

federal , state , provincial , local , and tribal governments in the united states and canada have sought to work together to address those environmental challenges and restore the great lakes ecosystem .

in 2012 , the united states and canada amended the great lakes water quality agreement ( glwqa ) , a commitment originally signed in 1972 that provides a framework for identifying binational priorities and implementing actions that improve water quality .

the revised agreement is intended to help the united states and canada better anticipate and prevent ecological harm .

it includes new provisions to address aquatic invasive species , habitat degradation and the effects of climate change , and continued threats to people's health and the environment such as harmful algae , toxic chemicals , and discharges from vessels .

the united states and canada have both provided funding to advance the goals of the glwqa .

in 2016 , for example , congress authorized appropriations of $300 million annually from fy2017 to fy2021 for the great lakes restoration initiative under title iv of the water infrastructure improvements for the nation act ( p.l .

114-322 ) .

although the trump administration sought to eliminate funding for the initiative in fy2018 , congress appropriated $300 million to continue restoration efforts in the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) .

the trump administration has requested $30 million for great lakes restoration in fy2019 .

in december 2017 , the canadian government announced it would invest c$44.8 million ( about $35 million ) in its great lakes protection initiative , with a particular focus on reducing toxic and nuisance algae and strengthening the resilience of great lakes coastal wetlands .

the international joint commission , a binational organization established by the 1909 boundary waters treaty to investigate and recommend solutions to transboundary water issues , issued the "first triennial assessment of progress on great lakes water quality" in november 2017 .

the report found that the united states and canada had made progress toward meeting many of the glwqa's objectives , including accelerated restoration of contaminated areas of concern , the development of binational habitat conservation strategies , the absence of newly introduced aquatic invasive species , such as asian carp , and comprehensive reporting on groundwater science .

it also identified significant challenges , such as the increase in harmful algal blooms in lake erie , the slow pace in addressing chemicals of mutual concern , the spread of previously introduced invasive species , and insufficient investments in infrastructure to prevent the discharge of untreated or insufficiently treated waste into the great lakes .

in addition to those ongoing challenges , congress has expressed concerns about a proposed deep geologic repository for nuclear waste by the bruce nuclear power facility in kincardine , ontario .

the proposed site , located about 1 kilometer inland from lake huron , would hold low - to mid - level waste materials currently being stored above ground in warehouses .

the explanatory statement accompanying the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 ( p.l .

115-141 ) , directs the secretary of state to submit a report to the committees on appropriations detailing the actions taken to date , and planned for the future , to engage the government of canada to jointly refer the proposed repository to the international joint commission for research and study .

it further directs the secretary to report on the diplomatic and legal steps the department of state plans to take to address concerns about the protection of the great lakes water basin and to review alternatives for the proposed repository that will not place the health , safety , and economic security of residents of the great lakes basin at risk .

