the rules and practices of the senate governing quorums and voting are grounded in article i of the constitution .

regarding quorums , clause 1 of section 5 states in part that "a majority of each [house] shall constitute a quorum to do business ; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day , and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members , in such manner , and under such penalties as each house may provide. .

regarding voting , clause 3 of the same section provides in part that "the yeas and nays of the members of either house on any question shall , at the desire of one fifth of those present , be entered on the journal. .

this report discusses how the senate now interprets and implements these two constitutional provisions .

what follows focuses on the most important rules and the most common practices ; it does not attempt to cover all the precedents the senate has established or all the procedures that may be invoked .

this report also assumes a familiarity with some other aspects of the senate's floor procedures .

a straightforward reading of the constitution's quorum requirement would seem to require a simple majority of senators , or a minimum of 51 if there are no vacancies in the body , to be present on the floor whenever the senate conducts business .

as any observer of the senate soon notices , typically only a handful of senators are present during floor debates .

it is unusual for as many as 51 senators to be present on the floor at the same time unless a rollcall vote is in progress .

as a regular practice , however , the senate presumes that it is complying with the constitution .

therefore , it presumes that a quorum always is present unless and until the absence of a quorum is suggested or demonstrated: the senate operates on the presumption that a quorum is present at all times , under all circumstances , unless the question to the contrary is raised , or the absence of a quorum is officially shown , or until a point of no quorum is made even though a voice vote is taken and announced in the meantime .

under the senate's standing rules , if no other senator has the floor , any senator ( including a senator who is presiding ) may "suggest the absence of a quorum. .

the presiding officer may not respond to this statement by counting the number of senators actually present , unless the senate is operating under cloture .

at all other times , when a senator suggests the absence of a quorum , the presiding officer responds by directing the clerk to call the roll .

paragraph 3 of rule vi requires that if , at any time during the daily sessions of the senate , a question shall be raised by any senator as to the presence of a quorum , the presiding officer shall forthwith direct the secretary to call the roll and shall announce the result , and these proceedings shall be without debate .

a quorum call formally begins when the clerk calls the first name .

once the quorum call has begun , the senate may not resume the conduct of business until a majority of senators respond to this call , or unless the senate agrees by unanimous consent to "dispense with further proceedings under the quorum call. .

while the quorum call is in progress , no debate or motion is in order , nor may the senate act on any unanimous consent request except a request to dispense with the call .

there are three ways in which the senate can conduct votes on the floor: by voice vote , by division vote , or by rollcall vote .

in practice , contested questions usually are decided by rollcall votes ; many uncontested questions are decided "without objection" and without the formality of even a voice vote .

voting and quorum procedures have recently been of interest in the senate in connection with proposals to change senate rules .

some senators have expressed frustration with the fact that , in order to forestall consideration of a measure or matter , senators often need only to threaten to filibuster or to withhold their consent from a unanimous consent agreement .

this situation is a consequence partially of quorum and voting procedures , in addition to the demanding schedules of senators and the large policy agenda of the modern senate .

a senator wishing to prevent a matter from coming to a vote need not engage in extended debate .

one reason is that if a quorum — 51 senators , assuming no vacancies — is not present on the floor , the opponent may instead simply take steps to trigger a live quorum call , and if a quorum does not respond , the senate can only adjourn or take steps to secure the attendance of a quorum .

adjournment serves the purposes of the opponent , who is only trying to delay or prevent a final vote on the matter .

as a result , if a numerical majority favoring a legislative proposal wanted an opponent to remain physically present on the senate floor engaging in a filibuster , that majority , or most of it , would itself have to remain on or near the floor to ensure that a quorum could be established at any point required .

even if a majority of the senate does so , moreover , opponents need not engage continuously in debate to forestall a vote on passage of a measure ; they can also filibuster by offering various motions and , if sufficiently numerous , by forcing multiple rollcall votes .

given these procedural conditions , a majority of the senate is unlikely to extend the effort to force an opponent to remain physically present on the floor to filibuster because the cost is so great and the benefit so uncertain .

the cost to the majority of requiring so many senators to remain near the floor , away from their other legislative and representative responsibilities , and the cost of preventing the senate from conducting any other business while it forces an opponent to conduct an overt filibuster , are very high and are nearly certain to occur .

the potential benefit — that the opponents eventually tire , make some mistake , or give up their efforts , and allow a measure to come to a vote — is unlikely if more than a handful of senators are willing to engage in such tactics .

maintaining the ability to produce a quorum may be a necessary step , but it is not a sufficient step , in an attempt to defeat a filibuster .

in contrast , the costs of conducting a filibuster are more manageable , and the likely benefit is the achievement of the goal: the delay of a vote .

few opponents need be present at any one time: they need not help to make a quorum and they do not need to vote on questions that , by virtue of their numbers , they would lose even if they were all present .

in addition , those in the minority party have less influence on the agenda , and thus arguably have less to lose if the senate engages in extended parliamentary maneuvering and conducts no other business .

because of these and other considerations , supporters of a matter often respond to a threatened filibuster by attempting to negotiate a compromise off the floor , rather than by attempting to exhaust opponents by keeping a quorum near the floor and potentially participating in multiple rollcall votes .

