this report examines the legal procedures for effecting either a liquidation or a business or consumer reorganization under one of three of the five operative chapters of the united states bankruptcy code , 11 u.s.c .

§ 101 et seq .

chapter 7 of the code governs liquidation of the debtor's estate and is often referred to as a "straight bankruptcy. .

chapter 11 of the code governs business reorganizations , and chapter 13 governs consumer reorganizations which conform to prescribed statutory debt limits .

the united states constitution expressly delegates to the congress the power "to establish .

 .

.uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the united states. .

it was not until 1800 , however , that the united states enacted its first bankruptcy law , and that act was repealed shortly thereafter in 1803 .

enactment of the law was motivated by severe financial panics in the 1790's that resulted in the imprisonment of many debtors .

a second act was approved august 19 , 1841 and repealed in 1843 .

like its predecessor , the act of 1841 arose from a period of economic hardship and was short - lived .

a subsequent law , the act of 1867 , followed the financial disturbances incident to the civil war .

in effect for more than a decade , it was repealed in 1878 .

thus , throughout a period of some 78 years , a national bankruptcy law was operative for only 16 .

after the repeal of the act of 1867 , a period of some 20 years would pass before another bankruptcy act was forthcoming — the act of 1898 .

the act of 1898 followed a depression of several years duration beginning in 1893 .

among the reasons cited by congress in support of a new and permanent bankruptcy law was the increasing availability to the public of an expanding network of federal courts , and increasing national growth of both population and commerce .

the 1898 act was amended at various times but underwent a comprehensive revision and modernization in 1938 .

these amendments , effected by a law known as the chandler act , recast the relief provisions that had been added to the 1898 act , established wage earner plans , and substituted or replaced provisions dealing with real property arrangements and corporate reorganizations .

changes in the act subsequent to the 1938 amendments were relatively slight .

eventually , congress perceived a need to modernize the bankruptcy laws , and , in 1970 , it created a commission on the bankruptcy laws of the united states to study and recommend changes in the law .

the commission became operational in june , 1971 , and filed its final report with the congress on july 30 , 1973 .

among the reasons expressed by congress for enactment of a new and modernized bankruptcy code was that the substantive law of bankruptcy embodied in the act of 1898 reflected "the horse and buggy" era of consumer and commercial credit ; that the widespread adoption of the uniform commercial code in the early 1960's changed and expanded commercial financing ; that bankruptcy relief for the consumer debtor was inadequate ; and , that the bankruptcy court system was too frequently an inefficient and unfair forum .

hence , the stage was set for a national debate on the bankruptcy laws .

in 1978 , congress repealed the act of 1898 in its entirety and enacted the present bankruptcy code , the bankruptcy reform act of 1978 .

since the code's enactment in 1978 , it has undergone several major amendments .

the bankruptcy amendments and federal judgeship act of 1984 cured constitutional deficiencies in the bankruptcy court system and made a wide variety of substantive and technical amendments to the code .

the bankruptcy judges , united states trustees , and family farmer bankruptcy act of 1986 instituted a nation - wide u.s .

trustee system and added a new operative chapter governing reorganizations of "family farmers. .

in 1988 , congress enacted several substantive amendments to the code , including the retiree benefits bankruptcy protection act , which added a new section governing the rights of retirees of a corporation undergoing a chapter 11 reorganization .

during the 101 st congress , more amendments were enacted .

in addition to technical amendments affecting swap agreements and forward contracts , legislation was passed altering the dischargeability under chapters 7 and 13 , respectively , for debts for liability incurred while driving while intoxicated , criminal restitution , and student loans .

the comprehensive thrift and bank fraud prosecution and taxpayer recovery act of 1990 made many amendments designed to strengthen criminal prosecution of and recovery from crimes against banks .

the most recent congressional enactment making wide - reaching substantive and procedural amendments to the code took place pursuant to the bankruptcy reform act of 1994 .

among its highlights was the creation of a national bankruptcy review commission , patterned after the 1970 commission , to study and report within two years recommendations for legislative or administrative action to the president , the congress , and the supreme court .

the commission issued its report on october 20 , 1997 .

in a lengthy report of approximately 1300 pages , the commission adopted as many as 172 recommendations dealing with , inter alia , consumer bankruptcy , business bankruptcy , municipal bankruptcy , and , bankruptcy jurisdiction , procedure , and administration .

on the subject of consumer bankruptcy reform , the commission could not reach consensus .

recommendations were adopted by a 5-4 split vote , which undermined the persuasive value and influence on the congress of the commission's report .

important procedural reform effected by the 1994 act included express authorization for bankruptcy courts to conduct jury trials with the consent of parties thereto .

the act also encouraged nation - wide creation of bankruptcy appellate panels as intermediary , specialized review tribunals positioned between u.s. district court and the circuit courts of appeals .

this law also incorporated sanctions into the code for negligent or fraudulent bankruptcy petition preparers and amends federal criminal law to establish additional penalties for bankruptcy fraud .

the 105 th congress considered , but did not enact , major bankruptcy reform legislation .

several provisions were enacted , however , including the religious liberty and charitable donation protection act , permitting debtors to make substantial charitable donations prior to filing and during the course of a chapter 13 reorganization .

other provisions narrowed the dischargeability of student loans , and effected amendments to the automatic stay .

during the 106 th and 107 th congresses , bankruptcy reform legislation , including provisions to effect major changes to consumer bankruptcy , continued to be debated .

enactment did not occur and reform proposals are still under consideration in the 109 th congress .

the code is divided into eight chapters — chapters 1 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 12 , and 13 .

chapters 1 , 3 , and 5 govern general procedures involving management and administration of the bankruptcy estate which are applicable , as specified , to the operative chapters .

chapters 7 through 13 , the operative chapters , address the different forms of bankruptcy relief , i.e. , liquidation or the various categories of reorganization — municipal , business , family farmer , and consumer .

also codified under title 11 of the united states code are rules of bankruptcy court and officially authorized bankruptcy forms .

examined below are substantive highlights of the procedural and operative provisions of the u.s. bankruptcy code governing liquidation and reorganization .

most individuals or businesses that are eligible to file under chapter 7 may file for reorganization under chapter 11 .

this chapter , however , is designed to accommodate complicated , publicly - held corporate reorganizations as well as those of lesser magnitude and , consequently , it is procedurally more elaborate and expensive to effectuate than a reorganization under chapter 12 or 13 .

to illustrate , this chapter contemplates the creation of creditor committees , the employment of professionals to assist the committees , the solicitation of creditor votes to accept or reject a reorganization plan , and the exchange and issuance of new securities by the debtor .

the applicable time frames for action under chapter 11 are adjusted accordingly .

the bankruptcy reform act of 1994 amended chapter 11 to expedite procedures for "small business" reorganizations .

a qualified small business debtor would be permitted to dispense with creditor committees ; would have an exclusivity period for filing a plan of 100 days ; and , would be subject to more liberal provisions for disclosure and solicitation of acceptances for a proposed reorganization plan .

highlights of the statutory requirements for a chapter 11 reorganization are examined below .

chapter 13 contemplates a more expedited and streamlined procedure for individual , i.e. , consumer reorganization than that provided for under chapter 11 .

in contrast to chapter 11 , a chapter 13 reorganization always requires the participation of a standing trustee .

it does not establish creditor committees , nor do creditors vote to accept or reject a plan of reorganization , although they are given the opportunity to accept certain provisions and interpose objections .

only the debtor may propose the reorganization plan , which must be completed within a specified three to five year time frame .

a debtor receives a discharge of indebtedness not upon confirmation , but upon completion of all payments under the plan .

the more significant procedural features are examined below .

in addition to the automatic stay , which operates to prevent creditors from engaging in collection activities after an order for relief is filed , chapter 13 imposes an additional stay on creditor attempts to collect on consumer debts against those who may be liable with the debtor .

the purpose of this provision is to protect a chapter 13 debtor by insulating him from indirect pressures from his creditors exerted through friends or relatives that may have cosigned an obligation of the debtor and who otherwise may be subject to the creditor's collection efforts .

specifically , a creditor may not act , commence , or continue any civil action to collect a consumer debt from any individual that is liable on the debt with the debtor , or that secured such debt unless ( 1 ) the individual became liable on the debt in the ordinary course of the individual's business , or ( 2 ) the case is closed , dismissed , or converted to a case under chapters 7 or 11 .

a creditor may , however , present a negotiable instrument and give notice of dishonor to preserve his rights under applicable nonbankruptcy law .

likewise , a party in interest may ask the court for relief from the stay on the grounds that: as between the debtor and the nonbankrupt codebtor , the codebtor received the consideration for the claim held by the creditor ; the plan filed by the debtor proposes not to pay such claim ; or the creditor's interest would be irreparably harmed by continuation of such stay .

if the court has not ruled on the request for relief from the stay within twenty days of the creditor's request therefor , the stay will be terminated unless the debtor or the codebtor files a written objection thereto .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1301 .

the u.s .

trustee may appoint a standing trustee from a panel of eligible , private trustees .

otherwise , the u.s .

trustee may appoint a disinterested individual to serve , or the u.s .

trustee may serve .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1302 ( a ) ; 28 u.s.c .

§ 586 .

among the duties which the trustee , as principal administrator in the case , must perform are: be accountable for all property received ; make sure the debtor files a statement of intent with respect to the retention or surrender of certain consumer goods ; investigate the debtor's financial affairs ; if a purpose would be served , examine proofs of claims and object to the allowance of improper claims ; if advisable , oppose the debtor's discharge ; unless otherwise ordered by the court , furnish such information as may be requested by a party in interest concerning the estate and its administration ; make , and file with the court , a final report and account of the administration ; appear and be heard at any hearing that concerns ( i ) the value of property subject to a lien , ( ii ) confirmation of a plan , or ( iii ) modification of a plan after confirmation ; advise , other than on legal matters , and assist the debtor in the performance of the plan ; ensure that the debtor commences making timely payments under the plan ; if the debtor is in business , investigate the financial condition of the debtor , the operation of the debtor's business , and the desirability of continuing the business , and report such information to the court .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1302 .

a debtor may sell , use , or lease estate property: other than in the ordinary course of business , after notice and hearing ; in the ordinary course of business without a hearing so long as such use is not inconsistent with conditions imposed or relief granted under the automatic stay , and so long as the creditor's interest in the property is adequately protected ; the debtor may sell property free and clear of any creditor's interest in the property only if applicable nonbankruptcy law permits sale of such property , the creditor consents , the price at which the property is to be sold is greater than the aggregate value of all liens on the property , the interest is in a bona fide dispute or the creditor could be compelled to accept a money satisfaction of the interest ; notwithstanding any provision of a contract , a lease , or applicable law that is conditioned on the insolvency or financial condition of the debtor , or on the commencement of a case in bankruptcy .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1303 .

the code stipulates that a self - employed debtor who incurs trade credit in the production of income from such employment is engaged in business .

because chapter 13 is limited to individuals , any business being operated can only be a sole proprietorship if the debts of the business are to be dealt with under chapter 13 .

unless the court orders otherwise , a debtor engaged in business may operate the business and use , sale or lease property of the estate in the ordinary course of business without notice and hearing .

the debtor may not use , sell or lease cash collateral ( i.e. , cash , negotiable instruments , documents of title , securities , deposit accounts , etc. ) .

unless the entity having an interest in the collateral consents or the court , after notice and hearing , authorizes the use .

the debtor may obtain unsecured credit and incur unsecured debt as an administrative expense in the ordinary course of business ; he may obtain trade credit and incur trade debt with some special priority or superpriority if necessary if the court , after notice and hearing , authorizes it .

in addition , a debtor operating a business must file periodic reports and summaries of its operation , including a statement of receipts and disbursements , with any governmental unit charged with the responsibility for determining and collecting any tax arising out of such operation .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1304 .

this provision is applicable exclusively to chapter 13 and supplements other provisions of the code , 11 u.s.c .

§§ 501-510 , which deal with the filing and allowance of claims .

it permits the filing of a proof of claim for taxes that become payable while the case is pending ; or , for a consumer debt that arises after the order for relief , and that is for property or services necessary for the debtor's performance .

the allowance of such claims is governed by § 502 , except that its standards are applied as of the date of the claim's allowance rather than as of the date of the filing of the petition .

a postpetition consumer debt claim that is for property or services necessary for the debtor's performance under the plan will be disallowed if the claimholder knew or should have known that the trustee's prior approval for the debtor's incurring of the obligation was practicable and was not obtained .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1305 .

in addition to the other code provisions delineating what constitutes property of the bankruptcy estate , chapter 13 includes earnings from all services performed by the debtor after the commencement of the case but before the case is closed , dismissed , or converted to one under chapter 7 or 11 .

a chapter 13 debtor is permitted to remain in possession of all property of the estate despite code provision elsewhere requiring a debtor to surrender to a trustee all property of the estate , including books , documents , records , and papers relating to property of the estate .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1306 .

only the debtor may file a chapter 13 reorganization plan .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1321 .

the code specifies no time period for filing , but bankruptcy rule 3015 provides that if a plan is not filed with the petition , it must be filed within 15 days thereafter .

a chapter 13 reorganization plan must: provide for the submission of all or such portion of future earnings of the debtor to the supervision and control of the trustee as is necessary for the execution of the plan ; provide for the full payment , in deferred cash payments , of all claims entitled to priority under the code , 11 u.s.c .

§ 507 , unless the holder of a particular claim agrees to a different treatment of such claim ; and if the plan classifies claims , provide the same treatment for each claim within a particular class .

the plan may: divide unsecured claims which are not entitled to priority into classes , provided that no class is discriminated against unfairly .

the plan may , however , treat claims for a consumer debt of the debtor for which a third - party is liable with the debtor differently than other unsecured claims ; modify the rights of secured and unsecured claimholders , other than a claim secured only by a security interest ( i.e. , a lien created by agreement , such as a mortgage ) in real property that is the debtor's principal residence ; provide for the curing or waiving of any default ; provide for concurrent payments on secured and unsecured claims ; cure any default on any secured or unsecured claim on which the final payment under the plan is due ; provide for payment of all or any part of a postpetition claim ; provide for the assumption or rejection of executory contracts and unexpired leases ; provide for payment of all or any part of a claim from the debtor's property or estate property ; on confirmation of the plan , or at a later time , provide for the vesting of estate property in the debtor or any other entity ; and include any other provision not inconsistent with the code .

the plan may not provide for payments over a period that is longer than three years , unless the court , for cause , approves a longer period , but the court may not approve a period that is longer than five years .

a debtor may cure a default with respect to a lien upon the debtor's principal residence until such time as the residence is sold at foreclosure ; when a final payment is due under a home mortgage before the date on which the final payment under the plan is due , the plan may provide for the claim as modified for the duration of the reorganization plan .

if a plan proposes to cure a default , the amount necessary to cure it shall be determined in accordance with the underlying agreement and applicable nonbankruptcy law .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1322 .

unless the court orders otherwise , the debtor must begin making payments proposed by a plan within 30 days after the plan is filed .

payments are retained by the trustee until confirmation or denial of confirmation .

if the plan is confirmed , the trustee will distribute payments in accordance with the plan as soon as practicable .

if the plan is not confirmed , the trustee will return payments to the debtor after deducting administrative expenses .

before or at the time of each payment to creditors under the plan , the trustee will pay outstanding administrative expenses and trustee fees .

except as otherwise provided in the plan or the confirmation order , the trustee will make the payments to the creditors under the plan .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1326 .

the debtor may modify the plan at any time before confirmation , so long as the modifications are consistent with code requirements .

after the debtor files the modifications , the plan as modified becomes the plan .

any holder of a secured claim that has accepted or rejected the plan is deemed to have accepted or rejected , as the case may be , the plan as modified , unless the modification provides for a change in the rights of the holder , in which case the holder may change his previous acceptance or rejection .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1323 .

after notice , the court will hold a hearing on confirmation of the plan during which any party in interest may interpose an objection .

the court shall confirm a plan if it meets the following criteria: it complies with all applicable code provisions ; the required filing fees and court costs have been paid ; the plan was proposed in good faith and is not in any way forbidden by law ; the value of the property to be distributed under the plan on account of each allowed unsecured claim is not less than the amount that would be paid if the debtor's estate were liquidated under chapter 7 ; with respect to each allowed secured claim provided for by the plan , the holder has accepted the plan , or the plan provides that the claimholder retain the lien securing the claim and the value of the property to be distributed on account of such claim is not less than the allowed amount of such claim , or the debtor surrenders the property securing the claim to the holder ; the debtor will be able to comply with , and make all payments under the plan .

if the trustee or a holder of an allowed unsecured claim objects to the confirmation , the court may not approve it unless ( a ) the value of the property to be distributed under the plan on account of such claim is not less than the amount of such claim , or ( b ) the plan provides that all of the debtor's projected disposable income to be received during the three - year period will be applied to make payments under the plan .

"disposable income" means income which is not reasonably necessary for the maintenance and support of the debtor and his or her dependents and for the payment of necessary business expenses if the debtor is in business .

necessary maintenance and support includes charitable contributions of up to 15 percent of the debtor's gross annual income .

after the confirmation of a plan , the court may order any entity from whom the debtor receives income to pay all or any part of such income to the trustee .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1325 .

the provisions of a confirmed plan bind the debtor and each creditor , whether or not the claim of the creditor is provided for by the plan or whether or not the creditor has accepted or rejected the plan .

except as otherwise provided in the plan or the order confirming it , confirmation vests all estate property in the debtor free and clear of any creditor's claim or interest provided for by the plan .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1328 .

at any time prior to completion of payments under the confirmed plan , the plan may be modified upon the request of the debtor , the trustee , or the holder of an allowed unsecured claim to: increase or reduce payments to creditors of a particular class ; extend or reduce the time for such payments ; or alter the payment to a creditor to take account of payment of his claim from sources other than under the plan .

the previously delineated requirements relating to the contents and confirmation of a plan , as well as those relating to a creditor's acceptance or rejection of a pre - confirmation modification of a plan , apply to a post - confirmation modification .

additionally , the modification must take place within the original three - year time period , with extensions to no longer than five years .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1329 .

on request of a party in interest and after notice and hearing , the court may revoke a confirmation order at any time within 180 days after its entry , if the confirmation was procured by fraud .

thereafter , unless a modified plan is confirmed , the court must either dismiss the case or convert it to a chapter 7 or chapter 11 case .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1330 .

as soon as practicable after the debtor's completion of payments under the plan , unless the court approves a written waiver of discharge executed by the debtor , the court shall grant the debtor a discharge of all debts provided for by the plan or disallowed by the court .

although narrowed significantly by amendments to the code in 1990 , a chapter 13 discharge remains potentially of broader scope than one under chapters 7 , 11 , or 12 .

debts which are nondischargeable under chapter 13 are: those for any unsecured or secured claim on which the last payment is due after the date on which the final payment under the plan is due ; for debts to a spouse , former spouse , or child of the debtor , for alimony , maintenance and support ; for liability for death or injury caused by the debtor while driving while intoxicated ; for criminal restitution ; criminal fines ; and , for student loans .

there is no prohibition against a plan provision for partial or no payment of a debt based on fraud , fiduciary defalcation , embezzlement or larceny , willful or malicious injury to person or property , a governmental fine or penalty ( excluding criminal restitution obligations ) — all of which are nondischargeable under chapters 7 , 11 , and 12 pursuant to 11 u.s.c .

§ 523 .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1328 ( a ) .

despite the fact that a debtor does not complete all the payments provided for under the plan , the court may grant the debtor a discharge if: the debtor's failure to complete payments is due to circumstances for which he should not justly be held accountable ; the value of the property actually distributed under the plan on account of each allowed unsecured claim is not less than the amount that would have been paid on the claim if the debtor's estate had been liquidated under chapter 7 ; and modification of the plan is impracticable .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1328 ( b ) .

a hardship discharge relieves the debtor from all unsecured debts provided for by the plan or disallowed by the court , but reinstates the nondischargeability of debts under § 523 ( a ) .

long term secured and unsecured debts which were not due until after the date on which final payment would have been due under the plan are also nondischargeable .

hence , the "superdischarge" which might otherwise be available under chapter 13 is unavailable in connection with the nonperforming hardship discharge .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1328 ( c ) .

a postpetition consumer debt is not discharged if prior trustee approval of the incurring of the debt was practicable and was not obtained .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1328 ( d ) .

at the request of any party in interest within one year after the discharge was granted , the court , after notice and hearing , may revoke the discharge if it was obtained through fraud and the requesting party learned of the fraud after the discharge was granted .

11 u.s.c .

§ 1328 ( e ) .

