congress established the nunn - lugar cooperative threat reduction ( ctr ) program innovember 1991 .

a failed coup in moscow in august 1991 and the subsequent disintegration of thesoviet union had raised concerns about the safety and security of soviet nuclear weapons .

congressresponded by authorizing the use of $400 million in fy1992 department of defense funds to assistwith the safe and secure transportation , storage , and dismantlement of nuclear , chemical , and otherweapons .

 ( 1 ) congress appropriated an additional $300to $400 million per year for the ctr programsbetween fy1993 and fy1998 .

it added $440.4 million in dod funds for fy1999 , $475.5 millionin fy2000 , $443.4 million in fy2001 , $403 million in fy2002 , $416.7 million in fy2003 and$450.8 million in fy2004 .

 ( 2 ) most of these fundssupport projects in russia , ukraine , belarus andkazakhstan - - the four nations that had soviet nuclear weapons on their territories - - but congresshas also authorized their use for projects in other former soviet republics .

the ctr program seeks to reduce the threat to the united states from nuclear and other weapons in the former soviet union .

towards this end , the program has focused on four keyobjectives: destroy nuclear , chemical , and other weapons of mass destruction ; transport , store , disable , and safeguard these weapons in connection with their destruction ; establish verifiable safeguards against the proliferation of these weapons , their components , and weapons - usable materials ; and prevent the diversion of scientific expertise that could contribute to weaponsprograms in other nations .

 ( 3 ) while most members of congress support the central objectives of the nunn - lugar effort , some members have questioned whether ctr programs truly enhance u.s. security .

some have objectedto specific projects while others have generally challenged the notion that the programs reduce thethreat to the united states .

many who hold this view believe that u.s. defense dollars could bebetter spent on u.s. defense programs .

others , however , believe that ctr programs can do moreto stem proliferation and enhance u.s. security .

those who hold this view have supported addingfunds to the budget requests for ctr .

these concerns are discussed in detail in the second half of this report .

the report first offers an overview of the evolving rationale for the ctr programs and a brief description of processes usedto implement the programs , the types of projects supported by ctr funds , and congressional actionon these programs in past years .

when congress first passed the nunn - lugar amendment in november 1991 , it sought toprovide u.s. assistance quickly in response to the expected collapse of nuclear control and securityin the soviet union .

even though the original impetus for u.s. assistance has passed , congresscontinues to provide strong support for the cooperative threat reduction program .

nevertheless,congress has prohibited ctr expenditures on some demilitarization programs and has questionedprogress on several other projects .

at the same time , congress approved more money for ctrprograms to enhance the security of nuclear materials than the administration requested .

the issues raised in the past few years are likely to reappear in future debates over ctr funding .

as long as members remain concerned about security at nuclear facilities and the potentialfor nuclear materials to leak to rogue nations or terrorist groups , many are likely to continue tosupport active u.s. involvement in efforts to secure these materials .

but as long as russia continuesto pursue programs and policies that run counter to u.s. preferences and interests , many membersare likely to continue to question the net value of u.s. assistance to russia and the other formersoviet republics .

source: ctr program office , department of defens .

