the computer fraud and abuse act ( cfaa ) , 18 u.s.c .

1030 , protects computers in which there is a federal interest — federal computers , bank computers , and computers used in or affecting interstate and foreign commerce .

it shields them from trespassing , threats , damage , espionage , and from being corruptly used as instruments of fraud .

it is not a comprehensive provision ; instead it fills cracks and gaps in the protection afforded by other state and federal criminal laws .

it is a work that over the last three decades , congress has kneaded , reworked , recast , amended , and supplemented to bolster the uncertain coverage of the more general federal trespassing , threat , malicious mischief , fraud , and espionage statutes .

this is a brief description of §1030 and its federal statutory companions .

there are other laws that address the subject of crime and computers .

cfaa deals with computers as victims ; other laws deal with computers as arenas for crime or as repositories of the evidence of crime or from some other perspective .

these other laws — laws relating to identity theft , obscenity , pornography , gambling , among others — are beyond the scope of this report .

in their present form , the seven paragraphs of subsection 1030 ( a ) outlaw computer trespassing in a government computer , 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( a ) ( 3 ) ; computer trespassing resulting in exposure to certain governmental , credit , financial , or computer - housed information , 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( a ) ( 2 ) ; damaging a government computer , a bank computer , or a computer used in , or affecting , interstate or foreign commerce , 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( a ) ( 5 ) ; committing fraud an integral part of which involves unauthorized access to a government computer , a bank computer , or a computer used in , or affecting , interstate or foreign commerce , 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( a ) ( 4 ) ; threatening to damage a government computer , a bank computer , or a computer used in , or affecting , interstate or foreign commerce , 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( a ) ( 7 ) ; trafficking in passwords for a government computer , or when the trafficking affects interstate or foreign commerce , 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( a ) ( 6 ) ; and accessing a computer to commit espionage , 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( a ) ( 1 ) .

subsection 1030 ( b ) makes it a crime to attempt or conspire to commit any of these offenses .

subsection 1030 ( c ) catalogs the penalties for committing them , penalties that range from imprisonment for not more than a year for simple cyberspace trespassing to imprisonment for not more than 20 years for a second espionage - related conviction and to life imprisonment for death - result offenses .

subsection 1030 ( d ) preserves the investigative authority of the secret service .

subsection 1030 ( e ) supplies common definitions .

subsection 1030 ( f ) disclaims any application to otherwise permissible law enforcement activities .

subsection 1030 ( g ) creates a civil cause of action for victims of these crimes .

subsection 1030 ( h ) , which has since expired , called for annual reports through 1999 from the attorney general and secretary of the treasury on investigations under the damage paragraph ( 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( a ) ( 5 ) ) .

and subsections 1030 ( i ) and ( j ) authorize the confiscation of property generated by , or used to facilitate the commission of , one of the offenses under subsection 1030 ( a ) or ( b ) .

 ( a ) whoever ... ( 3 ) intentionally , without authorization to access any nonpublic computer of a department or agency of the united states , accesses such a computer of that department or agency that is exclusively for the use of the government of the united states or , in the case of a computer not exclusively for such use , is used by or for the government of the united states and such conduct affects that use by or for the government of the united states ... shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

 ( b ) whoever attempts to commit an offense under subsection ( a ) of this section shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 3 ) condemns unauthorized intrusion ( "hacking" ) into federal government computers whether they are used exclusively by the government or the government shares access with others .

with the help of subsection 1030 ( b ) it also outlaws attempted intrusions and conspiracies to intrude .

in the case of shared computers , a crime only occurs if the unauthorized access "affects ... use by or for" the government or would affect such use if an attempted effort had succeeded .

broken down into its elements , paragraph ( a ) ( 3 ) makes it unlawful for anyone to without authorization intentionally either - access a government computer maintained exclusively for the use of the federal government , - access a government computer used , at least in part , by or for the federal government and the access affects use by or for the federal government , - attempts to do so ( 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( b ) ) or - conspires to do so ( 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( c ) ) .

this pure trespassing proscription dates from 1986 and its legislative history leaves little doubt that nothing more than unauthorized entry is required: "[s]ection 2 ( b ) will clarify the present 18 u.s.c .

1030 ( a ) ( 3 ) , making clear that it applies to acts of simple trespass against computers belonging to , or being used by or for , the federal government .

the department of justice and others have expressed concerns about whether the present subsection covers acts of mere trespass , i.e. , unauthorized access , or whether it requires a further showing that the information perused was 'used , modified , destroyed , or disclosed. .

to alleviate those concerns , the committee wants to make clear that the new subsection will be a simple trespass offense , applicable to persons without authorized access to federal computers. .

 ( a ) whoever ... ( 2 ) intentionally accesses a computer without authorization or exceeds authorized access , and thereby obtains ( a ) information contained in a financial record of a financial institution , or of a card issuer as defined in [s]ection 1 602 ( n ) of title 15 , or contained in a file of a consumer reporting agency on a consumer , as such terms are defined in the fair credit reporting act ( 15 u.s.c .

1681 et seq .

 ) ; ( b ) information from any department or agency of the united states ; or ( c ) information from any protected computer ... shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

 ( b ) whoever attempts to commit an offense under subsection ( a ) of this section shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

one step beyond simple hacking is the prohibition against acquiring certain protected information by intentional unauthorized computer access .

as a practical matter , in any instance involving a government computer it may be very difficult to distinguish between cases evidencing a violation of the simple trespass proscriptions of paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 3 ) and the trespassing - with - information - acquisition prohibitions of paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 2 ) .

the history of the trespass provisions speaks clearly of an intent to place beyond their reach whistleblowers and other federal employees for simple trespassing with respect to computers within their own agency .

this explains the absence of an "exceeds - authorized - access" provision in the trespassing provisions of paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 3 ) .

but the trespass - and - be - exposed - to - information provisions of paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 2 ) do feature a "exceeds - authorized - access" clause and seem facially applicable to whistleblowers .

it remains to be seen whether the courts will read paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 2 ) as effectively amending the simple trespassing provisions of paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 3 ) or will attempt to reconcile the two .

in any event , to sustain a conviction under paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 2 ) , "the government must prove that the defendant ( 1 ) intentionally ( 2 ) accessed without authorization ( or exceeded authorized access to ) a ( 3 ) protected computer and ( 4 ) thereby obtained information. .

whoever ... ( 5 ) ( a ) knowingly causes the transmission of a program , information , code , or command , and as a result of such conduct , intentionally causes damage without authorization , to a protected computer ; ( b ) intentionally accesses a protected computer without authorization , and as a result of such conduct , recklessly causes damage ; or ( c ) intentionally accesses a protected computer without authorization , and as a result of such conduct , causes damage and loss .

 ( b ) whoever attempts to commit an offense under subsection ( a ) of this section shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

 ( a ) whoever ... ( 4 ) knowingly and with intent to defraud , accesses a protected computer without authorization , or exceeds authorized access , and by means of such conduct furthers the intended fraud and obtains anything of value , unless the object of the fraud and the thing obtained consists only of the use of the computer and the value of such use is not more than $5,000 in any 1-year period ... shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

 ( b ) whoever attempts to commit an offense under subsection ( a ) of this section shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 4 ) outlaws fraud by computer intrusion .

its elements consist of knowingly and with intent to defraud ; accessing a protected computer without authorization , or exceeding authorization ; thereby furthering a fraud and obtaining anything of value ( other than a minimal amount of computer time , i.e. , more than $5,000 over the course of a year ) .

 ( a ) whoever ... ( 7 ) with intent to extort from any person any money or other thing of value , transmits in interstate or foreign commerce any communication containing any ( a ) threat to cause damage to a protected compute r ; ( b ) threat to obtain information from a protected computer without authorization or in excess of authorization or to impair the confidentiality of information obtained from a protected computer without authorization or by exceeding authorized access ; or ( c ) demand or request for money or other thing of value in relation to damage to a protected computer , where such damage was caused to facilitate the extortion ; shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

 ( b ) whoever attempts to commit an offense under subsection ( a ) of this section shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

congress enacted subparagraph 1030 ( a ) ( 7 ) ( a ) in 1996 out of concern that "the 'property' protected under existing laws , such as the hobbs act , 18 u.s.c .

1951 ( interference with commerce by extortion ) , or 18 u.s.c .

875 ( d ) ( interstate communication of threat to injury property of another ) , does not clearly include the operation of a computer , the data or programs stored in a computer or its peripheral equipment , or the decoding keys to encrypted data. .

it enacted subparagraphs 1030 ( a ) ( 7 ) ( b ) and ( c ) in 2008 following the recommendation of the department of justice to "cover the situation in which a criminal has already stolen the information and threatens to disclose it unless paid off" and in which "other criminals cause damage first — such as by accessing a corporate computer without authority and encrypting critical data — and then threaten that they will not correct the problem unless the victim pays. .

 ( a ) whoever ... ( 6 ) knowingly and with intent to defraud traffics ( as defined in [s]ection 1029 ) in any password or similar information through which a computer may be accessed without authorization , if — ( a ) such trafficking affects interstate or foreign commerce ; or ( b ) such computer is used by or for the government of the united states ... shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

 ( b ) whoever attempts to commit an offense under subsection ( a ) of this section shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 6 ) outlaws misconduct similar to the access device proscriptions of 18 u.s.c .

1029 .

it was enacted to deal with the practice of hackers posting the passwords for various computer systems on electronic bulletin boards .

although limited , it provides several distinct advantages .

first , it covers passwords for government computers more clearly than does §1029 .

second , as something of a lesser included offense to §1029 , it affords the government plea bargaining room in a case that it might otherwise be forced to bring under §1029 or abandon .

third , it contributes a means of cutting off the practice of publicly posting access to confidential computer systems without imposing severe penalties unless the misconduct persists .

fourth , it supplies a basis for private enforcement through the civil liability provisions of subsection 1030 ( g ) for misconduct that may be more appropriately addressed by the courts as a private wrong .

nevertheless , the paragraph has apparently been invoked only infrequently .

the elements of the crime are knowingly and with an intent to defraud ; trafficking in ( i.e. , "to transfer , or otherwise dispose of , to another , or obtain control of with intent to transfer or dispose of" ( 18 u.s.c .

1029 ( e ) ( 5 ) ) ) ; a computer password or similar computer key ; and either - of a federal computer or - in a manner that affects interstate or foreign commerce .

 ( a ) whoever ... ( 1 ) having knowingly accessed a computer without authorization or exceeding authorized access , and by means of such conduct having obtained information that has been determined by the united states government pursuant to an executive order or statute to require protection against unauthorized disclosure for reasons of national defense or foreign relations , or any restricted data , as defined in paragraph y of [s]ection 1 1 of the atomic energy act of 1954 , with reason to believe that such information so obtained could be used to the injury of the united states , or to the advantage of any foreign nation willfully communicates , delivers , transmits , or causes to be communicated , delivered , or transmitted , or attempts to communicate , deliver , transmit or cause to be communicated , delivered , or transmitted the same to any person not entitled to receive it , or willfully retains the same and fails to deliver it to the officer or employee of the united states entitled to receive it ... shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

 ( b ) whoever attempts to commit an offense under subsection ( a ) of this section shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 1 ) essentially tracks existing federal espionage laws — 18 u.s.c .

793 , 794 , and 798 — that ban disclosure of information potentially detrimental to u.s. national defense and well being , or more simply , laws that outlaw spying .

the paragraph was enacted as part of the original act and has been amended primarily to more closely track other espionage laws .

the distinctive feature of paragraph 1030 ( a ) ( 1 ) is its merger of elements of espionage and computer abuse .

broken down into a simplified version of its constituent elements it bars anyone from either - willfully disclosing , - willfully attempting to disclose , or - willfully failing to return classified information concerning national defense , foreign relations , or atomic energy with reason to believe that the information either - could be used to injure the united states , or - could be used to the advantage of a foreign nation when the information was acquired by unauthorized computer access .

 ( a ) whoever — ( 1 ) having knowingly accessed a computer without authorization or exceeding authorized access , and by means of such conduct having obtained information that has been determined by the united states government pursuant to an executive order or statute to require protection against unauthorized disclosure for reasons of national defense or foreign relations , or any restricted data , as defined in paragraph y. of section 11 of the atomic energy act of 1954 , with reason to believe that such information so obtained could be used to the injury of the united states , or to the advantage of any foreign nation willfully communicates , delivers , transmits , or causes to be communicated , delivered , or transmitted , or attempts to communicate , deliver , transmit or cause to be communicated , delivered , or transmitted the same to any person not entitled to receive it , or willfully retains the same and fails to deliver it to the officer or employee of the united states entitled to receive it ; ( 2 ) intentionally accesses a computer without authorization or exceeds authorized access , and thereby obtains — ( a ) information contained in a financial record of a financial institution , or of a card issuer as defined in section 1602 ( n ) of title 15 , or contained in a file of a consumer reporting agency on a consumer , as such terms are defined in the fair credit reporting act 15 u.s.c .

1681 et seq .

 ) ; ( b ) information from any department or agency of the united states ; or ( c ) information from any protected computer ; ( 3 ) intentionally , without authorization to access any nonpublic computer of a department or agency of the united states , accesses such a computer of that department or agency that is exclusively for the use of the government of the united states or , in the case of a computer not exclusively for such use , is used by or for the government of the united states and such conduct affects that use by or for the government of the united states ; ( 4 ) knowingly and with intent to defraud , accesses a protected computer without authorization , or exceeds authorized access , and by means of such conduct furthers the intended fraud and obtains anything of value , unless the object of the fraud and the thing obtained consists only of the use of the computer and the value of such use is not more than $5,000 in any 1-year period ; ( 5 ) ( a ) knowingly causes the transmission of a program , information , code , or command , and as a result of such conduct , intentionally causes damage without authorization , to a protected computer ; ( b ) intentionally accesses a protected computer without authorization , and as a result of such conduct , recklessly causes damage ; or ( c ) intentionally accesses a protected computer without authorization , and as a result of such conduct , causes damage and loss .

 ( 6 ) knowingly and with intent to defraud traffics ( as defined in section 1029 ) in any password or similar information through which a computer may be accessed without authorization , if - - ( a ) such trafficking affects interstate or foreign commerce ; or ( b ) such computer is used by or for the government of the united states .

 ( 7 ) with intent to extort from any person any money or other thing of value , transmits in interstate or foreign commerce any communication containing any — ( a ) threat to cause damage to a protected computer ; ( b ) threat to obtain information from a protected computer without authorization or in excess of authorization or to impair the confidentiality of information obtained from a protected computer without authorization or by exceeding authorized access ; or ( c ) demand or request for money or other thing of value in relation to damage to a protected computer , where such damage was caused to facilitate the extortion ; shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

 ( b ) whoever conspires to commit or attempts to commit an offense under subsection ( a ) of this section shall be punished as provided in subsection ( c ) of this section .

 ( c ) the punishment for an offense under subsection ( a ) or ( b ) of this section is — ( 1 ) ( a ) a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than ten years , or both , in the case of an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) of this section which does not occur after a conviction for another offense under this section , or an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; and ( b ) a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than twenty years , or both , in the case of an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) of this section which occurs after a conviction for another offense under this section , or an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; ( 2 ) ( a ) except as provided in subparagraph ( b ) , a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than one year , or both , in the case of an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) , ( a ) ( 3 ) , or ( a ) ( 6 ) of this section which does not occur after a conviction for another offense under this section , or an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; ( b ) a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than 5 years , or both , in the case of an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) , or an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph , if — ( i ) the offense was committed for purposes of commercial advantage or private financial gain ; ( ii ) the offense was committed in furtherance of any criminal or tortious act in violation of the constitution or laws of the united states or of any state ; or ( iii ) the value of the information obtained exceeds $5,000 ; and ( c ) a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than ten years , or both , in the case of an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) , ( a ) ( 3 ) or ( a ) ( 6 ) of this section which occurs after a conviction for another offense under this section , or an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; ( 3 ) ( a ) a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than five years , or both , in the case of an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 4 ) or ( a ) ( 7 ) of this section which does not occur after a conviction for another offense under this section , or an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; and ( b ) a fine under this title or imprisonment for not more than ten years , or both , in the case of an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 4 ) or ( a ) ( 7 ) of this section which occurs after a conviction for another offense under this section , or an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; ( 4 ) ( a ) except as provided in subparagraphs ( e ) and ( f ) , a fine under this title , imprisonment for not more than 5 years , or both , in the case of — ( i ) an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 5 ) ( b ) , which does not occur after a conviction for another offense under this section , if the offense caused ( or , in the case of an attempted offense , would , if completed , have caused ) — ( i ) loss to 1 or more persons during any 1-year period ( and , for purposes of an investigation , prosecution , or other proceeding brought by the united states only , loss resulting from a related course of conduct affecting 1 or more other protected computers ) aggregating at least $5,000 in value ; ( ii ) the modification or impairment , or potential modification or impairment , of the medical examination , diagnosis , treatment , or care of 1 or more individuals ; ( iii ) physical injury to any person ; ( iv ) a threat to public health or safety ; ( v ) damage affecting a computer used by or for an entity of the united states government in furtherance of the administration of justice , national defense , or national security ; or ( vi ) damage affecting 10 or more protected computers during any 1-year period ; or ( ii ) an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; ( b ) except as provided in subparagraphs ( e ) and ( f ) , a fine under this title , imprisonment for not more than 10 years , or both , in the case of — ( i ) an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 5 ) ( a ) , which does not occur after a conviction for another offense under this section , if the offense caused ( or , in the case of an attempted offense , would , if completed , have caused ) a harm provided in subclauses ( i ) through ( vi ) of subparagraph ( a ) ( i ) ; or ( ii ) an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; ( c ) except as provided in subparagraphs ( e ) and ( f ) , a fine under this title , imprisonment for not more than 20 years , or both , in the case of — ( i ) an offense or an attempt to commit an offense under subparagraphs ( a ) or ( b ) of subsection ( a ) ( 5 ) that occurs after a conviction for another offense under this section ; or ( ii ) an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; ( d ) a fine under this title , imprisonment for not more than 10 years , or both , in the case of — ( i ) an offense or an attempt to commit an offense under subsection ( a ) ( 5 ) ( c ) that occurs after a conviction for another offense under this section ; or ( ii ) an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph ; ( e ) if the offender attempts to cause or knowingly or recklessly causes serious bodily injury from conduct in violation of subsection ( a ) ( 5 ) ( a ) , a fine under this title , imprisonment for not more than 20 years , or both ; ( f ) if the offender attempts to cause or knowingly or recklessly causes death from conduct in violation of subsection ( a ) ( 5 ) ( a ) , a fine under this title , imprisonment for any term of years or for life , or both ; or ( g ) a fine under this title , imprisonment for not more than 1 year , or both , for — ( i ) any other offense under subsection ( a ) ( 5 ) ; or ( ii ) an attempt to commit an offense punishable under this subparagraph .

[ ( 5 ) repealed. .

 ( d ) ( 1 ) the united states secret service shall , in addition to any other agency having such authority , have the authority to investigate offenses under this section .

 ( 2 ) the federal bureau of investigation shall have primary authority to investigate offenses under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) for any cases involving espionage , foreign counterintelligence , information protected against unauthorized disclosure for reasons of national defense or foreign relations , or restricted data ( as that term is defined in section 11y of the atomic energy act of 1954 ( 42 u.s.c .

2014 ( y ) ) , except for offenses affecting the duties of the united states secret service pursuant to section 3056 ( a ) of this title .

 ( 3 ) such authority shall be exercised in accordance with an agreement which shall be entered into by the secretary of the treasury and the attorney general .

 ( e ) as used in this section — ( 1 ) the term "computer" means an electronic , magnetic , optical , electrochemical , or other high speed data processing device performing logical , arithmetic , or storage functions , and includes any data storage facility or communications facility directly related to or operating in conjunction with such device , but such term does not include an automated typewriter or typesetter , a portable hand held calculator , or other similar device ; ( 2 ) the term "protected computer" means a computer — ( a ) exclusively for the use of a financial institution or the united states government , or , in the case of a computer not exclusively for such use , used by or for a financial institution or the united states government and the conduct constituting the offense affects that use by or for the financial institution or the government ; or ( b ) which is used in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce or communication , including a computer located outside the united states that is used in a manner that affects interstate or foreign commerce or communication of the united states ; ( 3 ) the term "state" includes the district of columbia , the commonwealth of puerto rico , and any other commonwealth , possession or territory of the united states ; ( 4 ) the term "financial institution" means — ( a ) an institution , with deposits insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation ; ( b ) the federal reserve or a member of the federal reserve including any federal reserve bank ; ( c ) a credit union with accounts insured by the national credit union administration ; ( d ) a member of the federal home loan bank system and any home loan bank ; ( e ) any institution of the farm credit system under the farm credit act of 1971 ; ( f ) a broker - dealer registered with the securities and exchange commission pursuant to section 15 of the securities exchange act of 1934 ; ( g ) the securities investor protection corporation ; ( h ) a branch or agency of a foreign bank ( as such terms are defined in paragraphs ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) of section 1 ( b ) of the international banking act of 1978 ) ; and ( i ) an organization operating under section 25 or section 25 ( a ) of the federal reserve act ; ( 5 ) the term "financial record" means information derived from any record held by a financial institution pertaining to a customer's relationship with the financial institution ; ( 6 ) the term "exceeds authorized access" means to access a computer with authorization and to use such access to obtain or alter information in the computer that the accesser is not entitled so to obtain or alter ; ( 7 ) the term "department of the united states" means the legislative or judicial branch of the government or one of the executive departments enumerated in section 101 of title 5 ; ( 8 ) the term "damage" means any impairment to the integrity or availability of data , a program , a system , or information ; ( 9 ) the term "government entity" includes the government of the united states , any state or political subdivision of the united states , any foreign country , and any state , province , municipality , or other political subdivision of a foreign country ; ( 10 ) the term "conviction" shall include a conviction under the law of any state for a crime punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year , an element of which is unauthorized access , or exceeding authorized access , to a computer ; ( 11 ) the term "loss" means any reasonable cost to any victim , including the cost of responding to an offense , conducting a damage assessment , and restoring the data , program , system , or information to its condition prior to the offense , and any revenue lost , cost incurred , or other consequential damages incurred because of interruption of service ; and ( 12 ) the term "person" means any individual , firm , corporation , educational institution , financial institution , governmental entity , or legal or other entity .

 ( f ) this section does not prohibit any lawfully authorized investigative , protective , or intelligence activity of a law enforcement agency of the united states , a state , or a political subdivision of a state , or of an intelligence agency of the united states .

 ( g ) any person who suffers damage or loss by reason of a violation of this section may maintain a civil action against the violator to obtain compensatory damages and injunctive relief or other equitable relief .

a civil action for a violation of this section may be brought only if the conduct involves 1 of the factors set forth in subclauses ( i ) , ( ii ) , ( iii ) , ( iv ) , or ( v ) of subsection ( c ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ( i ) .

damages for a violation involving only conduct described in subsection ( c ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ( i ) ( i ) are limited to economic damages .

no action may be brought under this subsection unless such action is begun within 2 years of the date of the act complained of or the date of the discovery of the damage .

no action may be brought under this subsection for the negligent design or manufacture of computer hardware , computer software , or firmware .

 ( h ) the attorney general and the secretary of the treasury shall report to the congress annually , during the first 3 years following the date of the enactment of this subsection , concerning investigations and prosecutions under subsection ( a ) ( 5 ) .

 ( i ) ( 1 ) the court , in imposing sentence on any person convicted of a violation of this section , or convicted of conspiracy to violate this section , shall order , in addition to any other sentence imposed and irrespective of any provision of state law , that such person forfeit to the united states — ( a ) such person's interest in any personal property that was used or intended to be used to commit or to facilitate the commission of such violation ; and ( b ) any property , real or personal , constituting or derived from , any proceeds that such person obtained , directly or indirectly , as a result of such violation .

 ( 2 ) the criminal forfeiture of property under this subsection , any seizure and disposition thereof , and any judicial proceeding in relation thereto , shall be governed by the provisions of section 413 of the comprehensive drug abuse prevention and control act of 1970 ( 21 u.s.c .

853 ) , except subsection ( d ) of that section .

 ( j ) for purposes of subsection ( i ) , the following shall be subject to forfeiture to the united states and no property right shall exist in them: ( 1 ) any personal property used or intended to be used to commit or to facilitate the commission of any violation of this section , or a conspiracy to violate this section .

 ( 2 ) any property , real or personal , which constitutes or is derived from proceeds traceable to any violation of this section , or a conspiracy to violate this section .

 ( a ) ( 1 ) whoever , knowing that the property involved in a financial transaction represents the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity , conducts or attempts to conduct such a financial transaction which in fact involves the proceeds of specified unlawful activity ( a ) ( i ) with the intent to promote the carrying on of specified unlawful activity ; or ( ii ) with intent to engage in conduct constituting a violation of section 7201 or 7206 of the internal revenue code of 1986 ; or ( b ) knowing that the transaction is designed in whole or in part ( i ) to conceal or disguise the nature , the location , the source , the ownership , or the control of the proceeds of specified unlawful activity ; or ( ii ) to avoid a transaction reporting requirement under state or federal law , shall be sentenced to a fine of not more than $500,000 or twice the value of the property involved in the transaction , whichever is greater , or imprisonment for not more than twenty years , or both .

for purposes of this paragraph , a financial transaction shall be considered to be one involving the proceeds of specified unlawful activity if it is part of a set of parallel or dependent transactions , any one of which involves the proceeds of specified unlawful activity , and all of which are part of a single plan or arrangement .

 ( 2 ) whoever transports , transmits , or transfers , or attempts to transport , transmit , or transfer a monetary instrument or funds from a place in the united states to or through a place outside the united states or to a place in the united states from or through a place outside the united states — ( a ) with the intent to promote the carrying on of specified unlawful activity ; or ( b ) knowing that the monetary instrument or funds involved in the transportation , transmission , or transfer represent the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and knowing that such transportation , transmission , or transfer is designed in whole or in part — ( i ) to conceal or disguise the nature , the location , the source , the ownership , or the control of the proceeds of specified unlawful activity ; or ( ii ) to avoid a transaction reporting requirement under state or federal law , shall be sentenced to a fine of not more than $500,000 or twice the value of the monetary instrument or funds involved in the transportation , transmission , or transfer whichever is greater , or imprisonment for not more than twenty years , or both .

for the purpose of the offense described in subparagraph ( b ) , the defendant's knowledge may be established by proof that a law enforcement officer represented the matter specified in subparagraph ( b ) as true , and the defendant's subsequent statements or actions indicate that the defendant believed such representations to be true .

 ( 3 ) whoever , with the intent ( a ) to promote the carrying on of specified unlawful activity ; ( b ) to conceal or disguise the nature , location , source , ownership , or control of property believed to be the proceeds of specified unlawful activity ; or ( c ) to avoid a transaction reporting requirement under state or federal law , conducts or attempts to conduct a financial transaction involving property represented to be the proceeds of specified unlawful activity , or property used to conduct or facilitate specified unlawful activity , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than 20 years , or both .

for purposes of this paragraph and paragraph ( 2 ) , the term "represented" means any representation made by a law enforcement officer or by another person at the direction of , or with the approval of , a federal official authorized to investigate or prosecute violations of this section .

 ( b ) penalties. — ( 1 ) in general. — whoever conducts or attempts to conduct a transaction described in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) or ( a ) ( 3 ) , or section 1957 , or a transportation , transmission , or transfer described in subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) , is liable to the united states for a civil penalty of not more than the greater of ( a ) the value of the property , funds , or monetary instruments involved in the transaction ; or ( b ) $10,000 .

 ( 2 ) jurisdiction over foreign persons. — for purposes of adjudicating an action filed or enforcing a penalty ordered under this section , the district courts shall have jurisdiction over any foreign person , including any financial institution authorized under the laws of a foreign country , against whom the action is brought , if service of process upon the foreign person is made under the federal rules of civil procedure or the laws of the country in which the foreign person is found , and — ( a ) the foreign person commits an offense under subsection ( a ) involving a financial transaction that occurs in whole or in part in the united states ; ( b ) the foreign person converts , to his or her own use , property in which the united states has an ownership interest by virtue of the entry of an order of forfeiture by a court of the united states ; or ( c ) the foreign person is a financial institution that maintains a bank account at a financial institution in the united states .

 ( 3 ) court authority over assets. — a court may issue a pretrial restraining order or take any other action necessary to ensure that any bank account or other property held by the defendant in the united states is available to satisfy a judgment under this section .

 ( 4 ) federal receiver. — ( a ) in general. — a court may appoint a federal receiver , in accordance with subparagraph ( b ) of this paragraph , to collect , marshal , and take custody , control , and possession of all assets of the defendant , wherever located , to satisfy a civil judgment under this subsection , a forfeiture judgment under section 981 or 982 , or a criminal sentence under section 1957 or subsection ( a ) of this section , including an order of restitution to any victim of a specified unlawful activity .

 ( b ) appointment and authority. — a federal receiver described in subparagraph ( a ) — ( i ) may be appointed upon application of a federal prosecutor or a federal or state regulator , by the court having jurisdiction over the defendant in the case ; ( ii ) shall be an officer of the court , and the powers of the federal receiver shall include the powers set out in section 754 of title 28 , united states code ; and ( iii ) shall have standing equivalent to that of a federal prosecutor for the purpose of submitting requests to obtain information regarding the assets of the defendant ( i ) from the financial crimes enforcement network of the department of the treasury ; or ( ii ) from a foreign country pursuant to a mutual legal assistance treaty , multilateral agreement , or other arrangement for international law enforcement assistance , provided that such requests are in accordance with the policies and procedures of the attorney general .

 ( c ) as used in this section — ( 1 ) the term "knowing that the property involved in a financial transaction represents the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity" means that the person knew the property involved in the transaction represented proceeds from some form , though not necessarily which form , of activity that constitutes a felony under state , federal , or foreign law , regardless of whether or not such activity is specified in paragraph ( 7 ) ; ( 2 ) the term "conducts" includes initiating , concluding , or participating in initiating , or concluding a transaction ; ( 3 ) the term "transaction" includes a purchase , sale , loan , pledge , gift , transfer , delivery , or other disposition , and with respect to a financial institution includes a deposit , withdrawal , transfer between accounts , exchange of currency , loan , extension of credit , purchase or sale of any stock , bond , certificate of deposit , or other monetary instrument , use of a safe deposit box , or any other payment , transfer , or delivery by , through , or to a financial institution , by whatever means effected ; ( 4 ) the term "financial transaction" means ( a ) a transaction which in any way or degree affects interstate or foreign commerce ( i ) involving the movement of funds by wire or other means or ( ii ) involving one or more monetary instruments , or ( iii ) involving the transfer of title to any real property , vehicle , vessel , or aircraft , or ( b ) a transaction involving the use of a financial institution which is engaged in , or the activities of which affect , interstate or foreign commerce in any way or degree ; ( 5 ) the term "monetary instruments" means ( i ) coin or currency of the united states or of any other country , travelers' checks , personal checks , bank checks , and money orders , or ( ii ) investment securities or negotiable instruments , in bearer form or otherwise in such form that title thereto passes upon delivery ; ( 6 ) the term "financial institution" includes ( a ) any financial institution , as defined in section 5312 ( a ) ( 2 ) of title 31 , united states code , or the regulations promulgated thereunder ; and ( b ) any foreign bank , as defined in section 1 of the international banking act of 1978 ( 12 u.s.c .

3101 ) ; ( 7 ) the term "specified unlawful activity" means ( a ) any act or activity constituting an offense listed in section 1961 ( 1 ) of this title except an act which is indictable under subchapter ii of chapter 53 of title 31 ; ( b ) with respect to a financial transaction occurring in whole or in part in the united states , an offense against a foreign nation involving ( i ) the manufacture , importation , sale , or distribution of a controlled substance ( as such term is defined for the purposes of the controlled substances act ) ; ( ii ) murder , kidnapping , robbery , extortion , destruction of property by means of explosive or fire , or a crime of violence ( as defined in section 16 ) ; ( iii ) fraud , or any scheme or attempt to defraud , by or against a foreign bank ( as defined in paragraph 7 of section 1 ( b ) of the international banking act of 1978 ) ) ; ( iv ) bribery of a public official , or the misappropriation , theft , or embezzlement of public funds by or for the benefit of a public official ; ( v ) smuggling or export control violations involving — ( i ) an item controlled on the united states munitions list established under section 38 of the arms export control act ( 22 u.s.c .

2778 ) ; or ( ii ) an item controlled under regulations under the export administration regulations ( 15 c.f.r .

parts 730-774 ) ; ( vi ) an offense with respect to which the united states would be obligated by a multilateral treaty , either to extradite the alleged offender or to submit the case for prosecution , if the offender were found within the territory of the united states ; or ( vii ) trafficking in persons , selling or buying of children , sexual exploitation of children , or transporting , recruiting or harboring a person , including a child , for commercial sex acts ; ( c ) any act or acts constituting a continuing criminal enterprise , as that term is defined in section 408 of the controlled substances act ( 21 u.s.c .

848 ) ; ( d ) an offense under section 32 ( the destruction of aircraft ) , section 37 ( violence at international airports ) , section 115 ( influencing , impeding , or retaliating against a federal official by threatening or injuring a family member ) , section 152 ( concealment of assets ; false oaths and claims ; bribery ) , section 175c ( the variola virus ) , section 215 ( commissions or gifts for procuring loans ) , section 351 ( congressional or cabinet officer assassination ) , any of sections 500 through 503 ( certain counterfeiting offenses ) , section 513 ( securities of states and private entities ) , section 541 ( goods falsely classified ) , section 542 ( entry of goods by means of false statements ) , section 545 ( smuggling goods into the united states ) , section 549 ( removing goods from customs custody ) , section 554 ( smuggling goods from the united states ) , section 555 ( border tunnels ) , section 641 ( public money , property , or records ) , section 656 ( theft , embezzlement , or misapplication by bank officer or employee ) , section 657 ( lending , credit , and insurance institutions ) , section 658 ( property mortgaged or pledged to farm credit agencies ) , section 666 ( theft or bribery concerning programs receiving federal funds ) , section 793 , 794 , or 798 ( espionage ) , section 831 ( prohibited transactions involving nuclear materials ) , section 844 ( f ) or ( i ) ( destruction by explosives or fire of government property or property affecting interstate or foreign commerce ) , section 875 ( interstate communications ) , section 922 ( 1 ) ( the unlawful importation of firearms ) , section 924 ( n ) ( firearms trafficking ) , section 956 ( conspiracy to kill , kidnap , maim , or injure certain property in a foreign country ) , section 1005 ( fraudulent bank entries ) , 1006 ( fraudulent federal credit institution entries ) , 1007 ( fraudulent federal deposit insurance transactions ) , 1014 ( fraudulent loan or credit applications ) , section 1030 ( computer fraud and abuse ) , 1032 ( concealment of assets from conservator , receiver , or liquidating agent of financial institution ) , section 1111 ( murder ) , section 1114 ( murder of united states law enforcement officials ) , section 1116 ( murder of foreign officials , official guests , or internationally protected persons ) , section 1201 ( kidnapping ) , section 1203 ( hostage taking ) , section 1361 ( willful injury of government property ) , section 1363 ( destruction of property within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction ) , section 1708 ( theft from the mail ) , section 1751 ( presidential assassination ) , section 2113 or 2114 ( bank and postal robbery and theft ) , section 2252a ( child pornography ) where the child pornography contains a visual depiction of an actual minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct , section 2260 ( production of certain child pornography for importation into the united states ) , section 2280 ( violence against maritime navigation ) , section 2281 ( violence against maritime fixed platforms ) , section 2319 ( copyright infringement ) , section 2320 ( trafficking in counterfeit goods and services ) , section 2332 ( terrorist acts abroad against united states nationals ) , section 2332a ( use of weapons of mass destruction ) , section 2332b ( international terrorist acts transcending national boundaries ) , section 2332g ( missile systems designed to destroy aircraft ) , section 2332h ( radiological dispersal devices ) , section 2339a or 2339b ( providing material support to terrorists ) , section 2339c ( financing of terrorism ) , or section 2339d ( receiving military - type training from a foreign terrorist organization ) of this title , section 46502 of title 49 , united states code , a felony violation of the chemical diversion and trafficking act of 1988 ( precursor and essential chemicals ) , section 590 of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

1590 ) ( aviation smuggling ) , section 422 of the controlled substances act ( transportation of drug paraphernalia ) , section 38 ( c ) ( criminal violations ) of the arms export control act , section 11 ( violations ) of the export administration act of 1979 , section 206 ( penalties ) of the international emergency economic powers act , section 16 ( offenses and punishment ) of the trading with the enemy act , any felony violation of section 15 of the food and nutrition act of 2008 [7 u.s.c .

2024] ( supplemental nutrition assistance program benefits fraud ) involving a quantity of benefits having a value of not less than $5,000 , any violation of section 543 ( a ) ( 1 ) of the housing act of 1949 [42 u.s.c .

1490s ( a ) ( 1 ) ] ( equity skimming ) , any felony violation of the foreign agents registration act of 1938 , any felony violation of the foreign corrupt practices act , or section 92 of the atomic energy act of 1954 ( 42 u.s.c .

2122 ) ( prohibitions governing atomic weapons ) environmental crimes ( e ) a felony violation of the federal water pollution control act ( 33 u.s.c .

1251 et seq .

 ) , the ocean dumping act ( 33 u.s.c .

1401 et seq .

 ) , the act to prevent pollution from ships ( 33 u.s.c .

1901 et seq .

 ) , the safe drinking water act ( 42 u.s.c .

300f et seq .

 ) , or the resources conservation and recovery act ( 42 u.s.c .

6901 et seq .

 ) ; or ( f ) any act or activity constituting an offense involving a federal health care offense ; ( 8 ) the term "state" includes a state of the united states , the district of columbia , and any commonwealth , territory , or possession of the united states .

 ( 9 ) the term "proceeds" means any property derived from or obtained or retained , directly or indirectly , through some form of unlawful activity , including the gross receipts of such activity .

 ( d ) nothing in this section shall supersede any provision of federal , state , or other law imposing criminal penalties or affording civil remedies in addition to those provided for in this section .

 ( e ) violations of this section may be investigated by such components of the department of justice as the attorney general may direct , and by such components of the department of the treasury as the secretary of the treasury may direct , as appropriate , and , with respect to offenses over which the department of homeland security has jurisdiction , by such components of the department of homeland security as the secretary of homeland security may direct , and , with respect to offenses over which the united states postal service has jurisdiction , by the postal service .

such authority of the secretary of the treasury , the secretary of homeland security , and the postal service shall be exercised in accordance with an agreement which shall be entered into by the secretary of the treasury , the secretary of homeland security , the postal service , and the attorney general .

violations of this section involving offenses described in paragraph ( c ) ( 7 ) ( e ) may be investigated by such components of the department of justice as the attorney general may direct , and the national enforcement investigations center of the environmental protection agency .

 ( f ) there is extraterritorial jurisdiction over the conduct prohibited by this section if — ( 1 ) the conduct is by a united states citizen or , in the case of a non - united states citizen , the conduct occurs in part in the united states ; and ( 2 ) the transaction or series of related transactions involves funds or monetary instruments of a value exceeding $10,000 .

 ( g ) notice of conviction of financial institutions. — if any financial institution or any officer , director , or employee of any financial institution has been found guilty of an offense under this section , section 1957 or 1960 of this title , or section 5322 or 5324 of title 31 , the attorney general shall provide written notice of such fact to the appropriate regulatory agency for the financial institution .

 ( h ) any person who conspires to commit any offense defined in this section or section 1957 shall be subject to the same penalties as those prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the conspiracy .

 ( i ) venue. — ( 1 ) except as provided in paragraph ( 2 ) , a prosecution for an offense under this section or section 1957 may be brought in — ( a ) any district in which the financial or monetary transaction is conducted ; or ( b ) any district where a prosecution for the underlying specified unlawful activity could be brought , if the defendant participated in the transfer of the proceeds of the specified unlawful activity from that district to the district where the financial or monetary transaction is conducted .

 ( 2 ) a prosecution for an attempt or conspiracy offense under this section or section 1957 may be brought in the district where venue would lie for the completed offense under paragraph ( 1 ) , or in any other district where an act in furtherance of the attempt or conspiracy took place .

 ( 3 ) for purposes of this section , a transfer of funds from 1 place to another , by wire or any other means , shall constitute a single , continuing transaction .

any person who conducts ( as that term is defined in subsection ( c ) ( 2 ) ) any portion of the transaction may be charged in any district in which the transaction takes place .

as used in this chapter — ( 1 ) "racketeering activity means ( a ) any act or threat involving murder , kidnapping , gambling , arson , robbery , bribery , extortion , dealing in obscene matter , or dealing in a controlled substance or listed chemical ( as defined in section 102 of the controlled substances act ) , which is chargeable under state law and punishable by imprisonment for more than one year ; ( b ) any act which is indictable under any of the following provisions of title 18 , united states code: section 201 ( bribery ) , section 224 ( sports bribery ) , sections 471 , 472 , and 473 ( counterfeiting ) , section 659 ( theft from interstate shipment ) if the act indictable under section 659 is felonious , section 664 ( embezzlement from pension and welfare funds ) , sections 891-894 ( extortionate credit transactions ) , section 1028 ( fraud and related activity in connection with identification documents ) , section 1029 ( fraud and related activity in connection with access devices ) , section 1084 ( the transmission of gambling information ) , section 1341 ( mail fraud ) , section 1343 ( wire fraud ) , section 1344 ( financial institution fraud ) , section 1351 ( fraud in foreign labor contracting ) , section 1425 ( the procurement of citizenship or nationalization unlawfully ) , section 1426 ( the reproduction of naturalization or citizenship papers ) , section 1427 ( the sale of naturalization or citizenship papers ) , sections 1461-1465 ( obscene matter ) , section 1503 ( obstruction of justice ) , section 1510 ( obstruction of criminal investigations ) , section 1511 ( the obstruction of state or local law enforcement ) , section 1512 ( tampering with a witness , victim , or an informant ) , section 1513 ( retaliating against a witness , victim , or an informant ) , section 1542 ( false statement in application and use of passport ) , section 1543 ( forgery or false use of passport ) , section 1544 ( misuse of passport ) , section 1546 ( fraud and misuse of visas , permits , and other documents ) , sections 1581-1592 ( peonage , slavery , and trafficking in persons ) , section 1951 ( interference with commerce , robbery , or extortion ) , section 1952 ( racketeering ) , section 1953 ( interstate transportation of wagering paraphernalia ) , section 1954 ( unlawful welfare fund payments ) , section 1955 ( the prohibition of illegal gambling businesses ) , section 1956 ( the laundering of monetary instruments ) , section 1957 ( engaging in monetary transactions in property derived from specified unlawful activity ) , section 1958 ( use of interstate commerce facilities in the commission of murder - for - hire ) , section 1960 ( illegal money transmitters ) , sections 2251 , 2251a , 2252 , and 2260 ( sexual exploitation of children ) , sections 2312 and 2313 ( interstate transportation of stolen motor vehicles ) , sections 2314 and 2315 ( interstate transportation of stolen property ) , section 2318 ( trafficking in counterfeit labels for phonorecords , computer programs or computer program documentation or packaging and copies of motion pictures or other audiovisual works ) , section 2319 ( criminal infringement of a copyright ) , section 2319a ( unauthorized fixation of and trafficking in sound recordings and music videos of live musical performances ) , section 2320 ( trafficking in goods or services bearing counterfeit marks ) , section 2321 ( trafficking in certain motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts ) , sections 2341-2346 ( trafficking in contraband cigarettes ) , sections 2421-24 ( white slave traffic ) , sections 175-178 ( biological weapons ) , sections 229-229f ( chemical weapons ) , section 831 ( nuclear materials ) , ( c ) any act which is indictable under title 29 , united states code , section 186 ( dealing with restrictions on payments and loans to labor organizations ) or section 501 ( c ) ( embezzlement from union funds ) , ( d ) any offense involving fraud connected with a case under title 11 ( except a case under section 157 of this title ) , fraud in the sale of securities , or the felonious manufacture , importation , receiving , concealment , buying , selling , or otherwise dealing in a controlled substance or listed chemical ( as defined in section 102 of the controlled substances act ) , punishable under any law of the united states , ( e ) any act which is indictable under the currency and foreign transactions reporting act , ( f ) any act which is indictable under the immigration and nationality act , section 274 ( bringing in and harboring certain aliens ) , section 277 ( aiding or assisting certain aliens to enter the united states ) , or section 278 ( importation of alien for immoral purpose ) if the act indictable under such section of such act was committed for the purpose of financial gain , or ( g ) any act that is indictable under any provision listed in section 2332b ( g ) ( 5 ) ( b ) .

 ( g ) definitions — as used in this section — * * * ( 5 ) the term "federal crime of terrorism" means an offense that ... ( b ) is a violation of — ( i ) section 32 ( destruction of aircraft or aircraft facilities ) , 37 ( violence at international airports ) , 81 ( arson within special maritime and territorial jurisdiction ) , 175 or 175b ( biological weapons ) , 175c ( variola virus ) , 229 ( chemical weapons ) , subsection ( a ) , ( b ) , ( c ) , or ( d ) of section 351 ( congressional , cabinet , and supreme court assassination and kidnapping ) , 831 ( nuclear materials ) , 832 ( participation in nuclear and weapons of mass destruction threats to the united states ) 842 ( m ) or ( n ) ( plastic explosives ) , 844 ( f ) ( 2 ) or ( 3 ) ( arson and bombing of government property risking or causing death ) , 844 ( i ) ( arson and bombing of property used in interstate commerce ) , 930 ( c ) ( killing or attempted killing during an attack on a federal facility with a dangerous weapon ) , 956 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( conspiracy to murder , kidnap , or maim persons abroad ) , 1030 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( protection of computers ) , 1030 ( a ) ( 5 ) ( a ) resulting in damage as defined in 1030 ( c ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ( i ) ( ii ) through ( vi ) ( protection of computers ) , 1114 ( killing or attempted killing of officers and employees of the united states ) , 1116 ( murder or manslaughter of foreign officials , official guests , or internationally protected persons ) , 1203 ( hostage taking ) , 1361 ( government property or contracts ) , 1362 ( destruction of communication lines , stations , or systems ) , 1363 ( injury to buildings or property within special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the united states ) , 1366 ( a ) ( destruction of an energy facility ) , 1751 ( a ) , ( b ) , ( c ) , or ( d ) ( presidential and presidential staff assassination and kidnapping ) , 1992 ( terrorist attacks and other acts of violence against railroad carriers and against mass transportation systems on land , on water , or through the air ) , 2155 ( destruction of national defense materials , premises , or utilities ) , 2156 ( national defense material , premises , or utilities ) , 2280 ( violence against maritime navigation ) , 2281 ( violence against maritime fixed platforms ) , 2332 ( certain homicides and other violence against united states nationals occurring outside of the united states ) , 2332a ( use of weapons of mass destruction ) , 2332b ( acts of terrorism transcending national boundaries ) , 2332f ( bombing of public places and facilities ) , 2332g ( missile systems designed to destroy aircraft ) , 2332h ( radiological dispersal devices ) , 2339 ( harboring terrorists ) , 2339a ( providing material support to terrorists ) , 2339b ( providing material support to terrorist organizations ) , 2339c ( financing of terrorism ) , 2339d ( military - type training from a foreign terrorist organization ) , or 2340a ( torture ) of this title ; ( ii ) sections 92 ( prohibitions governing atomic weapons ) or 236 ( sabotage of nuclear facilities or fuel ) of the atomic energy act of 1954 ( 42 u.s.c .

2122 or 2284 ) ; ( iii ) section 46502 ( aircraft piracy ) , the second sentence of section 46504 ( assault on a flight crew with a dangerous weapon ) , section 46505 ( b ) ( 3 ) or ( c ) ( explosive or incendiary devices , or endangerment of human life by means of weapons , on aircraft ) , section 46506 if homicide or attempted homicide is involved ( application of certain criminal laws to acts on aircraft ) , or section 60123 ( b ) ( destruction of interstate gas or hazardous liquid pipeline facility ) of title 49 ; or ( iv ) section 1010a of the controlled substances import and export act ( narco - terrorism ) .

