kazakhstan's moves toward democracy have been halting .

the 1995 constitution establishes strong presidential power .

as further fleshed out by a presidential edict , the legislature cannot control the budget , initiate constitutional changes , or exercise oversight over the executive branch .

most bills are initiated by the president , and if the legislature fails within 30 days to pass one of his "urgent" bills , he may issue it by decree .

the bicameral legislature consists of a popularly elected lower chamber , the majilis , and an upper chamber , the senate , whose members are indirectly elected by regional assemblies or by the president .

a people's assembly composed of cultural and ethnic leaders serves as a presidential forum .

a law in 2000 guaranteed the president certain post - retirement powers , as well as immunity from prosecution .

these powers include the chairmanship of the people's assembly and membership on the security council and constitutional council , and the right to advise the incumbent president and to retain a role in "initiatives on the country's development. .

on december 4 , 2005 , president nazarbayev was reelected with 91.1% of 6.74 million votes cast in a five - man race .

many observers credited economic growth in the country and increases in pensions and state wages as bolstering nazarbayev's popularity .

he campaigned widely and pledged democratic reforms and poverty relief .

five pro - government parties formed a people's coalition to back him .

many oppositionists supported a movement for a just kazakhstan , which backed zharmakhan tuyakbay , the head of the social democratic party .

another candidate , alikhan baymenov , had been nominated by the "moderate opposition" ak zhol party .

observers from the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) and others assessed the election as progressive but still falling short of a free and fair race .

the legislature approved constitutional changes in may 2007 that president nazarbayev claimed would increase legislative power and boost democratization .

the changes included increasing the number of deputies in both legislative chambers , decreasing the president's term in office from seven to five years ( reversing a 1998 change from five to seven years ) , and requiring a court order in case of detention or arrest .

seemingly nonreformist changes included a requirement for a two - thirds vote in each legislative chamber to override presidential alterations to approved bills , a provision that nine deputies of the majilis ( the lower legislative chamber ) are appointed by the people's assembly , and a change "initiated" by the legislature excluding nazarbayev from term limits .

visiting former u.s. assistant secretary of state richard boucher stated in june 2007 that "these constitutional amendments go in the right direction.... [and] point the way to a stable , democratic system. .

an early majilis election was called for august 18 , 2007 .

as per constitutional amendments and election law changes , the size of the chamber was increased to 107 members .

ninety - eight members were to be elected by party lists and nine by the people's assembly headed by the president .

seven parties were registered for the election , six of which were pro - government and one of which was an opposition party , the national social democratic party .

the ruling party , nur - otan ( fatherland's ray of light ) , reportedly received 88.05% of 8.87 million votes cast and won all 98 seats .

the other parties were unable to clear a 7% threshold needed to win seats .

observers from the osce praised some positive aspects of the vote , but judged it as falling short of a free and fair race .

in 2009 , the azat ( freedom ) party and the national social democratic party announced that they were merging to increase their electoral prospects , but the government has refused to register the new party .

legislation approved in may 2010 proclaimed nazarbayev the "leader of the nation" ( " el basy " ) and reiterated and may have broadened lifetime powers granted in 2000 even if he retires from the presidency .

the underlying purpose of the legislation may have been its guarantees of lifetime immunity from prosecution and other protections for the president and his family , including their business dealings .

nazarbayev refused to sign the bills into law , stating that although he was honored by the designation , he did not need such "puffery," and that his family should be covered by the same laws as everyone else .

despite these seeming protestations , he did not formally veto the bills , so under a law implementing the constitution , they went into effect in mid - june 2010 .

he explained that he did not veto the bills because he was certain the legislature would bow to the wishes of the people and over - ride a veto .

kazakhstan long argued that there were few terrorists within the country , but this stance began to change in late 2003 with the establishment of an anti - terrorist center as part of the national security committee .

shocking many kazakhs , it reported the apprehension in late 2004 of over a dozen members of the obscure islamic jihad group / union of uzbekistan ( reportedly an offshoot of the islamic movement of uzbekistan ) .

it alleged that the group had ties to al qaeda ; had cells in kyrgyzstan , uzbekistan , and russia ; and had been involved in attacks in uzbekistan .

in mid - 2006 , authorities detained 15-30 members of the banned hizb ut - tahrir group .

in april 2007 , 16 alleged terrorists were arrested on charges of planning attacks against security and police forces .

in february 2008 , security forces arrested five members of an alleged salafi jihadi jamaat , whose leader had received training in syria .

in september 2009 , six alleged terrorists were sentenced to 12-17 years in prison for planning to attack foreign oil companies and non - muslims .

in late 2009 , the kazakh national security committee reported that the government had prevented four terrorist attacks in 2008 and three in 2009 .

several suicide bombings and other alleged terrorist attacks occurred in kazakhstan in 2011 , although the government appeared reluctant to release many details and trials of alleged terrorists were usually closed to outside observers .

a suicide bombing took place in a security office on may 17 , 2011 , in the city of aktoke , and a car bombing took place at another security office on may 24 in astana .

on the night of june 30 , alleged terrorists killed three police officers in the village of shubarshi in aktobe region .

apparently shaken by these and other bombings and terrorist attacks , president nazarbayev directed changes to the law on religion that were duly approved in late september .

on october 31 , two explosions occurred in the city of atyrau , one at the regional administration building and the other a suicide bombing in a residential area .

a week after these bombings , two police officers were killed in almaty by alleged terrorists .

on november 12 , in the town of taraz , one person killed several police and attacked a security office .

the same day , an attempted explosion reportedly was foiled and an attack on a roadblock was carried out in taraz , resulting in additional police deaths .

the jund al - khilafah ( soldiers of the caliphate ) claimed responsibility for the bombings in atyrau and may have been involved in other incidents .

kazakhstan's office of the prosecutor - general claimed that jund al - khilafah was formed in mid - 2011 by kazakh citizens renat khabibuly , orynbasarov unasov , and damir nabiyev ; was allied with the taliban ; was headquartered in pakistan's tribal area ; and was dedicated to "waging a jihad on the territory of kazakhstan. .

at the end of november 2011 , kazakhstan banned jund al - khilafah as a terrorist organization .

jund al - khilafah also has claimed responsibility for attacks on u.s. forces in afghanistan .

in april 2012 , 47 alleged members or accomplices of the jund al - khilafah were sentenced for the october 31 attacks .

on december 16 , 2011 , energy sector workers on strike since may 2011 and others reportedly extensively damaged and burned government and other buildings and clashed with police in the town of zhanaozen , in the mangistau region of kazakhstan , resulting in 16 deaths and dozens of injuries , the government reported .

some observers alleged that there were more casualties and that the riots were triggered or exacerbated by police firing on the demonstrators ( video posted on the internet appeared to back this claim ) .

protests and violence also spread to other areas of the region .

president nursultan nazarbayev declared a state of emergency and curfew in the town on december 17 and sent military and security forces to the region .

he claimed that the violence was pre - planned and financed , perhaps from abroad ; that the rioters had been given alcohol and money ; and that police had shot into the crowds only in self - defense .

at the same time , he charged that local officials had not heeded the grievances of the striking oil workers and had given him misinformation .

in response , he fired the head of kazmunaigaz , the state - owned energy firm ; ousted his son - in - law as head of the national fund that owned kazmunaigaz ; replaced the governor of the region ; and pledged new employment and retraining for oil workers who had been fired during their long strike .

critics charged that he took these moves to protect his popularity and that of the ruling political party during an electoral campaign ( see above ) .

the government reported that dozens of individuals have been detained so far in connection with the protests .

a trial against 37 individuals charged with crimes associated with the zhanaozen riot opened in late march 2012 .

the bulk of the defendants were striking workers and youths , who were accused of initiating the violence , although five police officers were being tried for abuses in quelling the unrest .

in late april 2012 , the human rights watch ngo called for the trial to be suspended while an investigation of alleged torture and other abuses against those on trial is carried out .

in june 2012 , a court sentenced about one - half of the defendants to 3-7 years in prison and gave suspended sentences , pardons , or acquittals to the rest .

another trial of 12 suspects resulted in 4 being sentenced to 4-7 years and the others being acquitted , pardoned , or amnestied .

other arrests have occurred .

the kazakh government has argued that it has convicted some police for excesses during the riot , disciplined some government officials , given unemployed workers new jobs , and otherwise admitted that it mishandled the labor strife in zhanaozen .

at a meeting with policemen on july 12 , 2012 , president nazarbayev criticized them for not taking preventive measures against terrorism , and stated that "over 100 crimes connected with terrorism were committed in kazakhstan in 2011-12 .

as a result , dozens of [terrorists and policemen] have died.... and we have to admit the fact that radical and extremist groups are putting enormous pressure on the government and society. .

according to a kazakh security council official , over 300 individuals have been convicted in kazakhstan on charges of terrorism since 2005 .

in late july 2012 , one policeman was killed and one wounded in almaty , and the alleged assailants later engaged in a gun battle with security forces and most were killed .

in mid - august 2012 , a gun battle with alleged terrorists took place in almaty , reportedly resulting in the deaths of several alleged terrorists and the capture of others .

authorities claimed that these terrorists were linked to an explosion at a house in a village near almaty in july and to the killing of several individuals whose bodies were found in a park near almaty .

the terrorists were planning widespread operations , according to the authorities .

in early september 2012 , a bomb - maker blew himself up in atyrau region , leading police to engage in a gun battle with other members of the alleged group , killing five of them .

in october 2012 , three individuals were arrested in uralsk region on charges of sending funds abroad to support the islamic jihad union .

some observers have warned that these recent incidents may have marked the revival of terrorist actions in kazakhstan after several months of seeming quietude .

in november 2012 , nazarbayev called for tightening legislation to facilitate government efforts to combat terrorism , with the government explaining that the changes in law were necessitated by increasing radicalization of the population and growing terrorist incidents in the country .

the bill was passed and signed into law in early january 2013 .

the changes included an apparently expansive definition of terrorism to include an "ideology of violence" and acts or threats aimed at influencing the government , including violence and "frightening people. .

in february 2013 , the kazakh national security committee reported that law and security forces had prevented 35 violent extremist actions and neutralized 42 extremist groups in 2011-2012 .

however , it also reported that it had failed to avert 18 extremist actions , including 7 explosions .

in may 2013 , six alleged terrorists were put on trial on charges of conspiring to commit robberies , to bomb civic sites and the national security committee building in astana , and to assassinate senior officials .

at the opening of the trial , the prosecutor alleged that they aimed to establish an islamic caliphate in kazakhstan .

reportedly , kazakh authorities are drafting a state program on counteracting religious extremism and terrorism for 2013-2017 , which some observers warn could further restrict the dissemination of religious literature and increase monitoring of religious groups , including through the installation of video surveillance cameras in places of worship and the monitoring of students studying religion abroad .

in congressional testimony in february 2013 , assistant secretary blake stated that "we do not assess that there is an imminent islamist militant threat to central asian states. .

nonetheless , he stated that the united states provides security assistance to the regional states to address transnational threats .

according to human rights watch , kazakhstan's human rights record seriously deteriorated in 2012 , in the wake of the violent clashes at the end of 2011 between police and demonstrators in zhanaozen .

several of the hundreds of zhanaozen detainees made credible and serious allegations of torture .

dozens of individuals were fined or sentenced to administrative arrest for participating in peaceful protests , a restrictive law on religious freedoms remained in force , and media remained under tight control amid attacks on independent journalists .

a ban on strikes in certain sectors of the economy improperly restricts workers' rights .

in its country reports on human rights practices for 201 2 , the u.s. state department did not report whether or not the kazakh government's human rights record had improved during the year , but did identify ongoing problems and progress .

the most significant problem areas included restrictions on freedom of speech , assembly , religion , association , and legal due process .

police allegedly tortured and abused detainees , often to obtain confessions .

the government frequently arrested and detained opponents and critics , sometimes for minor infractions such as unsanctioned assembly .

lawyers and human rights monitors alleged that judges and prosecutors solicited bribes in exchange for favorable rulings in the majority of criminal cases .

lack of due process particularly was a problem in politically motivated trials .

during the trial of vladimir kozlov , leader of the unregistered opposition political party alga , authorities did not present evidence linking him to the charges of violence or the overthrow of the government under which he was convicted , according to the state department .

although courts conducted jury trials for aggravated murder cases , observers noted that judges deliberated with the jurors and few acquittals occurred .

the government used a variety of means to control the media and limit freedom of expression , according to the state department .

the government owned 16% of the country's nearly 2,800 media outlets .

of these , most broadcast media were either government owned or allegedly controlled by members of the president's family or loyal associates .

in addition , the government influenced privately owned newspapers and television stations through government subsidies .

judicial actions against journalists and media outlets , including civil and criminal libel suits filed by government officials , led to the suspension of media outlets and self - censorship .

ngos and monitors reported that such libel suits greatly increased in 2012 .

at the end of 2012 , almaty courts banned several opposition media outlets — including the newspapers golos respubliki , vzglyad , the respublika web portal , and the internet television stations k plus and stan tv — for allegedly "inciting social discord" and "calling for the overthrow of the constitutional order. .

the law on state secrets makes it a criminal offense to release information regarding the health , finances , or private life of the president , as well as economic information deemed "strategic. .

in september 2012 , minister of culture and information darkhan mynbai asserted that the ministry would ban unofficial reports or negative interpretations of official information during emergencies .

despite these restrictions , some media criticism of government policies continued .

there were significant restrictions on freedom of association and assembly .

the law defines national security threats to include unsanctioned public meetings , demonstrations , and strikes that upset social and political stability .

authorities seldom approved demonstration requests and used force to disrupt peaceful but unsanctioned demonstrations .

an attempt by the azat party and the national socialist democratic party ( nsdp ) to register as a joint party failed , with azat losing its status as a registered political party .

violence against women and discrimination against non - ethnic kazakhs in government , persons with disabilities , and those in the lgbt community were problems .

according to the state department's international religious freedom report , the kazakh government generally respected the religious freedom of most religious groups , but refused to register some minority religious groups and harassed them , often through fines and raids .

the government implemented a 2011 religion law that provided broad grounds to deny religious groups legal status .

while most religious groups managed to obtain legal registration , some were refused under various grounds , such as scientologists , the unification church , and ahmadi muslims ( see also below ) .

the trafficking in persons report 201 3 reported that kazakhstan was a destination and , to a lesser extent , a source and transit country for persons subjected to sex trafficking and forced labor .

the government did not fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking , but was making significant efforts to do so , so was designated a "tier 2" country not subject to possible u.s. sanctions reserved for "tier 3" abusers .

the kazakh government maintained some law enforcement efforts against human trafficking and continued to protect some victims and fund awareness campaigns .

however , government officials were involved and complicit in trafficking , and the government failed to identify some potential victims .

seemingly indicating some of the problems of the judicial system , in late january 2013 the prosecutor - general reportedly complained to president nazarbayev that several dozen individuals had been acquitted by judges , even though prosecutors had "proven" their guilt ( seemingly equating the bringing of charges with the presumption of guilt ) .

president nazarbayev reportedly agreed that the acquittals were untoward and ordered the chairman of the supreme court to investigate whether corruption was involved in the acquittals .

in march 2013 , a group of kazakh ngos issued a report that the government had largely failed to fulfill a national human rights action plan for 2009-2012 that it had drawn up in april 2009 .

the report stated that while a few recommendations had been implemented , the four - year period had witnessed reduced freedom of association , assembly , religion , speech , and political participation .

on april 11 , 2013 , the u.s. head of mission to the osce permanent council , ian kelly , raised concerns that kazakhstan's 2011 religious legislation restricts the rights of religious communities deemed non - traditional by the kazakh government .

in particular , he raised concerns that all islamic communities were required to join the sunni hanafi spiritual administration of muslims in kazakhstan , and hold services in the kazakh language , in order to gain legal registration .

appearing to respond to this statement , president nazarbayev stated on april 17 , 2013 , that "religious freedom is fully ensured. .

on april 18 , 2013 , the european parliament approved a resolution decrying the deterioration of human rights in kazakhstan since the zhanaozen disturbance .

the resolution "strongly criticized" court decisions to ban the alga party and independent media , urged the release of political prisoners , and called for easing restrictions on the registration and practice of religion .

seemingly responding to the debate on the resolution , president nazarbayev stated that the "glass [of democracy in kazakhstan] is half or three - quarters full," and that "democracy and freedom as practiced in the west ... are for us the final aim. .

on july 1 , 2013 , visiting british prime minister david cameron stated in a press conference with president nazarbayev that he had discussed human rights problems in kazakhstan with the president , upon which nazarbayev reportedly responded that "no one has the right to tell us how to live and to build our country... .

i think that kazakhstan ensures basic rights .

we have open , free and alternative presidential elections , three political parties are in our parliament , we have working opposition , kazakhstan has 3,300 mass media outlets , including foreign ones , and we do not have political repressions. .

he also argued that building democracy and human rights was a long - term process that had taken hundreds of years in the united kingdom .

the u.s. - based ngo amnesty international issued a report on july 11 , 2013 , criticizing high levels of torture and other ill - treatment of detainees and prisoners in recent years — including as a result of the detention of alleged rioters at zhanaozen — and the lack of prosecutions of those responsible .

kazakhstan is the most economically developed of the former soviet central asian republics .

the country is a major regional exporter of oil , gas , and wheat .

in 1997 , president nazarbayev launched a plan to create an economically developed , secure , healthy , and educated country by 2030 ( see below , " energy " ) .

in late 2005 , he called for bringing kazakhstan into the ranks of the top 50 developed countries within 10 years .

at the beginning of 2010 , president nazarbayev launched a five - year plan for industrial diversification in line with his goals for 2030 , aimed at developing the transport , pharmaceutical , telecommunication , petrochemical , and food processing sectors of the economy .

in may 2012 , he called for developing transit infrastructure so that kazakhstan would become the central hub of a new regional "silk road. .

in december 2012 , president nazarbayev announced that the world economic forum , a ngo , had estimated that kazakhstan was on the brink of becoming one of the top 50 developed countries , and reported that the main goals of his 2030 plan had been reached .

he launched a plan for the country's development until 2050 to become one of the world's 30 most - developed countries .

the plan emphasizes food , water , energy , and natural resources security , as well as education , training , and social support .

in 2008 , tightening credit contributed to the collapse of kazakhstan's real estate market , but high oil prices in the first part of the year partly cushioned the decline in gdp .

in november 2008 , president nazarbayev launched a concerted anti - crisis plan that included lowering tax rates and drawing $10 billion from a national oil fund ( created in 2000 to stabilize the economy in the case of swings in world prices of oil , gas , and metals ) to recapitalize banks that had nonperforming loans and large foreign debt payments ; to support kazakhstan's currency , the tenge ; and otherwise to boost the economy .

declining oil revenues and foreign debt repayments led the central bank to devalue the tenge by 20% against the u.s. dollar in early 2009 .

according to the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) , gdp expanded by only 1.2% in 2009 , the slowest pace of growth since 1998 .

gdp growth rebounded in 2010-2011 , but slowed to 4.9% in 2012 , mostly reflecting declines in oil and agricultural output , the latter because of drought .

average annual inflation declined in 2012 to 5.1% .

the kazakh government boosted social spending and employment programs in 2012 following the labor - related violence in zhanaozen ( see above ) .

according to the cia world factbook , about 56.9% of kazakhstan's gdp in 2012 was derived from services , about 37.9% from energy and other industrial production , and 5.2% from agriculture , although the latter sector employed over one - fourth of the country's workforce .

although kazakhstan's major exports are oil and gas , it also is the world's largest exporter of uranium .

the united states exported $882.5 million of goods to kazakhstan and imported about $1.57 billion in 2012 .

u.s. exports have mostly been machinery and transport equipment , while imports have been oil , metals , and chemicals .

according to data reported by the national bank of kazakhstan in early 2013 , the largest contributor of the $177.7 billion of fdi in kazakhstan was the netherlands , at $49 billion ( which includes that by international firms operating through dutch holding companies ) ; followed by the united kingdom , at $24.7 billion ; china , at $18.2 billion ; and the united states , at $17.9 billion .

most of the u.s. and other fdi historically has been in the oil and gas and mining sectors .

among the u.s. businesses operating in the country ( for energy firms , see below ) , boeing has sold aircraft , a ge - kazakh joint venture manufactures locomotives , and fedex operates a shipping center in almaty .

in mid - 2013 , the international monetary fund ( imf ) conducted a review of kazakhstan's economy , and called for the country to bolster bank supervision and extend tax exemptions for banks and buyers of distressed debt .

it called for the national bank to elaborate on the factors guiding interest rate and exchange rate intervention decisions , and suggested that there may be scope to allow greater exchange rate flexibility .

the imf mission recommended against further budget cuts in 2013 to make up for a possible revenue shortfall , instead calling for addressing such a shortfall in next year's budget .

the mission advised that in order to diversify the economy , the role of the state must be reduced while efforts are taken to bolster human capital and institutions .

the state should enhance the transparency of all government programs implemented through quasi - fiscal institutions , and private public partnerships as well as through the general government budget .

the imf estimated that gdp growth will continue to be moderate in 2013 — at around 5% — in part due to weakness in the mining and metallurgy sector , partly related to a decline in foreign investment in the sector .

the world bank and others have reported that kazakhstan has improved its business climate in recent years in line with its development goals , but that much further progress is needed to reduce corruption , revamp labor laws and business regulations , and improve the rule of law .

kazakhstan hopes to complete lengthy bilateral negotiations with trading partners that will clear the way for it to win approval by the world trade organization by the end of 2013 for joining the organization in 2014 .

in june 2013 , the eu announced that it had reached agreement with kazakhstan on bilateral conditions for the latter's admission into the wto .

nazarbayev has stated that the geographic location of kazakhstan and its ethnic makeup dictate its "multi - vector orientation toward both west and east. .

he has pursued close ties with turkey , trade links with iran , and better relations with china , which many kazakhs have traditionally viewed as a security threat .

there are over 1 million ethnic kazakhs in china , and 300,000 ethnic uighurs of china residing in kazakhstan , who have contributed to complicated relations between the two states .

while seeking to protect kazakh independence , nazarbayev has pursued close relations with russia and other commonwealth of independent states ( cis ) members for economic and security reasons .

in 1998 , kazakhstan and russia signed a friendship treaty ; in 1998 and 2002 , they signed accords settling caspian seabed resource claims ; and in 2005 , they signed a border delineation agreement .

in late 2005 , the central asian cooperation organization merged with the eurasian economic community ( eurasec ; russia and kazakhstan belonged to both ) .

eurasec members russia , belarus , and kazakhstan launched a customs union in july 2010 .

on april 4 , 2011 , just after his reelection , president nazarbayev stated that "our foreign policy targets will remain as before .

we have close relations with russia and china , the eu , and the united states , and other states of the region are our big partners. .

in regard to the latter , he hailed increasing trade and other integration within the customs union .

nazarbayev also has supported russia's then - prime minister putin's october 2011 proposal for deeper regional economic integration on the basis of the customs union to establish an eurasian union ( which putin stated was based on a concept advocated by nazarbayev in 1994 ) .

some in kazakhstan have voiced concerns that kazkhstan's sovereignty will be harmed by these integration efforts .

kazakhstan's assertion of its national interests has contributed to recent tensions in kazakhstan - russia relations .

these include president nazarbayev's call for switching to the latin script and for kazakh and english to be more widely used ; his assertion that if eurasian integration threatens kazakhstan's sovereignty , the country will withdraw from "such a union" ; and kazakhstan's reappraisal of russia's lease of the expansive baikonur cosmodrome space launch center and surrounding areas .

in regard to the latter issue , a 1994 lease ( extended in 2004 ) grants russia a colonial - style concession over nearly 3,000 square miles of kazakh territory until 2050 for a yearly payment of about $154 million .

in late 2012 , kazakh officials raised the issue of renegotiating the lease agreement , and an inter - governmental commission was set up to discuss kazakh concerns .

in late march 2013 , however , the deputy prime minister pledged kazakhstan's "unconditional adherence" to the lease .

nonetheless , kazakhstan has pressed for limiting some rocket launches deemed environmentally damaging .

u.s. relations with kazakhstan intensified after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks on the united states and u.s. and coalition forces began operations in afghanistan .

at first , the u.s. policy appeared focused more on ties with uzbekistan , the centrally located and most populous regional state , when a u.s. airbase was established .

however , after uzbekistan closed the airbase in mid - 2005 in the wake of u.s. concerns about human rights abuses in that country , u.s. policy attention appeared to shift more to kazakhstan as the most significant u.s. "partner" in the region .

some observers argue that as kazakhstan has developed economically in recent years , including by establishing closer energy and other ties with china , it has placed somewhat less priority on ties with the united states .

these observers maintain that although future u.s. relations with kazakhstan may not focus as much on security concerns , the country will remain significant to u.s. interests as a prominent economic and political power in the region .

according to the obama administration's congressional budget justification for foreign operations , the u.s. "strategic aim in kazakhstan is to ensure and maintain the development of the country as a stable , secure , democratic , and prosperous partner that respects international standards and agreements , embraces free - market competition and the rule of law , and is a respected regional leader. .

the administration avers that kazakhstan has made significant progress — with u.s. support — over the period since it gained independence in late 1991 to reach these goals .

for fy2014 , u.s. government aid will focus on programs "that support kazakhstan's evolution into a stronger partner ... that can play a greater role in promoting regional stability and economic integration. .

during president nazarbayev's 1994 u.s. visit , he and then - president clinton signed a charter on democratic partnership , which recognized kazakhstan's commitments to the rule of law , respect for human rights , and economic reform .

during his december 2001 and september 2006 visits , nazarbayev repeated these pledges in joint statements with then - president bush .

during the former visit , an accord to establish an energy partnership dialogue was signed to facilitate cooperation on nuclear , hydrocarbon , and electric power resources and various issues such as renewable energy and energy efficiency .

at the 9 th annual meeting in october 2012 , an action plan for the next two years was promulgated dealing with these resources and issues .

the obama administration launched annual bilateral consultations ( abc ) on economic and political issues with kazakhstan , with the first meeting taking place in washington , dc , in march 2010 , the second in astana ( kazakhstan's capital ) in late march 2011 , and the third in washington , dc , in february 2012 .

at this meeting , the united states reportedly agreed to work with kazakhstan to attract u.s. companies and universities to establish a presence at the innovative technologies park near almaty .

the state department also announced that it was elevating relations with kazakhstan to the level of a strategic partnership dialogue by transforming the abc into a strategic partnership commission ( spc ) .

the inaugural meeting of the spc took place in april 2012 in washington , dc , and established several working groups , including on non - proliferation and disarmament , economic cooperation , and science and technology .

in addition , a "human dimension dialogue" involved a roundtable on civil and human rights held by various ngos .

apparently , these working groups are separate from other bilateral groups on nuclear material safeguards , on science and technology cooperation , and trade and investment that have been established by separate accords and which have held inaugural meetings in 2013 .

no agreements reportedly were signed at the second spc meeting in july 2013 , also held in washington , dc , but the two sides ( co - chaired on the u.s. side by deputy secretary of state william burns and on the kazakh side by foreign minister idrisov ) made several pledges , including u.s. pledges to continue to assist kazakhstan to obtain wto membership and to work to increase trade and investment .

president obama met with president nazarbayev at nuclear security summits in april 2010 and march 2012 ( see above ) .

also signaling the obama administration's interest in kazakhstan , a consulate general was opened in almaty ( the former capital and the business center ) — the first such post in central asia — and the first consul general arrived in august 2010 .

during an august 2012 visit to kazakhstan , assistant secretary blake stressed that "our relations with kazakhstan ... are the deepest and broadest of all countries in central asia.... kazakhstan is looking ... to play a larger role in the regional integration process and work a lot on some of the very important regional issues , such as non - proliferation and so on .

all of these are very consistent with what we are trying to accomplish and [are] one of the reasons why we have a very good partnership with kazakhstan. .

in congressional testimony in july 2012 , assistant secretary blake highlighted growing u.s. - kazakh trade relations , kazakhstan's assistance to stabilization efforts in afghanistan , and its global role in combating nuclear proliferation .

at the same time , he stressed that the united states would continue to support the kazakh government's further efforts to democratize and respect human rights .

he reiterated u.s. concerns about the kazakh government's use of deadly force in quelling unrest in zhanaozen in late 2012 ( see above ) and about allegations that suspects had been tortured .

cumulative u.s. aid budgeted for kazakhstan in fiscal years 1992 through 2010 was $2.05 billion ( all - agency funding ) , with kazakhstan ranking fifth in aid among the 12 soviet successor states .

a large part of this u.s. aid has supported comprehensive threat reduction ( ctr ) programs to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .

budgeted aid for fy2011 was $17.6 million and was $19.3 million for fy2012 .

requested aid for fy2014 is $12.2 million ( these latter amounts include foreign assistance listed in the congressional budget justification for foreign operations , and exclude defense and energy department funds ; country totals have not been released for fy2013 ) .

the administration states that kazakhstan's significant progress "as a stable , secure , democratic , and prosperous partner [has] allowed the u.s. government to scale down funding levels in fy2014. .

the request for fy2014 emphasizes security programs ( $4.8 million ) such as foreign military financing ( fmf ) , international military education and training ( imet ) , non - proliferation , antiterrorism , demining , and related programs ( nadr ) , and international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) ; economic support ( $4.1 million ) for developing small businesses , attracting more foreign investment , and increasing energy efficiency ( these programs will be funded mostly by kazakhstan with some u.s. support ) ; and democracy support ( $2.8 million ) to strengthen judicial independence and bolster human rights and civil society ngos .

u.s. defense cooperation has included fmf , imet , and other assistance and participation in annual steppe eagle military exercises in kazakhstan ( held under the aegis of nato's partnership for peace ) .

in july 2012 , u.s. secretary of the navy ray mabus visited kazakhstan and met with defense minister dzhaksybekev .

the two reportedly discussed the accomplishments of the 2008-2012 defense cooperation plan in the areas of training and equipment for the peacekeeping brigade , special forces training , technical assistance , and military education , and worked on drafting a new 2013-2017 plan .

in april 2013 , cadets from the u.s. military academy at west point visited the military institute of ground forces , and during the spc meeting in july 2013 , the two sides discussed mutual visits by the defense minister / secretary .

among congressional actions , omnibus appropriations for fy2003 ( p.l .

108-7 ) forbade assistance to the government of kazakhstan unless the secretary of state determined and reported that kazakhstan had significantly improved its human rights record during the preceding six - month period .

the secretary could , however , waive this prohibition on national security grounds .

this language has been continued in yearly appropriations acts .

since fy2005 , the secretary of state ( or the designee ) has reported to congress that kazakhstan has failed to significantly improve its human rights record , but that aid restrictions have been waived on national security grounds .

with regard to iraq , kazakhstan's then - foreign minister kasymzhomart tokayev on march 28 , 2003 , voiced general support for disarming iraq .

tokayev later explained that kazakhstan had decided to support the coalition because it feared that saddam hussein was building weapons of mass destruction .

reportedly responding to a u.s. appeal , the kazakh legislature in may 2003 approved sending military engineers to iraq .

the 27 troops trained iraqis in de - mining and water purification .

kazakh troops withdrew from iraq in late 2008 .

with regard to afghanistan , president nazarbayev warned in june 2001 that taliban actions in afghanistan increasingly threatened regional security , and after september 11 he offered overflight rights and the use of airbases to the u.s. - led coalition , but did not offer troops .

kazakhstan also facilitated the transshipment of supplies to u.s. bases in uzbekistan and kyrgyzstan .

a u.s. - kazakh memorandum of understanding was signed in july 2002 that permitted u.s. military aircraft to use kazakhstan's almaty airport for emergency military landings .

in september 2003 , a five - year military cooperation agreement was signed to combat terrorism , develop peacekeeping forces , bolster air defense capabilities , and enhance security in the caspian sea .

in february 2008 , the accord was extended to 2012 .

after receiving kazakhstan's permission , in early 2009 nato countries began rail shipments of nonlethal supplies to support the operations of the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan .

a u.s. - kazakh accord on over - flight rights for military equipment and personnel was brokered in april 2010 .

according to one source , u.s. military purchases of local goods and transit fees paid to regional states amount to several hundred million dollars annually .

in october 2010 , kazakhstan and nato reached agreement on detailing four kazakh officers to isaf headquarters , and the majlis in may 2011 approved the agreement .

just before the majilis approved the deployment , a suicide bombing took place in the city of aktobe outside a security forces building , reportedly injuring two security personnel , and after the approval a car bomb detonated in astana , similarly outside a security forces building , killing two people in the car .

no one took immediate responsibility for the bombings , and it was unclear if they were linked to the majilis action .

perhaps telling , just after the approval , the taliban allegedly warned that the deployment would be regarded as "disloyal" and damaging to kazakh - taliban relations .

the kazakh senate ( upper legislative chamber ) then added qualifying language to the bill approved by the lower chamber and returned it to the majlis , apparently reflecting a policy change by the government .

the senate explained its action as a response to widespread public opposition to sending military personnel to afghanistan .

finally , in april 2013 , the kazakh foreign ministry announced that in light of isaf's withdrawal from afghanistan , the agreement had become irrelevant .

in early june 2012 , nato secretary - general anders fogh rasmussen announced that kazakhstan , kyrgyzstan , and uzbekistan had agreed to allow the reverse transit of cargoes out of afghanistan .

at the "istanbul process" conference held in kabul in mid - june to discuss support for post - 2014 afghanistan , kazakhstan pledged to assist in disaster management , counter - narcotics , business , and educational confidence building measures , including to increase the number of afghan students receiving university and vocational education in kazakhstan .

kazakhstan reportedly is advocating that the use of its caspian seaport at aktau be increased as a component of the ndn .

reportedly , the port already is used to transport thousands of containers to and from afghanistan .

