this is an overview of federal forfeiture law .

it sketches the origins and general attributes of forfeiture , describes the distribution of the hundreds of millions of dollars it generates , and identifies some of the constitutional issues it raises .

congress and state legislatures have authorized the use of forfeiture for over 200 years .

forfeiture law has always been somewhat unique .

its increased use has highlighted its eccentricities and attendant policy concerns .

present forfeiture law has its roots in early english law .

it is reminiscent of three early english procedures: deodands , forfeiture of estate or common law forfeiture , and statutory or commercial forfeiture .

at early common law , the object that caused the death of a human being — the ox that gored , the knife that stabbed , or the cart that crushed — was confiscated as a deodand .

coroners' inquests and grand juries , bound with the duty to determine the cause of death , were obligated to identify the offending object and determine its value .

the crown distributed the proceeds realized from the confiscation of the animal or deadly object for religious and charitable purposes in the name of the deceased .

although deodands were not unknown in the american colonies , they appear to have fallen into disuse or been abolished by the time of the american revolution or shortly thereafter .

in spite of their limited use in this country , deodands and the practice of treating the offending animal or object as the defendant have frequently been cited to illustrate the characteristics of modern civil forfeiture .

forfeiture of estate or common law forfeiture , unlike deodands , focused solely on a human offender .

at common law , anyone , convicted and attained for treason or a felony , forfeited all his lands and personal property .

attainder , the judicial declaration of civil death , occurred as a consequence of the pronouncement of final sentence for treason or felony .

in colonial america , common law forfeitures were rare .

after the revolution , the constitution restricted the use of common law forfeiture in cases of treason , and congress restricted its use , by statute , in the case of other crimes .

the third antecedent of modern forfeiture , statutory or commercial forfeiture , figured prominently in cases in admiralty and on the revenue side of the exchequer in pre - colonial england .

it was used fairly extensively against smuggling and other revenue evasion schemes in the american colonies and has been used ever since .

in most instances , the statutes called for in rem confiscation proceedings in which , as with deodands , the offending object was the defendant ; occasionally , they established in personam procedures where confiscation occurred as the result of the conviction of the owner of the property .

although contemporary american forfeiture law owes much to the law of deodands and the law of forfeiture of estate , it is clearly a descendant of english statutory or commercial forfeiture .

at one time , it could safely be said that the constitution afforded state and federal governments extraordinary latitude to enact and enforce forfeiture statutes ; forfeiture often seemed unusual , sometimes severe , and occasionally unfair , yet with rare exceptions it was not unconstitutional .

in 1993 , the court handed down a series of decisions that seemed to signal its uneasiness with the trends in forfeiture law .

yet thereafter , it seems to deny any inclination to totally repudiate the government's broad forfeiture authority , although it incrementally began to define the constitutional borders of that authority .

 ( a ) ( 1 ) the following property is subject to forfeiture to the united states: ( a ) any property , real or personal , involved in a transaction or attempted transaction in violation of section 1956 , 1957 or 1960 of this title , or any property traceable to such property .

 ( b ) any property , real or personal , within the jurisdiction of the united states , constituting , derived from , or traceable to , any proceeds obtained directly or indirectly from an offense against a foreign nation , or any property used to facilitate such an offense , if the offense — ( i ) involves trafficking in nuclear , chemical , biological , or radiological weapons technology or material , or the manufacture , importation , sale , or distribution of a controlled substance ( as that term is defined for purposes of the controlled substances act ) , or any other conduct described in section 1956 ( c ) ( 7 ) ( b ) ; ( ii ) would be punishable within the jurisdiction of the foreign nation by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year ; and ( iii ) would be punishable under the laws of the united states by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year , if the act or activity constituting the offense had occurred within the jurisdiction of the united states .

 ( c ) any property , real or personal , which constitutes or is derived from proceeds traceable to a violation of section 215 , 471 , 472 , 473 , 474 , 476 , 477 , 478 , 479 , 480 , 481 , 485 , 486 , 487 , 488 , 501 , 502 , 510 , 542 , 545 , 555 , 656 , 657 , 670 , 842 , 844 , 1005 , 1006 , 1007 , 1014 , 1028 , 1029 , 1030 , 1032 , or 1344 of this title or any offense constituting "specified unlawful activity" ( as defined in section 1956 ( c ) ( 7 ) of this title ) , or a conspiracy to commit such offense .

 ( d ) any property , real or personal , which represents or is traceable to the gross receipts obtained , directly or indirectly , from a violation of — ( i ) section 666 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( relating to federal program fraud ) ; ( ii ) section 1001 ( relating to fraud and false statements ) ; ( iii ) section 1031 ( relating to major fraud against the united states ) ; ( iv ) section 1032 ( relating to concealment of assets from conservator or receiver of insured financial institution ) ; ( v ) section 1341 ( relating to mail fraud ) ; or ( vi ) section 1343 ( relating to wire fraud ) , if such violation relates to the sale of assets acquired or held by the federal deposit insurance corporation , as conservator or receiver for a financial institution , or any other conservator for a financial institution appointed by the office of the comptroller of the currency or the national credit union administration , as conservator or liquidating agent for a financial institution .

 ( e ) with respect to an offense listed in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ( d ) committed for the purpose of executing or attempting to execute any scheme or artifice to defraud , or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent statements , pretenses , representations or promises , the gross receipts of such an offense shall include all property , real or personal , tangible or intangible , which thereby is obtained , directly or indirectly .

 ( f ) any property , real or personal , which represents or is traceable to the gross proceeds obtained , directly or indirectly , from a violation of — ( i ) section 511 ( altering or removing motor vehicle identification numbers ) ; ( ii ) section 553 ( importing or exporting stolen motor vehicles ) ; ( iii ) section 2119 ( armed robbery of automobiles ) ; ( iv ) section 2312 ( transporting stolen motor vehicles in interstate commerce ) ; or ( v ) section 2313 ( possessing or selling a stolen motor vehicle that has moved in interstate commerce ) .

 ( g ) all assets , foreign or domestic — ( i ) of any individual , entity , or organization engaged in planning or perpetrating any federal crime of terrorism ( as defined in section 2332b ( g ) ( 5 ) ) against the united states , citizens or residents of the united states , or their property , and all assets , foreign or domestic , affording any person a source of influence over any such entity or organization ; ( ii ) acquired or maintained by any person with the intent and for the purpose of supporting , planning , conducting , or concealing federal crime of terrorism ( as defined in section 2332b ( g ) ( 5 ) ) against the united states , citizens or residents of the united states , or their property ; or ( iii ) derived from , involved in , or used or intended to be used to commit any federal crime of terrorism ( as defined in section 2332b ( g ) ( 5 ) ) against the united states , citizens or residents of the united states , or their property .

 ( iv ) of any individual , entity , or organization engaged in planning or perpetrating any act of international terrorism ( as defined in section 2331 ) against an international organization ( as defined in section 209 of the state department basic authorities act of 1956 ( 22 u.s.c .

4309 ( b ) ) or against any foreign government .

where the property sought for forfeiture is located beyond the territorial boundaries of the united states , an act in furtherance of such planning or perpetration must have occurred within the jurisdiction of the united states .

 ( h ) any property , real or personal , involved in a violation or attempted violation , or which constitutes or is derived from proceeds traceable to a violation , of section 2339c of this title .

 ( 2 ) for purposes of paragraph ( 1 ) , the term "proceeds" is defined as follows: ( a ) in cases involving illegal goods , illegal services , unlawful activities , and telemarketing and health care fraud schemes , the term "proceeds" means property of any kind obtained directly or indirectly , as the result of the commission of the offense giving rise to forfeiture , and any property traceable thereto , and is not limited to the net gain or profit realized from the offense .

 ( b ) in cases involving lawful goods or lawful services that are sold or provided in an illegal manner , the term "proceeds" means the amount of money acquired through the illegal transactions resulting in the forfeiture , less the direct costs incurred in providing the goods or services .

the claimant shall have the burden of proof with respect to the issue of direct costs .

the direct costs shall not include any part of the overhead expenses of the entity providing the goods or services , or any part of the income taxes paid by the entity .

 ( c ) in cases involving fraud in the process of obtaining a loan or extension of credit , the court shall allow the claimant a deduction from the forfeiture to the extent that the loan was repaid , or the debt was satisfied , without any financial loss to the victim .

 ( b ) ( 1 ) except as provided in section 985 , any property subject to forfeiture to the united states under subsection ( a ) may be seized by the attorney general and , in the case of property involved in a violation investigated by the secretary of the treasury or the united states postal service , the property may also be seized by the secretary of the treasury or the postal service , respectively .

 ( 2 ) seizures pursuant to this section shall be made pursuant to a warrant obtained in the same manner as provided for a search warrant under the federal rules of criminal procedure , except that a seizure may be made without a warrant if — ( a ) a complaint for forfeiture has been filed in the united states district court and the court issued an arrest warrant in rem pursuant to the supplemental rules for certain admiralty and maritime claims ; ( b ) there is probable cause to believe that the property is subject to forfeiture and — ( i ) the seizure is made pursuant to a lawful arrest or search ; or ( ii ) another exception to the fourth amendment warrant requirement would apply ; or ( c ) the property was lawfully seized by a state or local law enforcement agency and transferred to a federal agency .

 ( 3 ) notwithstanding the provisions of rule 41 ( a ) of the federal rules of criminal procedure , a seizure warrant may be issued pursuant to this subsection by a judicial officer in any district in which a forfeiture action against the property may be filed under section 1355 ( b ) of title 28 , and may be executed in any district in which the property is found , or transmitted to the central authority of any foreign state for service in accordance with any treaty or other international agreement .

any motion for the return of property seized under this section shall be filed in the district court in which the seizure warrant was issued or in the district court for the district in which the property was seized .

 ( 4 ) ( a ) if any person is arrested or charged in a foreign country in connection with an offense that would give rise to the forfeiture of property in the united states under this section or under the controlled substances act , the attorney general may apply to any federal judge or magistrate judge in the district in which the property is located for an ex parte order restraining the property subject to forfeiture for not more than 30 days , except that the time may be extended for good cause shown at a hearing conducted in the manner provided in rule 43 ( e ) of the federal rules of civil procedure .

 ( b ) the application for the restraining order shall set forth the nature and circumstances of the foreign charges and the basis for belief that the person arrested or charged has property in the united states that would be subject to forfeiture , and shall contain a statement that the restraining order is needed to preserve the availability of property for such time as is necessary to receive evidence from the foreign country or elsewhere in support of probable cause for the seizure of the property under this subsection .

 ( c ) property taken or detained under this section shall not be repleviable , but shall be deemed to be in the custody of the attorney general , the secretary of the treasury , or the postal service , as the case may be , subject only to the orders and decrees of the court or the official having jurisdiction thereof .

whenever property is seized under this subsection , the attorney general , the secretary of the treasury , or the postal service , as the case may be , may — ( 1 ) place the property under seal ; ( 2 ) remove the property to a place designated by him ; or ( 3 ) require that the general services administration take custody of the property and remove it , if practicable , to an appropriate location for disposition in accordance with law .

 ( d ) for purposes of this section , the provisions of the customs laws relating to the seizure , summary and judicial forfeiture , condemnation of property for violation of the customs laws , the disposition of such property or the proceeds from the sale of such property under this section , the remission or mitigation of such forfeitures , and the compromise of claims ( 19 u.s.c .

1602 et seq .

 ) , insofar as they are applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this section , shall apply to seizures and forfeitures incurred , or alleged to have been incurred , under this section , except that such duties as are imposed upon the customs officer or any other person with respect to the seizure and forfeiture of property under the customs laws shall be performed with respect to seizures and forfeitures of property under this section by such officers , agents , or other persons as may be authorized or designated for that purpose by the attorney general , the secretary of the treasury , or the postal service , as the case may be .

the attorney general shall have sole responsibility for disposing of petitions for remission or mitigation with respect to property involved in a judicial forfeiture proceeding .

 ( e ) notwithstanding any other provision of the law , except section 3 of the anti drug abuse act of 1986 , the attorney general , the secretary of the treasury , or the postal service , as the case may be , is authorized to retain property forfeited pursuant to this section , or to transfer such property on such terms and conditions as he may determine — ( 1 ) to any other federal agency ; ( 2 ) to any state or local law enforcement agency which participated directly in any of the acts which led to the seizure or forfeiture of the property ; ( 3 ) in the case of property referred to in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) , to any federal financial institution regulatory agency — ( a ) to reimburse the agency for payments to claimants or creditors of the institution ; and ( b ) to reimburse the insurance fund of the agency for losses suffered by the fund as a result of the receivership or liquidation ; ( 4 ) in the case of property referred to in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) , upon the order of the appropriate federal financial institution regulatory agency , to the financial institution as restitution , with the value of the property so transferred to be set off against any amount later recovered by the financial institution as compensatory damages in any state or federal proceeding ; ( 5 ) in the case of property referred to in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ( c ) , to any federal financial institution regulatory agency , to the extent of the agency's contribution of resources to , or expenses involved in , the seizure and forfeiture , and the investigation leading directly to the seizure and forfeiture , of such property ; ( 6 ) as restoration to any victim of the offense giving rise to the forfeiture , including , in the case of a money laundering offense , any offense constituting the underlying specified unlawful activity ; or ( 7 ) in the case of property referred to in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ( d ) , to the resolution trust corporation , the federal deposit insurance corporation , or any other federal financial institution regulatory agency ( as defined in section 8 ( e ) ( 7 ) ( d ) of the federal deposit insurance act ) .

the attorney general , the secretary of the treasury , or the postal service , as the case may be , shall ensure the equitable transfer pursuant to paragraph ( 2 ) of any forfeited property to the appropriate state or local law enforcement agency so as to reflect generally the contribution of any such agency participating directly in any of the acts which led to the seizure or forfeiture of such property .

a decision by the attorney general , the secretary of the treasury , or the postal service pursuant to paragraph ( 2 ) shall not be subject to review .

the united states shall not be liable in any action arising out of the use of any property the custody of which was transferred pursuant to this section to any non - federal agency .

the attorney general , the secretary of the treasury , or the postal service may order the discontinuance of any forfeiture proceedings under this section in favor of the institution of forfeiture proceedings by state or local authorities under an appropriate state or local statute .

after the filing of a complaint for forfeiture under this section , the attorney general may seek dismissal of the complaint in favor of forfeiture proceedings under state or local law .

whenever forfeiture proceedings are discontinued by the united states in favor of state or local proceedings , the united states may transfer custody and possession of the seized property to the appropriate state or local official immediately upon the initiation of the proper actions by such officials .

whenever forfeiture proceedings are discontinued by the united states in favor of state or local proceedings , notice shall be sent to all known interested parties advising them of the discontinuance or dismissal .

the united states shall not be liable in any action arising out of the seizure , detention , and transfer of seized property to state or local officials .

the united states shall not be liable in any action arising out of a transfer under paragraph ( 3 ) , ( 4 ) , or ( 5 ) of this subsection .

 ( f ) all right , title , and interest in property described in subsection ( a ) of this section shall vest in the united states upon commission of the act giving rise to forfeiture under this section .

 ( g ) ( 1 ) upon the motion of the united states , the court shall stay the civil forfeiture proceeding if the court determines that civil discovery will adversely affect the ability of the government to conduct a related criminal investigation or the prosecution of a related criminal case .

 ( 2 ) upon the motion of a claimant , the court shall stay the civil forfeiture proceeding with respect to that claimant if the court determines that — ( a ) the claimant is the subject of a related criminal investigation or case ; ( b ) the claimant has standing to assert a claim in the civil forfeiture proceeding ; and ( c ) continuation of the forfeiture proceeding will burden the right of the claimant against self - incrimination in the related investigation or case .

 ( 3 ) with respect to the impact of civil discovery described in paragraphs ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) , the court may determine that a stay is unnecessary if a protective order limiting discovery would protect the interest of one party without unfairly limiting the ability of the opposing party to pursue the civil case .

in no case , however , shall the court impose a protective order as an alternative to a stay if the effect of such protective order would be to allow one party to pursue discovery while the other party is substantially unable to do so .

 ( 4 ) in this subsection , the terms "related criminal case" and "related criminal investigation" mean an actual prosecution or investigation in progress at the time at which the request for the stay , or any subsequent motion to lift the stay is made .

in determining whether a criminal case or investigation is "related" to a civil forfeiture proceeding , the court shall consider the degree of similarity between the parties , witnesses , facts , and circumstances involved in the two proceedings , without requiring an identity with respect to any one or more factors .

 ( 5 ) in requesting a stay under paragraph ( 1 ) , the government may , in appropriate cases , submit evidence ex parte in order to avoid disclosing any matter that may adversely affect an ongoing criminal investigation or pending criminal trial .

 ( 6 ) whenever a civil forfeiture proceeding is stayed pursuant to this subsection , the court shall enter any order necessary to preserve the value of the property or to protect the rights of lienholders or other persons with an interest in the property while the stay is in effect .

 ( 7 ) a determination by the court that the claimant has standing to request a stay pursuant to paragraph ( 2 ) shall apply only to this subsection and shall not preclude the government from objecting to the standing of the claimant by dispositive motion or at the time of trial .

 ( h ) in addition to the venue provided for in section 1395 of title 28 or any other provision of law , in the case of property of a defendant charged with a violation that is the basis for forfeiture of the property under this section , a proceeding for forfeiture under this section may be brought in the judicial district in which the defendant owning such property is found or in the judicial district in which the criminal prosecution is brought .

 ( i ) ( 1 ) whenever property is civilly or criminally forfeited under this chapter , the attorney general or the secretary of the treasury , as the case may be , may transfer the forfeited personal property or the proceeds of the sale of any forfeited personal or real property to any foreign country which participated directly or indirectly in the seizure or forfeiture of the property , if such a transfer — ( a ) has been agreed to by the secretary of state ; ( b ) is authorized in an international agreement between the united states and the foreign country ; and ( c ) is made to a country which , if applicable , has been certified under section 481 ( h ) of the foreign assistance act of 1961 .

a decision by the attorney general or the secretary of the treasury pursuant to this paragraph shall not be subject to review .

the foreign country shall , in the event of a transfer of property or proceeds of sale of property under this subsection , bear all expenses incurred by the united states in the seizure , maintenance , inventory , storage , forfeiture , and disposition of the property , and all transfer costs .

the payment of all such expenses , and the transfer of assets pursuant to this paragraph , shall be upon such terms and conditions as the attorney general or the secretary of the treasury may , in his discretion , set .

 ( 2 ) the provisions of this section shall not be construed as limiting or superseding any other authority of the united states to provide assistance to a foreign country in obtaining property related to a crime committed in the foreign country , including property which is sought as evidence of a crime committed in the foreign country .

 ( 3 ) a certified order or judgment of forfeiture by a court of competent jurisdiction of a foreign country concerning property which is the subject of forfeiture under this section and was determined by such court to be the type of property described in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) of this section , and any certified recordings or transcripts of testimony taken in a foreign judicial proceeding concerning such order or judgment of forfeiture , shall be admissible in evidence in a proceeding brought pursuant to this section .

such certified order or judgment of forfeiture , when admitted into evidence , shall constitute probable cause that the property forfeited by such order or judgment of forfeiture is subject to forfeiture under this section and creates a rebuttable presumption of the forfeitability of such property under this section .

 ( 4 ) a certified order or judgment of conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of a foreign country concerning an unlawful drug activity which gives rise to forfeiture under this section and any certified recordings or transcripts of testimony taken in a foreign judicial proceeding concerning such order or judgment of conviction shall be admissible in evidence in a proceeding brought pursuant to this section .

such certified order or judgment of conviction , when admitted into evidence , creates a rebuttable presumption that the unlawful drug activity giving rise to forfeiture under this section has occurred .

 ( 5 ) the provisions of paragraphs ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) of this subsection shall not be construed as limiting the admissibility of any evidence otherwise admissible , nor shall they limit the ability of the united states to establish probable cause that property is subject to forfeiture by any evidence otherwise admissible .

 ( j ) for purposes of this section — ( 1 ) the term "attorney general" means the attorney general or his delegate ; and ( 2 ) the term "secretary of the treasury" means the secretary of the treasury or his delegate .

 ( k ) interbank accounts. — ( 1 ) in general. — ( a ) in general. — for the purpose of a forfeiture under this section or under the controlled substances act ( 21 u.s.c .

801 et seq .

 ) , if funds are deposited into an account at a foreign bank , and that foreign bank has an interbank account in the united states with a covered financial institution ( as defined in section 5318 ( j ) ( 1 ) of title 31 ) , the funds shall be deemed to have been deposited into the interbank account in the united states , and any restraining order , seizure warrant , or arrest warrant in rem regarding the funds may be served on the covered financial institution , and funds in the interbank account , up to the value of the funds deposited into the account at the foreign bank , may be restrained , seized , or arrested .

 ( b ) authority to suspend. — the attorney general , in consultation with the secretary of the treasury , may suspend or terminate a forfeiture under this section if the attorney general determines that a conflict of law exists between the laws of the jurisdiction in which the foreign bank is located and the laws of the united states with respect to liabilities arising from the restraint , seizure , or arrest of such funds , and that such suspension or termination would be in the interest of justice and would not harm the national interests of the united states .

 ( 2 ) no requirement for government to trace funds. — if a forfeiture action is brought against funds that are restrained , seized , or arrested under paragraph ( 1 ) , it shall not be necessary for the government to establish that the funds are directly traceable to the funds that were deposited into the foreign bank , nor shall it be necessary for the government to rely on the application of section 984 .

 ( 3 ) claims brought by owner of the funds. — if a forfeiture action is instituted against funds restrained , seized , or arrested under paragraph ( 1 ) , the owner of the funds deposited into the account at the foreign bank may contest the forfeiture by filing a claim under section 983 .

 ( 4 ) definitions. — for purposes of this subsection , the following definitions shall apply: ( a ) interbank account. — the term "interbank account" has the same meaning as in section 984 ( c ) ( 2 ) ( b ) .

 ( b ) owner. — ( i ) in general. — except as provided in clause ( ii ) , the term "owner" — ( i ) means the person who was the owner , as that term is defined in section 983 ( d ) ( 6 ) , of the funds that were deposited into the foreign bank at the time such funds were deposited ; and ( ii ) does not include either the foreign bank or any financial institution acting as an intermediary in the transfer of the funds into the interbank account .

 ( ii ) exception. — the foreign bank may be considered the "owner" of the funds ( and no other person shall qualify as the owner of such funds ) only if — ( i ) the basis for the forfeiture action is wrongdoing committed by the foreign bank ; or ( ii ) the foreign bank establishes , by a preponderance of the evidence , that prior to the restraint , seizure , or arrest of the funds , the foreign bank had discharged all or part of its obligation to the prior owner of the funds , in which case the foreign bank shall be deemed the owner of the funds to the extent of such discharged obligation .

 ( a ) ( 1 ) the court , in imposing sentence on a person convicted of an offense in violation of section 1956 , 1957 , or 1960 of this title , shall order that the person forfeit to the united states any property , real or personal , involved in such offense , or any property traceable to such property .

 ( 2 ) the court , in imposing sentence on a person convicted of a violation of , or a conspiracy to violate — ( a ) section 215 , 656 , 657 , 1005 , 1006 , 1007 , 1014 , 1341 , 1343 , or 1344 of this title , affecting a financial institution , or ( b ) section 471 , 472 , 473 , 474 , 476 , 477 , 478 , 479 , 480 , 481 , 485 , 486 , 487 , 488 , 501 , 502 , 510 , 542 , 545 , 555 , 842 , 844 , 1028 , 1029 , or 1030 of this title , shall order that the person forfeit to the united states any property constituting , or derived from , proceeds the person obtained directly or indirectly , as the result of such violation .

 ( 3 ) the court , in imposing a sentence on a person convicted of an offense under — ( a ) section 666 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( relating to federal program fraud ) ; ( b ) section 1001 ( relating to fraud and false statements ) ; ( c ) section 1031 ( relating to major fraud against the united states ) ; ( d ) section 1032 ( relating to concealment of assets from conservator , receiver , or liquidating agent of insured financial institution ) ; ( e ) section 1341 ( relating to mail fraud ) ; or ( f ) section 1343 ( relating to wire fraud ) , involving the sale of assets acquired or held by the federal deposit insurance corporation , as conservator or receiver for a financial institution or any other conservator for a financial institution appointed by the office of the comptroller of the currency or the national credit union administration , as conservator or liquidating agent for a financial institution , shall order that the person forfeit to the united states any property , real or personal , which represents or is traceable to the gross receipts obtained , directly or indirectly , as a result of such violation .

 ( 4 ) with respect to an offense listed in subsection ( a ) ( 3 ) committed for the purpose of executing or attempting to execute any scheme or artifice to defraud , or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent statements , pretenses , representations , or promises , the gross receipts of such an offense shall include any property , real or personal , tangible or intangible , which is obtained , directly or indirectly , as a result of such offense .

 ( 5 ) the court , in imposing sentence on a person convicted of a violation or conspiracy to violate — ( a ) section 511 ( altering or removing motor vehicle identification numbers ) ; ( b ) section 553 ( importing or exporting stolen motor vehicles ) ; ( c ) section 2119 ( armed robbery of automobiles ) ; ( d ) section 2312 ( transporting stolen motor vehicles in interstate commerce ) ; or ( e ) section 2313 ( possessing or selling a stolen motor vehicle that has moved in interstate commerce ) ; shall order that the person forfeit to the united states any property , real or personal , which represents or is traceable to the gross proceeds obtained , directly or indirectly , as a result of such violation .

 ( 6 ) ( a ) the court , in imposing sentence on a person convicted of a violation of , or conspiracy to violate , section 274 ( a ) , 274a ( a ) ( 1 ) , or 274a ( a ) ( 2 ) of the immigration and nationality act or section 554 , 1425 , 1426 , 1427 , 1541 , 1542 , 1543 , 1544 , or 1546 of this title , or a violation of , or conspiracy to violate , section 1028 of this title if committed in connection with passport or visa issuance or use , shall order that the person forfeit to the united states , regardless of any provision of state law — ( i ) any conveyance , including any vessel , vehicle , or aircraft used in the commission of the offense of which the person is convicted ; and ( ii ) any property real or personal — ( i ) that constitutes , or is derived from or is traceable to the proceeds obtained directly or indirectly from the commission of the offense of which the person is convicted ; or ( ii ) that is used to facilitate , or is intended to be used to facilitate , the commission of the offense of which the person is convicted .

 ( b ) the court , in imposing sentence on a person described in subparagraph ( a ) , shall order that the person forfeit to the united states all property described in that subparagraph .

 ( 7 ) the court , in imposing sentence on a person convicted of a federal health care offense , shall order the person to forfeit property , real or personal , that constitutes or is derived , directly or indirectly , from gross proceeds traceable to the commission of the offense .

 ( 8 ) the court , in sentencing a defendant convicted of an offense under section 1028 , 1029 , 1341 , 1342 , 1343 , or 1344 , or of a conspiracy to commit such an offense , if the offense involves telemarketing ( as that term is defined in section 2325 ) , shall order that the defendant forfeit to the united states any real or personal property — ( a ) used or intended to be used to commit , to facilitate , or to promote the commission of such offense ; and ( b ) constituting , derived from , or traceable to the gross proceeds that the defendant obtained directly or indirectly as a result of the offense .

 ( b ) ( 1 ) the forfeiture of property under this section , including any seizure and disposition of the property and any related judicial or administrative proceeding , shall be governed by the provisions of section 413 ( other than subsection ( d ) of that section ) of the comprehensive drug abuse prevention and control act of 1970 ( 21 u.s.c .

853 ) .

 ( 2 ) the substitution of assets provisions of subsection 413 ( p ) shall not be used to order a defendant to forfeit assets in place of the actual property laundered where such defendant acted merely as an intermediary who handled but did not retain the property in the course of the money laundering offense unless the defendant , in committing the offense or offenses giving rise to the forfeiture , conducted three or more separate transactions involving a total of $100,000 or more in any twelve month period .

 ( a ) notice ; claim ; complaint .

 — ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) except as provided in clauses ( ii ) through ( v ) , in any nonjudicial civil forfeiture proceeding under a civil forfeiture statute , with respect to which the government is required to send written notice to interested parties , such notice shall be sent in a manner to achieve proper notice as soon as practicable , and in no case more than 60 days after the date of the seizure .

 ( ii ) no notice is required if , before the 60-day period expires , the government files a civil judicial forfeiture action against the property and provides notice of that action as required by law .

 ( iii ) if , before the 60-day period expires , the government does not file a civil judicial forfeiture action , but does obtain a criminal indictment containing an allegation that the property is subject to forfeiture , the government shall either — ( i ) send notice within the 60 days and continue the nonjudicial civil forfeiture proceeding under this section ; or ( ii ) terminate the nonjudicial civil forfeiture proceeding , and take the steps necessary to preserve its right to maintain custody of the property as provided in the applicable criminal forfeiture statute .

 ( iv ) in a case in which the property is seized by a state or local law enforcement agency and turned over to a federal law enforcement agency for the purpose of forfeiture under federal law , notice shall be sent not more than 90 days after the date of seizure by the state or local law enforcement agency .

 ( v ) if the identity or interest of a party is not determined until after the seizure or turnover but is determined before a declaration of forfeiture is entered , notice shall be sent to such interested party not later than 60 days after the determination by the government of the identity of the party or the party's interest .

 ( b ) a supervisory official in the headquarters office of the seizing agency may extend the period for sending notice under subparagraph ( a ) for a period not to exceed 30 days ( which period may not be further extended except by a court ) , if the official determines that the conditions in subparagraph ( d ) are present .

 ( c ) upon motion by the government , a court may extend the period for sending notice under subparagraph ( a ) for a period not to exceed 60 days , which period may be further extended by the court for 60-day periods , as necessary , if the court determines , based on a written certification of a supervisory official in the headquarters office of the seizing agency , that the conditions in subparagraph ( d ) are present .

 ( d ) the period for sending notice under this paragraph may be extended only if there is reason to believe that notice may have an adverse result , including — ( i ) endangering the life or physical safety of an individual ; ( ii ) flight from prosecution ; ( iii ) destruction of or tampering with evidence ; ( iv ) intimidation of potential witnesses ; or ( v ) otherwise seriously jeopardizing an investigation or unduly delaying a trial .

 ( e ) each of the federal seizing agencies conducting nonjudicial forfeitures under this section shall report periodically to the committees on the judiciary of the house of representatives and the senate the number of occasions when an extension of time is granted under subparagraph ( b ) .

 ( f ) if the government does not send notice of a seizure of property in accordance with subparagraph ( a ) to the person from whom the property was seized , and no extension of time is granted , the government shall return the property to that person without prejudice to the right of the government to commence a forfeiture proceeding at a later time .

the government shall not be required to return contraband or other property that the person from whom the property was seized may not legally possess .

 ( 2 ) ( a ) any person claiming property seized in a nonjudicial civil forfeiture proceeding under a civil forfeiture statute may file a claim with the appropriate official after the seizure .

 ( b ) a claim under subparagraph ( a ) may be filed not later than the deadline set forth in a personal notice letter ( which deadline may be not earlier than 35 days after the date the letter is mailed ) , except that if that letter is not received , then a claim may be filed not later than 30 days after the date of final publication of notice of seizure .

 ( c ) a claim shall — ( i ) identify the specific property being claimed ; ( ii ) state the claimant's interest in such property ; and ( iii ) be made under oath , subject to penalty of perjury .

 ( d ) a claim need not be made in any particular form .

each federal agency conducting nonjudicial forfeitures under this section shall make claim forms generally available on request , which forms shall be written in easily understandable language .

 ( e ) any person may make a claim under subparagraph ( a ) without posting bond with respect to the property which is the subject of the claim .

 ( 3 ) ( a ) not later than 90 days after a claim has been filed , the government shall file a complaint for forfeiture in the manner set forth in the supplemental rules for certain admiralty and maritime claims or return the property pending the filing of a complaint , except that a court in the district in which the complaint will be filed may extend the period for filing a complaint for good cause shown or upon agreement of the parties .

 ( b ) if the government does not — ( i ) file a complaint for forfeiture or return the property , in accordance with subparagraph ( a ) ; or ( ii ) before the time for filing a complaint has expired — ( i ) obtain a criminal indictment containing an allegation that the property is subject to forfeiture ; and ( ii ) take the steps necessary to preserve its right to maintain custody of the property as provided in the applicable criminal forfeiture statute , the government shall promptly release the property pursuant to regulations promulgated by the attorney general , and may not take any further action to effect the civil forfeiture of such property in connection with the underlying offense .

 ( c ) in lieu of , or in addition to , filing a civil forfeiture complaint , the government may include a forfeiture allegation in a criminal indictment .

if criminal forfeiture is the only forfeiture proceeding commenced by the government , the government's right to continued possession of the property shall be governed by the applicable criminal forfeiture statute .

 ( d ) no complaint may be dismissed on the ground that the government did not have adequate evidence at the time the complaint was filed to establish the forfeitability of the property .

 ( 4 ) ( a ) in any case in which the government files in the appropriate united states district court a complaint for forfeiture of property , any person claiming an interest in the seized property may file a claim asserting such person's interest in the property in the manner set forth in the supplemental rules for certain admiralty and maritime claims , except that such claim may be filed not later than 30 days after the date of service of the government's complaint or , as applicable , not later than 30 days after the date of final publication of notice of the filing of the complaint .

 ( b ) a person asserting an interest in seized property , in accordance with subparagraph ( a ) , shall file an answer to the government's complaint for forfeiture not later than 20 days after the date of the filing of the claim .

 ( b ) representation .

 — ( 1 ) ( a ) if a person with standing to contest the forfeiture of property in a judicial civil forfeiture proceeding under a civil forfeiture statute is financially unable to obtain representation by counsel , and the person is represented by counsel appointed under section 3006a of this title in connection with a related criminal case , the court may authorize counsel to represent that person with respect to the claim .

 ( b ) in determining whether to authorize counsel to represent a person under subparagraph ( a ) , the court shall take into account such factors as — ( i ) the person's standing to contest the forfeiture ; and ( ii ) whether the claim appears to be made in good faith .

 ( 2 ) ( a ) if a person with standing to contest the forfeiture of property in a judicial civil forfeiture proceeding under a civil forfeiture statute is financially unable to obtain representation by counsel , and the property subject to forfeiture is real property that is being used by the person as a primary residence , the court , at the request of the person , shall insure that the person is represented by an attorney for the legal services corporation with respect to the claim .

 ( b ) ( i ) at appropriate times during a representation under subparagraph ( a ) , the legal services corporation shall submit a statement of reasonable attorney fees and costs to the court .

 ( ii ) the court shall enter a judgment in favor of the legal services corporation for reasonable attorney fees and costs submitted pursuant to clause ( i ) and treat such judgment as payable under section 2465 of title 28 , united states code , regardless of the outcome of the case .

 ( 3 ) the court shall set the compensation for representation under this subsection , which shall be equivalent to that provided for court - appointed representation under section 3006a of this title .

 ( c ) burden of proof .

 — in a suit or action brought under any civil forfeiture statute for the civil forfeiture of any property — ( 1 ) the burden of proof is on the government to establish , by a preponderance of the evidence , that the property is subject to forfeiture ; ( 2 ) the government may use evidence gathered after the filing of a complaint for forfeiture to establish , by a preponderance of the evidence , that property is subject to forfeiture ; and ( 3 ) if the government's theory of forfeiture is that the property was used to commit or facilitate the commission of a criminal offense , or was involved in the commission of a criminal offense , the government shall establish that there was a substantial connection between the property and the offense .

 ( d ) innocent owner defense .

 — ( 1 ) an innocent owner's interest in property shall not be forfeited under any civil forfeiture statute .

the claimant shall have the burden of proving that the claimant is an innocent owner by a preponderance of the evidence .

 ( 2 ) ( a ) with respect to a property interest in existence at the time the illegal conduct giving rise to forfeiture took place , the term "innocent owner" means an owner who — ( i ) did not know of the conduct giving rise to forfeiture ; or ( ii ) upon learning of the conduct giving rise to the forfeiture , did all that reasonably could be expected under the circumstances to terminate such use of the property .

 ( b ) ( i ) for the purposes of this paragraph , ways in which a person may show that such person did all that reasonably could be expected may include demonstrating that such person , to the extent permitted by law — ( i ) gave timely notice to an appropriate law enforcement agency of information that led the person to know the conduct giving rise to a forfeiture would occur or has occurred ; and ( ii ) in a timely fashion revoked or made a good faith attempt to revoke permission for those engaging in such conduct to use the property or took reasonable actions in consultation with a law enforcement agency to discourage or prevent the illegal use of the property .

 ( ii ) a person is not required by this subparagraph to take steps that the person reasonably believes would be likely to subject any person ( other than the person whose conduct gave rise to the forfeiture ) to physical danger .

 ( 3 ) ( a ) with respect to a property interest acquired after the conduct giving rise to the forfeiture has taken place , the term "innocent owner" means a person who , at the time that person acquired the interest in the property — ( i ) was a bona fide purchaser or seller for value ( including a purchaser or seller of goods or services for value ) ; and ( ii ) did not know and was reasonably without cause to believe that the property was subject to forfeiture .

 ( b ) an otherwise valid claim under subparagraph ( a ) shall not be denied on the ground that the claimant gave nothing of value in exchange for the property if — ( i ) the property is the primary residence of the claimant ; ( ii ) depriving the claimant of the property would deprive the claimant of the means to maintain reasonable shelter in the community for the claimant and all dependents residing with the claimant ; ( iii ) the property is not , and is not traceable to , the proceeds of any criminal offense ; and ( iv ) the claimant acquired his or her interest in the property through marriage , divorce , or legal separation , or the claimant was the spouse or legal dependent of a person whose death resulted in the transfer of the property to the claimant through inheritance or probate , except that the court shall limit the value of any real property interest for which innocent ownership is recognized under this subparagraph to the value necessary to maintain reasonable shelter in the community for such claimant and all dependents residing with the claimant .

 ( 4 ) notwithstanding any provision of this subsection , no person may assert an ownership interest under this subsection in contraband or other property that it is illegal to possess .

 ( 5 ) if the court determines , in accordance with this section , that an innocent owner has a partial interest in property otherwise subject to forfeiture , or a joint tenancy or tenancy by the entirety in such property , the court may enter an appropriate order — ( a ) severing the property ; ( b ) transferring the property to the government with a provision that the government compensate the innocent owner to the extent of his or her ownership interest once a final order of forfeiture has been entered and the property has been reduced to liquid assets ; or ( c ) permitting the innocent owner to retain the property subject to a lien in favor of the government to the extent of the forfeitable interest in the property .

 ( 6 ) in this subsection , the term "owner" — ( a ) means a person with an ownership interest in the specific property sought to be forfeited , including a leasehold , lien , mortgage , recorded security interest , or valid assignment of an ownership interest ; and ( b ) does not include — ( i ) a person with only a general unsecured interest in , or claim against , the property or estate of another ; ( ii ) a bailee unless the bailor is identified and the bailee shows a colorable legitimate interest in the property seized ; or ( iii ) a nominee who exercises no dominion or control over the property .

 ( e ) motion to set aside forfeiture . — ( 1 ) any person entitled to written notice in any nonjudicial civil forfeiture proceeding under a civil forfeiture statute who does not receive such notice may file a motion to set aside a declaration of forfeiture with respect to that person's interest in the property , which motion shall be granted if — ( a ) the government knew , or reasonably should have known , of the moving party's interest and failed to take reasonable steps to provide such party with notice ; and ( b ) the moving party did not know or have reason to know of the seizure within sufficient time to file a timely claim .

 ( 2 ) ( a ) notwithstanding the expiration of any applicable statute of limitations , if the court grants a motion under paragraph ( 1 ) , the court shall set aside the declaration of forfeiture as to the interest of the moving party without prejudice to the right of the government to commence a subsequent forfeiture proceeding as to the interest of the moving party .

 ( b ) any proceeding described in subparagraph ( a ) shall be commenced — ( i ) if nonjudicial , within 60 days of the entry of the order granting the motion ; or ( ii ) if judicial , within 6 months of the entry of the order granting the motion .

 ( 3 ) a motion under paragraph ( 1 ) may be filed not later than 5 years after the date of final publication of notice of seizure of the property .

 ( 4 ) if , at the time a motion made under paragraph ( 1 ) is granted , the forfeited property has been disposed of by the government in accordance with law , the government may institute proceedings against a substitute sum of money equal to the value of the moving party's interest in the property at the time the property was disposed of .

 ( 5 ) a motion filed under this subsection shall be the exclusive remedy for seeking to set aside a declaration of forfeiture under a civil forfeiture statute .

 ( f ) release of seized property . — ( 1 ) a claimant under subsection ( a ) is entitled to immediate release of seized property if — ( a ) the claimant has a possessory interest in the property ; ( b ) the claimant has sufficient ties to the community to provide assurance that the property will be available at the time of the trial ; ( c ) the continued possession by the government pending the final disposition of forfeiture proceedings will cause substantial hardship to the claimant , such as preventing the functioning of a business , preventing an individual from working , or leaving an individual homeless ; ( d ) the claimant's likely hardship from the continued possession by the government of the seized property outweighs the risk that the property will be destroyed , damaged , lost , concealed , or transferred if it is returned to the claimant during the pendency of the proceeding ; and ( e ) none of the conditions set forth in paragraph ( 8 ) applies .

 ( 2 ) a claimant seeking release of property under this subsection must request possession of the property from the appropriate official , and the request must set forth the basis on which the requirements of paragraph ( 1 ) are met .

 ( 3 ) ( a ) if not later than 15 days after the date of a request under paragraph ( 2 ) the property has not been released , the claimant may file a petition in the district court in which the complaint has been filed or , if no complaint has been filed , in the district court in which the seizure warrant was issued or in the district court for the district in which the property was seized .

 ( b ) the petition described in subparagraph ( a ) shall set forth — ( i ) the basis on which the requirements of paragraph ( 1 ) are met ; and ( ii ) the steps the claimant has taken to secure release of the property from the appropriate official .

 ( 4 ) if the government establishes that the claimant's claim is frivolous , the court shall deny the petition .

in responding to a petition under this subsection on other grounds , the government may in appropriate cases submit evidence ex parte in order to avoid disclosing any matter that may adversely affect an ongoing criminal investigation or pending criminal trial .

 ( 5 ) the court shall render a decision on a petition filed under paragraph ( 3 ) not later than 30 days after the date of the filing , unless such 30-day limitation is extended by consent of the parties or by the court for good cause shown .

 ( 6 ) if — ( a ) a petition is filed under paragraph ( 3 ) ; and ( b ) the claimant demonstrates that the requirements of paragraph ( 1 ) have been met , the district court shall order that the property be returned to the claimant , pending completion of proceedings by the government to obtain forfeiture of the property .

 ( 7 ) if the court grants a petition under paragraph ( 3 ) — ( a ) the court may enter any order necessary to ensure that the value of the property is maintained while the forfeiture action is pending , including ( i ) permitting the inspection , photographing , and inventory of the property ; ( ii ) fixing a bond in accordance with rule e ( 5 ) of the supplemental rules for certain admiralty and maritime claims ; and ( iii ) requiring the claimant to obtain or maintain insurance on the subject property ; and ( b ) the government may place a lien against the property or file a lis pendens to ensure that the property is not transferred to another person .

 ( 8 ) this subsection shall not apply if the seized property — ( a ) is contraband , currency , or other monetary instrument , or electronic funds unless such currency or other monetary instrument or electronic funds constitutes the assets of a legitimate business which has been seized ; ( b ) is to be used as evidence of a violation of the law ; ( c ) by reason of design or other characteristic , is particularly suited for use in illegal activities ; or ( d ) is likely to be used to commit additional criminal acts if returned to the claimant .

 ( g ) proportionality . — ( 1 ) the claimant under subsection ( a ) ( 4 ) may petition the court to determine whether the forfeiture was constitutionally excessive .

 ( 2 ) in making this determination , the court shall compare the forfeiture to the gravity of the offense giving rise to the forfeiture .

 ( 3 ) the claimant shall have the burden of establishing that the forfeiture is grossly disproportional by a preponderance of the evidence at a hearing conducted by the court without a jury .

 ( 4 ) if the court finds that the forfeiture is grossly disproportional to the offense it shall reduce or eliminate the forfeiture as necessary to avoid a violation of the excessive fines clause of the eighth amendment of the constitution .

 ( h ) civil fine . — ( 1 ) in any civil forfeiture proceeding under a civil forfeiture statute in which the government prevails , if the court finds that the claimant's assertion of an interest in the property was frivolous , the court may impose a civil fine on the claimant of an amount equal to 10 percent of the value of the forfeited property , but in no event shall the fine be less than $250 or greater than $5,000 .

 ( 2 ) any civil fine imposed under this subsection shall not preclude the court from imposing sanctions under rule 11 of the federal rules of civil procedure .

 ( 3 ) in addition to the limitations of section 1915 of title 28 , united states code , in no event shall a prisoner file a claim under a civil forfeiture statute or appeal a judgment in a civil action or proceeding based on a civil forfeiture statute if the prisoner has , on three or more prior occasions , while incarcerated or detained in any facility , brought an action or appeal in a court of the united states that was dismissed on the grounds that it is frivolous or malicious , unless the prisoner shows extraordinary and exceptional circumstances .

 ( i ) civil forfeiture statute defined . — in this section , the term "civil forfeiture statute" — ( 1 ) means any provision of federal law providing for the forfeiture of property other than as a sentence imposed upon conviction of a criminal offense ; and ( 2 ) does not include — ( a ) the tariff act of 1930 or any other provision of law codified in title 19 ; ( b ) the internal revenue code of 1986 ; ( c ) the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( 21 u.s.c .

301 et seq .

 ) ; ( d ) the trading with the enemy act ( 50 u.s.c .

app .

1 et seq. ) .

or the international emergency economic powers act ( ieepa ) ( 50 u.s.c .

1701 et seq .

 ) ; or ( e ) section 1 of title vi of the act of june 15 , 1917 ( 40 stat .

233 ; 22 u.s.c .

401 ) .

 ( j ) restraining orders ; protective orders . — ( 1 ) upon application of the united states , the court may enter a restraining order or injunction , require the execution of satisfactory performance bonds , create receiverships , appoint conservators , custodians , appraisers , accountants , or trustees , or take any other action to seize , secure , maintain , or preserve the availability of property subject to civil forfeiture — ( a ) upon the filing of a civil forfeiture complaint alleging that the property with respect to which the order is sought is subject to civil forfeiture ; or ( b ) prior to the filing of such a complaint , if , after notice to persons appearing to have an interest in the property and opportunity for a hearing , the court determines that — ( i ) there is a substantial probability that the united states will prevail on the issue of forfeiture and that failure to enter the order will result in the property being destroyed , removed from the jurisdiction of the court , or otherwise made unavailable for forfeiture ; and ( ii ) the need to preserve the availability of the property through the entry of the requested order outweighs the hardship on any party against whom the order is to be entered .

 ( 2 ) an order entered pursuant to paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) shall be effective for not more than 90 days , unless extended by the court for good cause shown , or unless a complaint described in paragraph ( 1 ) ( a ) has been filed .

 ( 3 ) a temporary restraining order under this subsection may be entered upon application of the united states without notice or opportunity for a hearing when a complaint has not yet been filed with respect to the property , if the united states demonstrates that there is probable cause to believe that the property with respect to which the order is sought is subject to civil forfeiture and that provision of notice will jeopardize the availability of the property for forfeiture .

such a temporary order shall expire not more than 14 days after the date on which it is entered , unless extended for good cause shown or unless the party against whom it is entered consents to an extension for a longer period .

a hearing requested concerning an order entered under this paragraph shall be held at the earliest possible time and prior to the expiration of the temporary order .

 ( 4 ) the court may receive and consider , at a hearing held pursuant to this subsection , evidence and information that would be inadmissible under the federal rules of evidence .

 ( 1 ) scope .

this rule governs a forfeiture action in rem arising from a federal statute .

to the extent that this rule does not address an issue , supplemental rules c and e and the federal rules of civil procedure also apply .

 ( 2 ) complaint .

the complaint must: ( a ) be verified ; ( b ) state the grounds for subject - matter jurisdiction , in rem jurisdiction over the defendant property , and venue ; ( c ) describe the property with reasonable particularity ; ( d ) if the property is tangible , state its location when any seizure occurred and — if different — its location when the action is filed ; ( e ) identify the statute under which the forfeiture action is brought ; and ( f ) state sufficiently detailed facts to support a reasonable belief that the government will be able to meet its burden of proof at trial .

 ( 3 ) judicial authorization and process .

 ( a ) real property .

if the defendant is real property , the government must proceed under 18 u.s.c .

§985 .

 ( b ) other property ; arrest warrant .

if the defendant is not real property: ( i ) the clerk must issue a warrant to arrest the property if it is in the government's possession , custody , or control ; ( ii ) the court — on finding probable cause — must issue a warrant to arrest the property if it is not in the government's possession , custody , or control and is not subject to a judicial restraining order ; and ( iii ) a warrant is not necessary if the property is subject to a judicial restraining order .

 ( c ) execution of process .

 ( i ) the warrant and any supplemental process must be delivered to a person or organization authorized to execute it , who may be: ( a ) a marshal or any other united states officer or employee ; ( b ) someone under contract with the united states ; or ( c ) someone specially appointed by the court for that purpose .

 ( ii ) the authorized person or organization must execute the warrant and any supplemental process on property in the united states as soon as practicable unless: ( a ) the property is in the government's possession , custody , or control ; or ( b ) the court orders a different time when the complaint is under seal , the action is stayed before the warrant and supplemental process are executed , or the court finds other good cause .

 ( iii ) the warrant and any supplemental process may be executed within the district or , when authorized by statute , outside the district .

 ( iv ) if executing a warrant on property outside the united states is required , the warrant may be transmitted to an appropriate authority for serving process where the property is located .

 ( 4 ) notice .

 ( a ) notice by publication .

 ( i ) when publication is required .

a judgment of forfeiture may be entered only if the government has published notice of the action within a reasonable time after filing the complaint or at a time the court orders .

but notice need not be published if: ( a ) the defendant property is worth less than $1,000 and direct notice is sent under rule g ( 4 ) ( b ) to every person the government can reasonably identify as a potential claimant ; or ( b ) the court finds that the cost of publication exceeds the property's value and that other means of notice would satisfy due process .

 ( ii ) content of the notice .

unless the court orders otherwise , the notice must: ( a ) describe the property with reasonable particularity ; ( b ) state the times under rule g ( 5 ) to file a claim and to answer ; and ( c ) name the government attorney to be served with the claim and answer .

 ( iii ) frequency of publication .

published notice must appear: ( a ) once a week for three consecutive weeks ; or ( b ) only once if , before the action was filed , notice of nonjudicial forfeiture of the same property was published on an official internet government forfeiture site for at least 30 consecutive days , or in a newspaper of general circulation for three consecutive weeks in a district where publication is authorized under rule g ( 4 ) ( a ) ( iv ) .

 ( iv ) means of publication .

the government should select from the following options a means of publication reasonably calculated to notify potential claimants of the action: ( a ) if the property is in the united states , publication in a newspaper generally circulated in the district where the action is filed , where the property was seized , or where property that was not seized is located ; ( b ) if the property is outside the united states , publication in a newspaper generally circulated in a district where the action is filed , in a newspaper generally circulated in the country where the property is located , or in legal notices published and generally circulated in the country where the property is located ; or ( c ) instead of ( a ) or ( b ) , posting a notice on an official internet government forfeiture site for at least 30 consecutive days .

 ( b ) notice to known potential claimants .

 ( i ) direct notice required .

the government must send notice of the action and a copy of the complaint to any person who reasonably appears to be a potential claimant on the facts known to the government before the end of the time for filing a claim under rule g ( 5 ) ( a ) ( ii ) ( b ) .

 ( ii ) content of the notice .

the notice must state: ( a ) the date when the notice is sent ; ( b ) a deadline for filing a claim , at least 35 days after the notice is sent ; ( c ) that an answer or a motion under rule 12 must be filed no later than 21 days after filing the claim ; and ( d ) the name of the government attorney to be served with the claim and answer .

 ( iii ) sending notice .

 ( a ) the notice must be sent by means reasonably calculated to reach the potential claimant .

 ( b ) notice may be sent to the potential claimant or to the attorney representing the potential claimant with respect to the seizure of the property or in a related investigation , administrative forfeiture proceeding , or criminal case .

 ( c ) notice sent to a potential claimant who is incarcerated must be sent to the place of incarceration .

 ( d ) notice to a person arrested in connection with an offense giving rise to the forfeiture who is not incarcerated when notice is sent may be sent to the address that person last gave to the agency that arrested or released the person .

 ( e ) notice to a person from whom the property was seized who is not incarcerated when notice is sent may be sent to the last address that person gave to the agency that seized the property .

 ( iv ) when notice is sent .

notice by the following means is sent on the date when it is placed in the mail , delivered to a commercial carrier , or sent by electronic mail .

 ( v ) actual notice .

a potential claimant who had actual notice of a forfeiture action may not oppose or seek relief from forfeiture because of the government's failure to send the required notice .

 ( 5 ) responsive pleadings .

 ( a ) filing a claim .

 ( i ) a person who asserts an interest in the defendant property may contest the forfeiture by filing a claim in the court where the action is pending .

the claim must: ( a ) identify the specific property claimed ; ( b ) identify the claimant and state the claimant's interest in the property ; ( c ) be signed by the claimant under penalty of perjury ; and ( d ) be served on the government attorney designated under rule g ( 4 ) ( a ) ( ii ) ( c ) or ( b ) ( ii ) ( d ) .

 ( ii ) unless the court for good cause sets a different time , the claim must be filed: ( a ) by the time stated in a direct notice sent under rule g ( 4 ) ( b ) ; ( b ) if notice was published but direct notice was not sent to the claimant or the claimant's attorney , no later than 30 days after final publication of newspaper notice or legal notice under rule g ( 4 ) ( a ) or no later than 60 days after the first day of publication on an official internet government forfeiture site ; or ( c ) if notice was not published and direct notice was not sent to the claimant or the claimant's attorney: ( 1 ) if the property was in the government's possession , custody , or control when the complaint was filed , no later than 60 days after the filing , not counting any time when the complaint was under seal or when the action was stayed before execution of a warrant issued under rule g ( 3 ) ( b ) ; or ( 2 ) if the property was not in the government's possession , custody , or control when the complaint was filed , no later than 60 days after the government complied with 18 u.s.c .

§985 ( c ) as to real property , or 60 days after process was executed on the property under rule g ( 3 ) .

 ( iii ) a claim filed by a person asserting an interest as a bailee must identify the bailor , and if filed on the bailor's behalf must state the authority to do so .

 ( b ) answer .

a claimant must serve and file an answer to the complaint or a motion under rule 12 within 21 days after filing the claim .

a claimant waives an objection to in rem jurisdiction or to venue if the objection is not made by motion or stated in the answer .

 ( 6 ) special interrogatories .

 ( a ) time and scope .

the government may serve special interrogatories limited to the claimant's identity and relationship to the defendant property without the court's leave at any time after the claim is filed and before discovery is closed .

but if the claimant serves a motion to dismiss the action , the government must serve the interrogatories within 21 days after the motion is served .

 ( b ) answers or objections .

answers or objections to these interrogatories must be served within 21 days after the interrogatories are served .

 ( c ) government 's response deferred .

the government need not respond to a claimant's motion to dismiss the action under rule g ( 8 ) ( b ) until 21 days after the claimant has answered these interrogatories .

 ( 7 ) preserving , preventing criminal use , and disposing of property ; sales .

 ( a ) preserving and preventing criminal use of property .

when the government does not have actual possession of the defendant property the court , on motion or on its own , may enter any order necessary to preserve the property , to prevent its removal or encumbrance , or to prevent its use in a criminal offense .

 ( b ) interlocutory sale or delivery .

 ( i ) order to sell .

on motion by a party or a person having custody of the property , the court may order all or part of the property sold if: ( a ) the property is perishable or at risk of deterioration , decay , or injury by being detained in custody pending the action ; ( b ) the expense of keeping the property is excessive or is disproportionate to its fair market value ; ( c ) the property is subject to a mortgage or to taxes on which the owner is in default ; or ( d ) the court finds other good cause .

 ( ii ) who makes the sale .

a sale must be made by a united states agency that has authority to sell the property , by the agency's contractor , or by any person the court designates .

 ( iii ) sale procedures .

the sale is governed by 28 u.s.c .

§§2001 , 2002 , and 2004 , unless all parties , with the court's approval , agree to the sale , aspects of the sale , or different procedures .

 ( iv ) sale proceeds .

sale proceeds are a substitute res subject to forfeiture in place of the property that was sold .

the proceeds must be held in an interest - bearing account maintained by the united states pending the conclusion of the forfeiture action .

 ( v ) delivery on a claimant 's motion .

the court may order that the property be delivered to the claimant pending the conclusion of the action if the claimant shows circumstances that would permit sale under rule g ( 7 ) ( b ) ( i ) and gives security under these rules .

 ( c ) disposing of forfeited property .

upon entry of a forfeiture judgment , the property or proceeds from selling the property must be disposed of as provided by law .

 ( 8 ) motions .

 ( a ) motion to suppress use of the property as evidence .

if the defendant property was seized , a party with standing to contest the lawfulness of the seizure may move to suppress use of the property as evidence .

suppression does not affect forfeiture of the property based on independently derived evidence .

 ( b ) motion to dismiss the action .

 ( i ) a claimant who establishes standing to contest forfeiture may move to dismiss the action under rule 12 ( b ) .

 ( ii ) in an action governed by 18 u.s.c .

§983 ( a ) ( 3 ) ( d ) the complaint may not be dismissed on the ground that the government did not have adequate evidence at the time the complaint was filed to establish the forfeitability of the property .

the sufficiency of the complaint is governed by rule g ( 2 ) .

 ( c ) motion to strike a claim or answer .

 ( i ) at any time before trial , the government may move to strike a claim or answer: ( a ) for failing to comply with rule g ( 5 ) or ( 6 ) , or ( b ) because the claimant lacks standing .

 ( ii ) the motion: ( a ) must be decided before any motion by the claimant to dismiss the action ; and ( b ) may be presented as a motion for judgment on the pleadings or as a motion to determine after a hearing or by summary judgment whether the claimant can carry the burden of establishing standing by a preponderance of the evidence .

 ( d ) petition to release property .

 ( i ) if a united states agency or an agency's contractor holds property for judicial or nonjudicial forfeiture under a statute governed by 18 u.s.c .

§983 ( f ) , a person who has filed a claim to the property may petition for its release under §983 ( f ) .

 ( ii ) if a petition for release is filed before a judicial forfeiture action is filed against the property , the petition may be filed either in the district where the property was seized or in the district where a warrant to seize the property issued .

if a judicial forfeiture action against the property is later filed in another district - or if the government shows that the action will be filed in another district - the petition may be transferred to that district under 28 u.s.c .

§1404 .

 ( e ) excessive fines .

a claimant may seek to mitigate a forfeiture under the excessive fines clause of the eighth amendment by motion for summary judgment or by motion made after entry of a forfeiture judgment if: ( i ) the claimant has pleaded the defense under rule 8 ; and ( ii ) the parties have had the opportunity to conduct civil discovery on the defense .

 ( 9 ) trial .

trial is to the court unless any party demands trial by jury under rule 38 .

 ( a ) ( 1 ) in any forfeiture action in rem in which the subject property is cash , monetary instruments in bearer form , funds deposited in an account in a financial institution ( as defined in section 20 of this title ) , or precious metals — ( a ) it shall not be necessary for the government to identify the specific property involved in the offense that is the basis for the forfeiture ; and ( b ) it shall not be a defense that the property involved in such an offense has been removed and replaced by identical property .

 ( 2 ) except as provided in subsection ( b ) , any identical property found in the same place or account as the property involved in the offense that is the basis for the forfeiture shall be subject to forfeiture under this section .

 ( b ) no action pursuant to this section to forfeit property not traceable directly to the offense that is the basis for the forfeiture may be commenced more than 1 year from the date of the offense .

 ( c ) ( 1 ) subsection ( a ) does not apply to an action against funds held by a financial institution in an interbank account unless the account holder knowingly engaged in the offense that is the basis for the forfeiture .

 ( 2 ) in this subsection — ( a ) the term "financial institution" includes a foreign bank ( as defined in section 1 ( b ) ( 7 ) of the international banking act of 1978 ( 12 u.s.c .

3101 ( b ) ( 7 ) ) ) ; and ( b ) the term "interbank account" means an account held by one financial institution at another financial institution primarily for the purpose of facilitating customer transactions .

 ( d ) nothing in this section may be construed to limit the ability of the government to forfeit property under any provision of law if the property involved in the offense giving rise to the forfeiture or property traceable thereto is available for forfeiture .

 ( a ) notwithstanding any other provision of law , all civil forfeitures of real property and interests in real property shall proceed as judicial forfeitures .

 ( b ) ( 1 ) except as provided in this section — ( a ) real property that is the subject of a civil forfeiture action shall not be seized before entry of an order of forfeiture ; and ( b ) the owners or occupants of the real property shall not be evicted from , or otherwise deprived of the use and enjoyment of , real property that is the subject of a pending forfeiture action .

 ( 2 ) the filing of a lis pendens and the execution of a writ of entry for the purpose of conducting an inspection and inventory of the property shall not be considered a seizure under this subsection .

 ( c ) ( 1 ) the government shall initiate a civil forfeiture action against real property by — ( a ) filing a complaint for forfeiture ; ( b ) posting a notice of the complaint on the property ; and ( c ) serving notice on the property owner , along with a copy of the complaint .

 ( 2 ) if the property owner cannot be served with the notice under paragraph ( 1 ) because the owner — ( a ) is a fugitive ; ( b ) resides outside the united states and efforts at service pursuant to rule 4 of the federal rules of civil procedure are unavailing ; or ( c ) cannot be located despite the exercise of due diligence , constructive service may be made in accordance with the laws of the state in which the property is located .

 ( 3 ) if real property has been posted in accordance with this subsection , it shall not be necessary for the court to issue an arrest warrant in rem , or to take any other action to establish in rem jurisdiction over the property .

 ( d ) ( 1 ) real property may be seized prior to the entry of an order of forfeiture if — ( a ) the government notifies the court that it intends to seize the property before trial ; and ( b ) the court — ( i ) issues a notice of application for warrant , causes the notice to be served on the property owner and posted on the property , and conducts a hearing in which the property owner has a meaningful opportunity to be heard ; or ( ii ) makes an ex parte determination that there is probable cause for the forfeiture and that there are exigent circumstances that permit the government to seize the property without prior notice and an opportunity for the property owner to be heard .

 ( 2 ) for purposes of paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) ( ii ) , to establish exigent circumstances , the government shall show that less restrictive measures such as a lis pendens , restraining order , or bond would not suffice to protect the government's interests in preventing the sale , destruction , or continued unlawful use of the real property .

 ( e ) if the court authorizes a seizure of real property under subsection ( d ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( ii ) , it shall conduct a prompt post - seizure hearing during which the property owner shall have an opportunity to contest the basis for the seizure .

 ( f ) this section — ( 1 ) applies only to civil forfeitures of real property and interests in real property ; ( 2 ) does not apply to forfeitures of the proceeds of the sale of such property or interests , or of money or other assets intended to be used to acquire such property or interests ; and ( 3 ) shall not affect the authority of the court to enter a restraining order relating to real property .

 ( a ) right to contest. — an owner of property that is confiscated under any provision of law relating to the confiscation of assets of suspected international terrorists , may contest that confiscation by filing a claim in the manner set forth in the federal rules of civil procedure ( supplemental rules for certain admiralty and maritime claims ) , and asserting as an affirmative defense that — ( 1 ) the property is not subject to confiscation under such provision of law ; or ( 2 ) the innocent owner provisions of section 983 ( d ) of title 18 , united states code , apply to the case .

 ( b ) evidence. — in considering a claim filed under this section , a court may admit evidence that is otherwise inadmissible under the federal rules of evidence , if the court determines that the evidence is reliable , and that compliance with the federal rules of evidence may jeopardize the national security interests of the united states .

 ( c ) clarifications. — ( 1 ) protection of rights. — the exclusion of certain provisions of federal law from the definition of the term "civil forfeiture statute" in section 983 ( i ) of title 18 , united states code , shall not be construed to deny an owner of property the right to contest the confiscation of assets of suspected international terrorists under — ( a ) subsection ( a ) of this section ; ( b ) the constitution ; or ( c ) subchapter ii of chapter 5 of title 5 , united states code ( commonly known as the "administrative procedure act" ) .

 ( 2 ) savings clause. — nothing in this section shall limit or otherwise affect any other remedies that may be available to an owner of property under section 983 of title 18 , united states code , or any other provision of law .

 ( a ) subject property the following shall be subject to forfeiture to the united states and no property right shall exist in them: ( 1 ) all controlled substances which have been manufactured , distributed , dispensed , or acquired in violation of this subchapter .

 ( 2 ) all raw materials , products , and equipment of any kind which are used , or intended for use , in manufacturing , compounding , processing , delivering , importing , or exporting any controlled substance or listed chemical in violation of this subchapter .

 ( 3 ) all property which is used , or intended for use , as a container for property described in paragraph ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) , or ( 9 ) .

 ( 4 ) all conveyances , including aircraft , vehicles , or vessels , which are used , or are intended for use , to transport , or in any manner to facilitate the transportation , sale , receipt , possession , or concealment of property described in paragraph ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) , or ( 9 ) .

 ( 5 ) all books , records , and research , including formulas , microfilm , tapes , and data which are used , or intended for use , in violation of this subchapter .

 ( 6 ) all moneys , negotiable instruments , securities , or other things of value furnished or intended to be furnished by any person in exchange for a controlled substance or listed chemical in violation of this subchapter , all proceeds traceable to such an exchange , and all moneys , negotiable instruments , and securities used or intended to be used to facilitate any violation of this subchapter .

 ( 7 ) all real property , including any right , title , and interest ( including any leasehold interest ) in the whole of any lot or tract of land and any appurtenances or improvements , which is used , or intended to be used , in any manner or part , to commit , or to facilitate the commission of , a violation of this subchapter punishable by more than one year's imprisonment .

 ( 8 ) all controlled substances which have been possessed in violation of this subchapter .

 ( 9 ) all listed chemicals , all drug manufacturing equipment , all tableting machines , all encapsulating machines , and all gelatin capsules , which have been imported , exported , manufactured , possessed , distributed , dispensed , acquired , or intended to be distributed , dispensed , acquired , imported , or exported , in violation of this subchapter or subchapter ii of this chapter .

 ( 10 ) any drug paraphernalia ( as defined in section 863 of this title ) .

 ( 11 ) any firearm ( as defined in section 921 of title 18 ) used or intended to be used to facilitate the transportation , sale , receipt , possession , or concealment of property described in paragraph ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) and any proceeds traceable to such property .

 ( b ) seizure procedures any property subject to forfeiture to the united states under this section may be seized by the attorney general in the manner set forth in section 981 ( b ) of title 18 .

 ( c ) custody of attorney general property taken or detained under this section shall not be repleviable , but shall be deemed to be in the custody of the attorney general , subject only to the orders and decrees of the court or the official having jurisdiction thereof .

whenever property is seized under any of the provisions of this subchapter , the attorney general may — ( 1 ) place the property under seal ; ( 2 ) remove the property to a place designated by him ; or ( 3 ) require that the general services administration take custody of the property and remove it , if practicable , to an appropriate location for disposition in accordance with law .

 ( d ) other laws and proceedings applicable the provisions of law relating to the seizure , summary and judicial forfeiture , and condemnation of property for violation of the customs laws ; the disposition of such property or the proceeds from the sale thereof ; the remission or mitigation of such forfeitures ; and the compromise of claims shall apply to seizures and forfeitures incurred , or alleged to have been incurred , under any of the provisions of this subchapter , insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions hereof ; except that such duties as are imposed upon the customs officer or any other person with respect to the seizure and forfeiture of property under the customs laws shall be performed with respect to seizures and forfeitures of property under this subchapter by such officers , agents , or other persons as may be authorized or designated for that purpose by the attorney general , except to the extent that such duties arise from seizures and forfeitures effected by any customs officer .

 ( e ) disposition of forfeited property ( 1 ) whenever property is civilly or criminally forfeited under this subchapter the attorney general may — ( a ) retain the property for official use or , in the manner provided with respect to transfers under section 1616a of title 19 , transfer the property to any federal agency or to any state or local law enforcement agency which participated directly in the seizure or forfeiture of the property ; ( b ) except as provided in paragraph ( 4 ) , sell , by public sale or any other commercially feasible means , any forfeited property which is not required to be destroyed by law and which is not harmful to the public ; ( c ) require that the general services administration take custody of the property and dispose of it in accordance with law ; ( d ) forward it to the drug enforcement administration for disposition ( including delivery for medical or scientific use to any federal or state agency under regulations of the attorney general ) ; or ( e ) transfer the forfeited personal property or the proceeds of the sale of any forfeited personal or real property to any foreign country which participated directly or indirectly in the seizure or forfeiture of the property , if such a transfer — ( i ) has been agreed to by the secretary of state ; ( ii ) is authorized in an international agreement between the united states and the foreign country ; and ( iii ) is made to a country which , if applicable , has been certified under section 2291j ( b ) of title 22 .

 ( 2 ) ( a ) the proceeds from any sale under subparagraph ( b ) of paragraph ( 1 ) and any moneys forfeited under this title shall be used to pay — ( i ) all property expenses of the proceedings for forfeiture and sale including expenses of seizure , maintenance of custody , advertising , and court costs ; and ( ii ) awards of up to $100,000 to any individual who provides original information which leads to the arrest and conviction of a person who kills or kidnaps a federal drug law enforcement agent .

any award paid for information concerning the killing or kidnaping of a federal drug law enforcement agent , as provided in clause ( ii ) , shall be paid at the discretion of the attorney general .

 ( b ) the attorney general shall forward to the treasurer of the united states for deposit in accordance with section 524 ( c ) of title 28 , any amounts of such moneys and proceeds remaining after payment of the expenses provided in subparagraph ( a ) , except that , with respect to forfeitures conducted by the postal service , the postal service shall deposit in the postal service fund , under section 2003 ( b ) ( 7 ) of title 39 , such moneys and proceeds .

 ( 3 ) the attorney general shall assure that any property transferred to a state or local law enforcement agency under paragraph ( 1 ) ( a ) — ( a ) has a value that bears a reasonable relationship to the degree of direct participation of the state or local agency in the law enforcement effort resulting in the forfeiture , taking into account the total value of all property forfeited and the total law enforcement effort with respect to the violation of law on which the forfeiture is based ; and ( b ) will serve to encourage further cooperation between the recipient state or local agency and federal law enforcement agencies .

 ( 4 ) ( a ) with respect to real property described in subparagraph ( b ) , if the chief executive officer of the state involved submits to the attorney general a request for purposes of such subparagraph , the authority established in such subparagraph is in lieu of the authority established in paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) .

 ( b ) in the case of property described in paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) that is civilly or criminally forfeited under this subchapter , if the property is real property that is appropriate for use as a public area reserved for recreational or historic purposes or for the preservation of natural conditions , the attorney general , upon the request of the chief executive officer of the state in which the property is located , may transfer title to the property to the state , either without charge or for a nominal charge , through a legal instrument providing that — ( i ) such use will be the principal use of the property ; and ( ii ) title to the property reverts to the united states in the event that the property is used otherwise .

 ( f ) forfeiture and destruction of schedule i and ii substances ( 1 ) all controlled substances in schedule i or ii that are possessed , transferred , sold , or offered for sale in violation of the provisions of this subchapter ; all dangerous , toxic , or hazardous raw materials or products subject to forfeiture under subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) of this section ; and any equipment or container subject to forfeiture under subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) or ( 3 ) of this section which cannot be separated safely from such raw materials or products shall be deemed contraband and seized and summarily forfeited to the united states .

similarly , all substances in schedule i or ii , which are seized or come into the possession of the united states , the owners of which are unknown , shall be deemed contraband and summarily forfeited to the united states .

 ( 2 ) the attorney general may direct the destruction of all controlled substances in schedule i or ii seized for violation of this subchapter ; all dangerous , toxic , or hazardous raw materials or products subject to forfeiture under subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) of this section ; and any equipment or container subject to forfeiture under subsection ( a ) ( 2 ) or ( 3 ) of this section which cannot be separated safely from such raw materials or products under such circumstances as the attorney general may deem necessary .

 ( g ) plants ( 1 ) all species of plants from which controlled substances in schedules i and ii may be derived which have been planted or cultivated in violation of this subchapter , or of which the owners or cultivators are unknown , or which are wild growths , may be seized and summarily forfeited to the united states .

 ( 2 ) the failure , upon demand by the attorney general or his duly authorized agent , of the person in occupancy or in control of land or premises upon which such species of plants are growing or being stored , to produce an appropriate registration , or proof that he is the holder thereof , shall constitute authority for the seizure and forfeiture .

 ( 3 ) the attorney general , or his duly authorized agent , shall have authority to enter upon any lands , or into any dwelling pursuant to a search warrant , to cut , harvest , carry off , or destroy such plants .

 ( h ) vesting of title in united states all right , title , and interest in property described in subsection ( a ) of this section shall vest in the united states upon commission of the act giving rise to forfeiture under this section .

 ( i ) stay of civil forfeiture proceedings ; applicability the provisions of section 981 ( g ) of title 18 , united states code , regarding the stay of a civil forfeiture proceeding shall apply to forfeitures under this section .

 ( j ) venue in addition to the venue provided for in section 1395 of title 28 or any other provision of law , in the case of property of a defendant charged with a violation that is the basis for forfeiture of the property under this section , a proceeding for forfeiture under this section may be brought in the judicial district in which the defendant owning such property is found or in the judicial district in which the criminal prosecution is brought .

 ( l ) agreement between attorney general and postal service for performance of functions the functions of the attorney general under this section shall be carried out by the postal service pursuant to such agreement as may be entered into between the attorney general and the postal service .

 ( a ) property subject to criminal forfeiture any person convicted of a violation of this subchapter or subchapter ii of this chapter punishable by imprisonment for more than one year shall forfeit to the united states , irrespective of any provision of state law — ( 1 ) any property constituting , or derived from , any proceeds the person obtained , directly or indirectly , as the result of such violation ; ( 2 ) any of the person's property used , or intended to be used , in any manner or part , to commit , or to facilitate the commission of , such violation ; and ( 3 ) in the case of a person convicted of engaging in a continuing criminal enterprise in violation of section 848 of this title , the person shall forfeit , in addition to any property described in paragraph ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) , any of his interest in , claims against , and property or contractual rights affording a source of control over , the continuing criminal enterprise .

the court , in imposing sentence on such person , shall order , in addition to any other sentence imposed pursuant to this subchapter or subchapter ii of this chapter , that the person forfeit to the united states all property described in this subsection .

in lieu of a fine otherwise authorized by this part , a defendant who derives profits or other proceeds from an offense may be fined not more than twice the gross profits or other proceeds .

 ( b ) meaning of term "property" property subject to criminal forfeiture under this section includes — ( 1 ) real property , including things growing on , affixed to , and found in land ; and ( 2 ) tangible and intangible personal property , including rights , privileges , interests , claims , and securities .

 ( c ) third party transfers all right , title , and interest in property described in subsection ( a ) of this section vests in the united states upon the commission of the act giving rise to forfeiture under this section .

any such property that is subsequently transferred to a person other than the defendant may be the subject of a special verdict of forfeiture and thereafter shall be ordered forfeited to the united states , unless the transferee establishes in a hearing pursuant to subsection ( n ) of this section that he is a bona fide purchaser for value of such property who at the time of purchase was reasonably without cause to believe that the property was subject to forfeiture under this section .

 ( d ) rebuttable presumption there is a rebuttable presumption at trial that any property of a person convicted of a felony under this subchapter or subchapter ii of this chapter is subject to forfeiture under this section if the united states establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that — ( 1 ) such property was acquired by such person during the period of the violation of this subchapter or subchapter ii of this chapter or within a reasonable time after such period ; and ( 2 ) there was no likely source for such property other than the violation of this subchapter or subchapter ii of this chapter .

 ( e ) protective orders ( 1 ) upon application of the united states , the court may enter a restraining order or injunction , require the execution of a satisfactory performance bond , or take any other action to preserve the availability of property described in subsection ( a ) of this section for forfeiture under this section — ( a ) upon the filing of an indictment or information charging a violation of this subchapter or subchapter ii of this chapter for which criminal forfeiture may be ordered under this section and alleging that the property with respect to which the order is sought would , in the event of conviction , be subject to forfeiture under this section ; or ( b ) prior to the filing of such an indictment or information , if , after notice to persons appearing to have an interest in the property and opportunity for a hearing , the court determines that — ( i ) there is a substantial probability that the united states will prevail on the issue of forfeiture and that failure to enter the order will result in the property being destroyed , removed from the jurisdiction of the court , or otherwise made unavailable for forfeiture ; and ( ii ) the need to preserve the availability of the property through the entry of the requested order outweighs the hardship on any party against whom the order is to be entered: provided , however , that an order entered pursuant to subparagraph ( b ) shall be effective for not more than ninety days , unless extended by the court for good cause shown or unless an indictment or information described in subparagraph ( a ) has been filed .

 ( 2 ) a temporary restraining order under this subsection may be entered upon application of the united states without notice or opportunity for a hearing when an information or indictment has not yet been filed with respect to the property , if the united states demonstrates that there is probable cause to believe that the property with respect to which the order is sought would , in the event of conviction , be subject to forfeiture under this section and that provision of notice will jeopardize the availability of the property for forfeiture .

such a temporary order shall expire not more than fourteen days after the date on which it is entered , unless extended for good cause shown or unless the party against whom it is entered consents to an extension for a longer period .

a hearing requested concerning an order entered under this paragraph shall be held at the earliest possible time and prior to the expiration of the temporary order .

 ( 3 ) the court may receive and consider , at a hearing held pursuant to this subsection , evidence and information that would be inadmissible under the federal rules of evidence .

 ( f ) warrant of seizure the government may request the issuance of a warrant authorizing the seizure of property subject to forfeiture under this section in the same manner as provided for a search warrant .

if the court determines that there is probable cause to believe that the property to be seized would , in the event of conviction , be subject to forfeiture and that an order under subsection ( e ) of this section may not be sufficient to assure the availability of the property for forfeiture , the court shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure of such property .

 ( g ) execution upon entry of an order of forfeiture under this section , the court shall authorize the attorney general to seize all property ordered forfeited upon such terms and conditions as the court shall deem proper .

following entry of an order declaring the property forfeited , the court may , upon application of the united states , enter such appropriate restraining orders or injunctions , require the execution of satisfactory performance bonds , appoint receivers , conservators , appraisers , accountants , or trustees , or take any other action to protect the interest of the united states in the property ordered forfeited .

any income accruing to or derived from property ordered forfeited under this section may be used to offset ordinary and necessary expenses to the property which are required by law , or which are necessary to protect the interests of the united states or third parties .

 ( h ) disposition of property following the seizure of property ordered forfeited under this section , the attorney general shall direct the disposition of the property by sale or any other commercially feasible means , making due provision for the rights of any innocent persons .

any property right or interest not exercisable by , or transferable for value to , the united states shall expire and shall not revert to the defendant , nor shall the defendant or any person acting in concert with him or on his behalf be eligible to purchase forfeited property at any sale held by the united states .

upon application of a person , other than the defendant or a person acting in concert with him or on his behalf , the court may restrain or stay the sale or disposition of the property pending the conclusion of any appeal of the criminal case giving rise to the forfeiture , if the applicant demonstrates that proceeding with the sale or disposition of the property will result in irreparable injury , harm , or loss to him .

 ( i ) authority of the attorney general with respect to property ordered forfeited under this section , the attorney general is authorized to — ( 1 ) grant petitions for mitigation or remission of forfeiture , restore forfeited property to victims of a violation of this subchapter , or take any other action to protect the rights of innocent persons which is in the interest of justice and which is not inconsistent with the provisions of this section ; ( 2 ) compromise claims arising under this section ; ( 3 ) award compensation to persons providing information resulting in a forfeiture under this section ; ( 4 ) direct the disposition by the united states , in accordance with the provisions of section 881 ( e ) of this title , of all property ordered forfeited under this section by public sale or any other commercially feasible means , making due provision for the rights of innocent persons ; and ( 5 ) take appropriate measures necessary to safeguard and maintain property ordered forfeited under this section pending its disposition .

 ( j ) applicability of civil forfeiture provisions except to the extent that they are inconsistent with the provisions of this section , the provisions of section 881 ( d ) of this title shall apply to a criminal forfeiture under this section .

 ( k ) bar on intervention except as provided in subsection ( n ) of this section , no party claiming an interest in property subject to forfeiture under this section may — ( 1 ) intervene in a trial or appeal of a criminal case involving the forfeiture of such property under this section ; or ( 2 ) commence an action at law or equity against the united states concerning the validity of his alleged interest in the property subsequent to the filing of an indictment or information alleging that the property is subject to forfeiture under this section .

 ( l ) jurisdiction to enter orders the district courts of the united states shall have jurisdiction to enter orders as provided in this section without regard to the location of any property which may be subject to forfeiture under this section or which has been ordered forfeited under this section .

 ( m ) depositions in order to facilitate the identification and location of property declared forfeited and to facilitate the disposition of petitions for remission or mitigation of forfeiture , after the entry of an order declaring property forfeited to the united states , the court may , upon application of the united states , order that the testimony of any witness relating to the property forfeited be taken by deposition and that any designated book , paper , document , record , recording , or other material not privileged be produced at the same time and place , in the same manner as provided for the taking of depositions under rule 15 of the federal rules of criminal procedure .

 ( n ) third party interests ( 1 ) following the entry of an order of forfeiture under this section , the united states shall publish notice of the order and of its intent to dispose of the property in such manner as the attorney general may direct .

the government may also , to the extent practicable , provide direct written notice to any person known to have alleged an interest in the property that is the subject of the order of forfeiture as a substitute for published notice as to those persons so notified .

 ( 2 ) any person , other than the defendant , asserting a legal interest in property which has been ordered forfeited to the united states pursuant to this section may , within thirty days of the final publication of notice or his receipt of notice under paragraph ( 1 ) , whichever is earlier , petition the court for a hearing to adjudicate the validity of his alleged interest in the property .

the hearing shall be held before the court alone , without a jury .

 ( 3 ) the petition shall be signed by the petitioner under penalty of perjury and shall set forth the nature and extent of the petitioner's right , title , or interest in the property , the time and circumstances of the petitioner's acquisition of the right , title , or interest in the property , any additional facts supporting the petitioner's claim , and the relief sought .

 ( 4 ) the hearing on the petition shall , to the extent practicable and consistent with the interests of justice , be held within thirty days of the filing of the petition .

the court may consolidate the hearing on the petition with a hearing on any other petition filed by a person other than the defendant under this subsection .

 ( 5 ) at the hearing , the petitioner may testify and present evidence and witnesses on his own behalf , and cross - examine witnesses who appear at the hearing .

the united states may present evidence and witnesses in rebuttal and in defense of its claim to the property and cross - examine witnesses who appear at the hearing .

in addition to testimony and evidence presented at the hearing , the court shall consider the relevant portions of the record of the criminal case which resulted in the order of forfeiture .

 ( 6 ) if , after the hearing , the court determines that the petitioner has established by a preponderance of the evidence that — ( a ) the petitioner has a legal right , title , or interest in the property , and such right , title , or interest renders the order of forfeiture invalid in whole or in part because the right , title , or interest was vested in the petitioner rather than the defendant or was superior to any right , title , or interest of the defendant at the time of the commission of the acts which gave rise to the forfeiture of the property under this section ; or ( b ) the petitioner is a bona fide purchaser for value of the right , title , or interest in the property and was at the time of purchase reasonably without cause to believe that the property was subject to forfeiture under this section ; the court shall amend the order of forfeiture in accordance with its determination .

 ( 7 ) following the court's disposition of all petitions filed under this subsection , or if no such petitions are filed following the expiration of the period provided in paragraph ( 2 ) for the filing of such petitions , the united states shall have clear title to property that is the subject of the order of forfeiture and may warrant good title to any subsequent purchaser or transferee .

 ( o ) construction the provisions of this section shall be liberally construed to effectuate its remedial purposes .

 ( p ) forfeiture of substitute property ( 1 ) in general paragraph ( 2 ) of this subsection shall apply , if any property described in subsection ( a ) , as a result of any act or omission of the defendant — ( a ) cannot be located upon the exercise of due diligence ; ( b ) has been transferred or sold to , or deposited with , a third party ; ( c ) has been placed beyond the jurisdiction of the court ; ( d ) has been substantially diminished in value ; or ( e ) has been commingled with other property which cannot be divided without difficulty .

 ( 2 ) substitute property in any case described in any of subparagraphs ( a ) through ( e ) of paragraph ( 1 ) , the court shall order the forfeiture of any other property of the defendant , up to the value of any property described in subparagraphs ( a ) through ( e ) of paragraph ( 1 ) , as applicable .

 ( 3 ) return of property to jurisdiction in the case of property described in paragraph ( 1 ) ( c ) , the court may , in addition to any other action authorized by this subsection , order the defendant to return the property to the jurisdiction of the court so that the property may be seized and forfeited .

 ( q ) restitution for cleanup of clandestine laboratory sites the court , when sentencing a defendant convicted of an offense under this subchapter or subchapter ii of this chapter involving the manufacture , possession , or the possession with intent to distribute , of amphetamine or methamphetamine , shall — ( 1 ) order restitution as provided in sections 3612 and 3664 of title 18 ; ( 2 ) order the defendant to reimburse the united states , the state or local government concerned , or both the united states and the state or local government concerned for the costs incurred by the united states or the state or local government concerned , as the case may be , for the cleanup associated with the manufacture of amphetamine or methamphetamine by the defendant , or on premises or in property that the defendant owns , resides , or does business in ; and ( 3 ) order restitution to any person injured as a result of the offense as provided in section 3663a of title 18 .

 ( a ) whoever violates any provision of section 1962 of this chapter shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 20 years ( or for life if the violation is based on a racketeering activity for which the maximum penalty includes life imprisonment ) , or both , and shall forfeit to the united states , irrespective of any provision of state law — ( 1 ) any interest the person has acquired or maintained in violation of section 1962 ; ( 2 ) any — ( a ) interest in ; ( b ) security of ; ( c ) claim against ; or ( d ) property or contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over ; any enterprise which the person has established , operated , controlled , conducted , or participated in the conduct of , in violation of section 1962 ; and ( 3 ) any property constituting , or derived from , any proceeds which the person obtained , directly or indirectly , from racketeering activity or unlawful debt collection in violation of section 1962 .

the court , in imposing sentence on such person shall order , in addition to any other sentence imposed pursuant to this section , that the person forfeit to the united states all property described in this subsection .

in lieu of a fine otherwise authorized by this section , a defendant who derives profits or other proceeds from an offense may be fined not more than twice the gross profits or other proceeds .

 ( b ) property subject to criminal forfeiture under this section includes — ( 1 ) real property , including things growing on , affixed to , and found in land ; and ( 2 ) tangible and intangible personal property , including rights , privileges , interests , claims , and securities .

 ( c ) all right , title , and interest in property described in subsection ( a ) vests in the united states upon the commission of the act giving rise to forfeiture under this section .

any such property that is subsequently transferred to a person other than the defendant may be the subject of a special verdict of forfeiture and thereafter shall be ordered forfeited to the united states , unless the transferee establishes in a hearing pursuant to subsection ( l ) that he is a bona fide purchaser for value of such property who at the time of purchase was reasonably without cause to believe that the property was subject to forfeiture under this section .

 ( d ) ( 1 ) upon application of the united states , the court may enter a restraining order or injunction , require the execution of a satisfactory performance bond , or take any other action to preserve the availability of property described in subsection ( a ) for forfeiture under this section — ( a ) upon the filing of an indictment or information charging a violation of section 1962 of this chapter and alleging that the property with respect to which the order is sought would , in the event of conviction , be subject to forfeiture under this section ; or ( b ) prior to the filing of such an indictment or information , if , after notice to persons appearing to have an interest in the property and opportunity for a hearing , the court determines that — ( i ) there is a substantial probability that the united states will prevail on the issue of forfeiture and that failure to enter the order will result in the property being destroyed , removed from the jurisdiction of the court , or otherwise made unavailable for forfeiture ; and ( ii ) the need to preserve the availability of the property through the entry of the requested order outweighs the hardship on any party against whom the order is to be entered: provided , however , that an order entered pursuant to subparagraph ( b ) shall be effective for not more than ninety days , unless extended by the court for good cause shown or unless an indictment or information described in subparagraph ( a ) has been filed .

 ( 2 ) a temporary restraining order under this subsection may be entered upon application of the united states without notice or opportunity for a hearing when an information or indictment has not yet been filed with respect to the property , if the united states demonstrates that there is probable cause to believe that the property with respect to which the order is sought would , in the event of conviction , be subject to forfeiture under this section and that provision of notice will jeopardize the availability of the property for forfeiture .

such a temporary order shall expire not more than fourteen days after the date on which it is entered , unless extended for good cause shown or unless the party against whom it is entered consents to an extension for a longer period .

a hearing requested concerning an order entered under this paragraph shall be held at the earliest possible time , and prior to the expiration of the temporary order .

 ( 3 ) the court may receive and consider , at a hearing held pursuant to this subsection , evidence and information that would be inadmissible under the federal rules of evidence .

 ( e ) upon conviction of a person under this section , the court shall enter a judgment of forfeiture of the property to the united states and shall also authorize the attorney general to seize all property ordered forfeited upon such terms and conditions as the court shall deem proper .

following the entry of an order declaring the property forfeited , the court may , upon application of the united states , enter such appropriate restraining orders or injunctions , require the execution of satisfactory performance bonds , appoint receivers , conservators , appraisers , accountants , or trustees , or take any other action to protect the interest of the united states in the property ordered forfeited .

any income accruing to , or derived from , an enterprise or an interest in an enterprise which has been ordered forfeited under this section may be used to offset ordinary and necessary expenses to the enterprise which are required by law , or which are necessary to protect the interests of the united states or third parties .

 ( f ) following the seizure of property ordered forfeited under this section , the attorney general shall direct the disposition of the property by sale or any other commercially feasible means , making due provision for the rights of any innocent persons .

any property right or interest not exercisable by , or transferable for value to , the united states shall expire and shall not revert to the defendant , nor shall the defendant or any person acting in concert with or on behalf of the defendant be eligible to purchase forfeited property at any sale held by the united states .

upon application of a person , other than the defendant or a person acting in concert with or on behalf of the defendant , the court may restrain or stay the sale or disposition of the property pending the conclusion of any appeal of the criminal case giving rise to the forfeiture , if the applicant demonstrates that proceeding with the sale or disposition of the property will result in irreparable injury , harm or loss to him .

notwithstanding 31 u.s.c .

3302 ( b ) , the proceeds of any sale or other disposition of property forfeited under this section and any moneys forfeited shall be used to pay all proper expenses for the forfeiture and the sale , including expenses of seizure , maintenance and custody of the property pending its disposition , advertising and court costs .

the attorney general shall deposit in the treasury any amounts of such proceeds or moneys remaining after the payment of such expenses .

 ( g ) with respect to property ordered forfeited under this section , the attorney general is authorized to — ( 1 ) grant petitions for mitigation or remission of forfeiture , restore forfeited property to victims of a violation of this chapter , or take any other action to protect the rights of innocent persons which is in the interest of justice and which is not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter ; ( 2 ) compromise claims arising under this section ; ( 3 ) award compensation to persons providing information resulting in a forfeiture under this section ; ( 4 ) direct the disposition by the united states of all property ordered forfeited under this section by public sale or any other commercially feasible means , making due provision for the rights of innocent persons ; and ( 5 ) take appropriate measures necessary to safeguard and maintain property ordered forfeited under this section pending its disposition .

 ( h ) the attorney general may promulgate regulations with respect to — ( 1 ) making reasonable efforts to provide notice to persons who may have an interest in property ordered forfeited under this section ; ( 2 ) granting petitions for remission or mitigation of forfeiture ; ( 3 ) the restitution of property to victims of an offense petitioning for remission or mitigation of forfeiture under this chapter ; ( 4 ) the disposition by the united states of forfeited property by public sale or other commercially feasible means ; ( 5 ) the maintenance and safekeeping of any property forfeited under this section pending its disposition ; and ( 6 ) the compromise of claims arising under this chapter .

pending the promulgation of such regulations , all provisions of law relating to the disposition of property , or the proceeds from the sale thereof , or the remission or mitigation of forfeitures for violation of the customs laws , and the compromise of claims and the award of compensation to informers in respect of such forfeitures shall apply to forfeitures incurred , or alleged to have been incurred , under the provisions of this section , insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions hereof .

such duties as are imposed upon the customs service or any person with respect to the disposition of property under the customs law shall be performed under this chapter by the attorney general .

 ( i ) except as provided in subsection ( l ) , no party claiming an interest in property subject to forfeiture under this section may — ( 1 ) intervene in a trial or appeal of a criminal case involving the forfeiture of such property under this section ; or ( 2 ) commence an action at law or equity against the united states concerning the validity of his alleged interest in the property subsequent to the filing of an indictment or information alleging that the property is subject to forfeiture under this section .

 ( j ) the district courts of the united states shall have jurisdiction to enter orders as provided in this section without regard to the location of any property which may be subject to forfeiture under this section or which has been ordered forfeited under this section .

 ( k ) in order to facilitate the identification or location of property declared forfeited and to facilitate the disposition of petitions for remission or mitigation of forfeiture , after the entry of an order declaring property forfeited to the united states the court may , upon application of the united states , order that the testimony of any witness relating to the property forfeited be taken by deposition and that any designated book , paper , document , record , recording , or other material not privileged be produced at the same time and place , in the same manner as provided for the taking of depositions under rule 15 of the federal rules of criminal procedure .

 ( l ) ( 1 ) following the entry of an order of forfeiture under this section , the united states shall publish notice of the order and of its intent to dispose of the property in such manner as the attorney general may direct .

the government may also , to the extent practicable , provide direct written notice to any person known to have alleged an interest in the property that is the subject of the order of forfeiture as a substitute for published notice as to those persons so notified .

 ( 2 ) any person , other than the defendant , asserting a legal interest in property which has been ordered forfeited to the united states pursuant to this section may , within thirty days of the final publication of notice or his receipt of notice under paragraph ( 1 ) , whichever is earlier , petition the court for a hearing to adjudicate the validity of his alleged interest in the property .

the hearing shall be held before the court alone , without a jury .

 ( 3 ) the petition shall be signed by the petitioner under penalty of perjury and shall set forth the nature and extent of the petitioner's right , title , or interest in the property , the time and circumstances of the petitioner's acquisition of the right , title , or interest in the property , any additional facts supporting the petitioner's claim , and the relief sought .

 ( 4 ) the hearing on the petition shall , to the extent practicable and consistent with the interests of justice , be held within thirty days of the filing of the petition .

the court may consolidate the hearing on the petition with a hearing on any other petition filed by a person other than the defendant under this subsection .

 ( 5 ) at the hearing , the petitioner may testify and present evidence and witnesses on his own behalf , and cross - examine witnesses who appear at the hearing .

the united states may present evidence and witnesses in rebuttal and in defense of its claim to the property and cross - examine witnesses who appear at the hearing .

in addition to testimony and evidence presented at the hearing , the court shall consider the relevant portions of the record of the criminal case which resulted in the order of forfeiture .

 ( 6 ) if , after the hearing , the court determines that the petitioner has established by a preponderance of the evidence that — ( a ) the petitioner has a legal right , title , or interest in the property , and such right , title , or interest renders the order of forfeiture invalid in whole or in part because the right , title , or interest was vested in the petitioner rather than the defendant or was superior to any right , title , or interest of the defendant at the time of the commission of the acts which gave rise to the forfeiture of the property under this section ; or ( b ) the petitioner is a bona fide purchaser for value of the right , title , or interest in the property and was at the time of purchase reasonably without cause to believe that the property was subject to forfeiture under this section ; the court shall amend the order of forfeiture in accordance with its determination .

 ( 7 ) following the court's disposition of all petitions filed under this subsection , or if no such petitions are filed following the expiration of the period provided in paragraph ( 2 ) for the filing of such petitions , the united states shall have clear title to property that is the subject of the order of forfeiture and may warrant good title to any subsequent purchaser or transferee .

 ( m ) if any of the property described in subsection ( a ) , as a result of any act or omission of the defendant — ( 1 ) cannot be located upon the exercise of due diligence ; ( 2 ) has been transferred or sold to , or deposited with , a third party ; ( 3 ) has been placed beyond the jurisdiction of the court ; ( 4 ) has been substantially diminished in value ; or ( 5 ) has been commingled with other property which cannot be divided without difficulty ; the court shall order the forfeiture of any other property of the defendant up to the value of any property described in paragraphs ( 1 ) through ( 5 ) .

 ( a ) notice to the defendant .

a court must not enter a judgment of forfeiture in a criminal proceeding unless the indictment or information contains notice to the defendant that the government will seek the forfeiture of property as part of any sentence in accordance with the applicable statute .

the notice should not be designated as a count of the indictment or information .

the indictment or information need not identify the property subject to forfeiture or specify the amount of any forfeiture money judgment that the government seeks .

 ( b ) entering a preliminary order of forfeiture .

 ( 1 ) forfeiture phase of the trial .

 ( a ) forfeiture determinations .

as soon as practical after a verdict or finding of guilty , or after a plea of guilty or nolo contendere is accepted , on any count in an indictment or information regarding which criminal forfeiture is sought , the court must determine what property is subject to forfeiture under the applicable statute .

if the government seeks forfeiture of specific property , the court must determine whether the government has established the requisite nexus between the property and the offense .

if the government seeks a personal money judgment , the court must determine the amount of money that the defendant will be ordered to pay .

 ( b ) evidence and hearing .

the court's determination may be based on evidence already in the record , including any written plea agreement , and on any additional evidence or information submitted by the parties and accepted by the court as relevant and reliable .

if the forfeiture is contested , on either party's request the court must conduct a hearing after the verdict or finding of guilty .

 ( 2 ) preliminary order .

 ( a ) contents of a specific order .

if the court finds that property is subject to forfeiture , it must promptly enter a preliminary order of forfeiture setting forth the amount of any money judgment , directing the forfeiture of specific property , and directing the forfeiture of any substitute property if the government has met the statutory criteria .

the court must enter the order without regard to any third party's interest in the property .

determining whether a third party has such an interest must be deferred until any third party files a claim in an ancillary proceeding under rule 32.2 ( c ) .

 ( b ) timing .

unless doing so is impractical , the court must enter the preliminary order sufficiently in advance of sentencing to allow the parties to suggest revisions or modifications before the order becomes final as to the defendant under rule 32.2 ( b ) ( 4 ) .

 ( c ) general order .

if , before sentencing , the court cannot identify all the specific property subject to forfeiture or calculate the total amount of the money judgment , the court may enter a forfeiture order that: ( i ) lists any identified property ; ( ii ) describes other property in general terms ; and ( iii ) states that the order will be amended under rule 32.2 ( e ) ( 1 ) when additional specific property is identified or the amount of the money judgment has been calculated .

 ( 3 ) seizing property .

the entry of a preliminary order of forfeiture authorizes the attorney general ( or a designee ) to seize the specific property subject to forfeiture ; to conduct any discovery the court considers proper in identifying , locating , or disposing of the property ; and to commence proceedings that comply with any statutes governing third - party rights .

the court may include in the order of forfeiture conditions reasonably necessary to preserve the property's value pending any appeal .

 ( 4 ) sentence and judgment .

 ( a ) when final .

at sentencing - or at any time before sentencing if the defendant consents - the preliminary forfeiture order becomes final as to the defendant .

if the order directs the defendant to forfeit specific property , it remains preliminary as to third parties until the ancillary proceeding is concluded under rule 32.2 ( c ) .

 ( b ) notice and inclusion in the judgment .

the court must include the forfeiture when orally announcing the sentence or must otherwise ensure that the defendant knows of the forfeiture at sentencing .

the court must also include the forfeiture order , directly or by reference , in the judgment , but the court's failure to do so may be corrected at any time under rule 36 .

 ( c ) time to appeal .

the time for the defendant or the government to file an appeal from the forfeiture order , or from the court's failure to enter an order , begins to run when judgment is entered .

if the court later amends or declines to amend a forfeiture order to include additional property under rule 32.2 ( e ) , the defendant or the government may file an appeal regarding that property under federal rule of appellate procedure 4 ( b ) .

the time for that appeal runs from the date when the order granting or denying the amendment becomes final .

 ( 5 ) jury determination .

 ( a ) retaining the jury .

in any case tried before a jury , if the indictment or information states that the government is seeking forfeiture , the court must determine before the jury begins deliberating whether either party requests that the jury be retained to determine the forfeitability of specific property if it returns a guilty verdict .

 ( b ) special verdict form .

if a party timely requests to have the jury determine forfeiture , the government must submit a proposed special verdict form listing each property subject to forfeiture and asking the jury to determine whether the government has established the requisite nexus between the property and the offense committed by the defendant .

 ( 6 ) notice of the forfeiture order .

 ( a ) publishing and sending notice .

if the court orders the forfeiture of specific property , the government must publish notice of the order and send notice to any person who reasonably appears to be a potential claimant with standing to contest the forfeiture in the ancillary proceeding .

 ( b ) content of the notice .

the notice must describe the forfeited property , state the times under the applicable statute when a petition contesting the forfeiture must be filed , and state the name and contact information for the government attorney to be served with the petition .

 ( c ) means of publication ; exceptions to publication requirement .

publication must take place as described in supplemental rule g ( 4 ) ( a ) ( iii ) of the federal rules of civil procedure , and may be by any means described in supplemental rule g ( 4 ) ( a ) ( iv ) .

publication is unnecessary if any exception in supplemental rule g ( 4 ) ( a ) ( i ) applies .

 ( d ) means of sending the notice .

the notice may be sent in accordance with supplemental rules g ( 4 ) ( b ) ( iii ) - ( v ) of the federal rules of civil procedure .

 ( 7 ) interlocutory sale .

at any time before entry of a final forfeiture order , the court , in accordance with supplemental rule g ( 7 ) of the federal rules of civil procedure , may order the interlocutory sale of property alleged to be forfeitable .

 ( c ) ancillary proceeding ; entering a final order of forfeiture .

 ( 1 ) in general .

if , as prescribed by statute , a third party files a petition asserting an interest in the property to be forfeited , the court must conduct an ancillary proceeding , but no ancillary proceeding is required to the extent that the forfeiture consists of a money judgment .

 ( a ) in the ancillary proceeding , the court may , on motion , dismiss the petition for lack of standing , for failure to state a claim , or for any other lawful reason .

for purposes of the motion , the facts set forth in the petition are assumed to be true .

 ( b ) after disposing of any motion filed under rule 32.2 ( c ) ( 1 ) ( a ) and before conducting a hearing on the petition , the court may permit the parties to conduct discovery in accordance with the federal rules of civil procedure if the court determines that discovery is necessary or desirable to resolve factual issues .

when discovery ends , a party may move for summary judgment under federal rule of civil procedure 56 .

 ( 2 ) entering a final order .

when the ancillary proceeding ends , the court must enter a final order of forfeiture by amending the preliminary order as necessary to account for any third - party rights .

if no third party files a timely petition , the preliminary order becomes the final order of forfeiture if the court finds that the defendant ( or any combination of defendants convicted in the case ) had an interest in the property that is forfeitable under the applicable statute .

the defendant may not object to the entry of the final order on the ground that the property belongs , in whole or in part , to a codefendant or third party ; nor may a third party object to the final order on the ground that the third party had an interest in the property .

 ( 3 ) multiple petitions .

if multiple third - party petitions are filed in the same case , an order dismissing or granting one petition is not appealable until rulings are made on all the petitions , unless the court determines that there is no just reason for delay .

 ( 4 ) ancillary proceeding not part of sentencing .

an ancillary proceeding is not part of sentencing .

 ( d ) stay pending appeal .

if a defendant appeals from a conviction or an order of forfeiture , the court may stay the order of forfeiture on terms appropriate to ensure that the property remains available pending appellate review .

a stay does not delay the ancillary proceeding or the determination of a third party's rights or interests .

if the court rules in favor of any third party while an appeal is pending , the court may amend the order of forfeiture but must not transfer any property interest to a third party until the decision on appeal becomes final , unless the defendant consents in writing or on the record .

 ( e ) subsequently located property ; substitute property .

 ( 1 ) in general .

on the government's motion , the court may at any time enter an order of forfeiture or amend an existing order of forfeiture to include property that: ( a ) is subject to forfeiture under an existing order of forfeiture but was located and identified after that order was entered ; or ( b ) is substitute property that qualifies for forfeiture under an applicable statute .

 ( 2 ) procedure .

if the government shows that the property is subject to forfeiture under rule 32.2 ( e ) ( 1 ) , the court must: ( a ) enter an order forfeiting that property , or amend an existing preliminary or final order to include it ; and ( b ) if a third party files a petition claiming an interest in the property , conduct an ancillary proceeding under rule 32.2 ( c ) .

 ( 3 ) jury trial limited .

there is no right to a jury trial under rule 32.2 ( e ) .

 ( c ) ( 1 ) there is established in the united states treasury a special fund to be known as the department of justice assets forfeiture fund ( hereafter in this subsection referred to as the "fund" ) which shall be available to the attorney general without fiscal year limitation for the following law enforcement purposes — ( a ) the payment , at the discretion of the attorney general , of any expenses necessary to seize , detain , inventory , safeguard , maintain , advertise , sell , or dispose of property under seizure , detention , or forfeited pursuant to any law enforced or administered by the department of justice , or of any other necessary expense incident to the seizure , detention , forfeiture , or disposal of such property including — ( i ) payments for — ( i ) contract services ; ( ii ) the employment of outside contractors to operate and manage properties or provide other specialized services necessary to dispose of such properties in an effort to maximize the return from such properties ; and ( iii ) reimbursement of any federal , state , or local agency for any expenditures made to perform the functions described in this clause ; ( ii ) payments to reimburse any federal agency participating in the fund for investigative costs leading to seizures ; ( iii ) payments for contracting for the services of experts and consultants needed by the department of justice to assist in carrying out duties related to asset seizure and forfeiture ; and ( iv ) payments made pursuant to guidelines promulgated by the attorney general if such payments are necessary and directly related to seizure and forfeiture program expenses for — ( i ) the purchase or lease of automatic data processing systems ( not less than a majority of which use will be related to such program ) ; ( ii ) training ; ( iii ) printing ; ( iv ) the storage , protection , and destruction of controlled substances ; and ( v ) contracting for services directly related to the identification of forfeitable assets , and the processing of and accounting for forfeitures ; ( b ) the payment of awards for information or assistance directly relating to violations of the criminal drug laws of the united states or of sections 1956 and 1957 of title 18 , sections 5313 and 5324 of title 31 , and section 6050i of the internal revenue code of 1986 ; ( c ) at the discretion of the attorney general , the payment of awards for information or assistance leading to a civil or criminal forfeiture involving any federal agency participating in the fund ; ( d ) the compromise and payment of valid liens and mortgages against property that has been forfeited pursuant to any law enforced or administered by the department of justice , subject to the discretion of the attorney general to determine the validity of any such lien or mortgage and the amount of payment to be made , and the employment of attorneys and other personnel skilled in state real estate law as necessary ; ( e ) ( i ) for disbursements authorized in connection with remission or mitigation procedures relating to property forfeited under any law enforced or administered by the department of justice ; and ( ii ) for payment for — ( i ) costs incurred by or on behalf of the department of justice in connection with the removal , for purposes of federal forfeiture and disposition , of any hazardous substance or pollutant or contaminant associated with the illegal manufacture of amphetamine or methamphetamine ; and ( ii ) costs incurred by or on behalf of a state or local government in connection with such removal in any case in which such state or local government has assisted in a federal prosecution relating to amphetamine or methamphetamine , to the extent such costs exceed equitable sharing payments made to such state or local government in such case ; ( f ) ( i ) for equipping for law enforcement functions of any government - owned or leased vessel , vehicle , or aircraft available for official use by any federal agency participating in the fund ; ( ii ) for equipping any vessel , vehicle , or aircraft available for official use by a state or local law enforcement agency to enable the vessel , vehicle , or aircraft to assist law enforcement functions if the vessel , vehicle , or aircraft will be used in a joint law enforcement operation with a federal agency participating in the fund ; and ( iii ) payments for other equipment directly related to seizure or forfeiture , including laboratory equipment , protective equipment , communications equipment , and the operation and maintenance costs of such equipment ; ( g ) for purchase of evidence of any violation of the controlled substances act , the controlled substances import and export act , chapter 96 of title 18 , or sections 1956 and 1957 of title 18 ; ( h ) the payment of state and local property taxes on forfeited real property that accrued between the date of the violation giving rise to the forfeiture and the date of the forfeiture order ; and ( i ) payment of overtime salaries , travel , fuel , training , equipment , and other similar costs of state or local law enforcement officers that are incurred in a joint law enforcement operation with a federal law enforcement agency participating in the fund .

amounts for paying the expenses authorized by subparagraphs ( b ) , ( f ) , and ( g ) shall be specified in appropriations acts and may be used under authorities available to the organization receiving the funds .

amounts for other authorized expenditures and payments from the fund , including equitable sharing payments , are not required to be specified in appropriations acts .

the attorney general may exempt the procurement of contract services under subparagraph ( a ) under the fund from division c ( except sections 3302 , 3501 ( b ) , 3509 , 3906 , 4710 , and 4711 ) of subtitle i of title 41 , section 6101 ( b ) to ( d ) of title 41 , and other provisions of law as may be necessary to maintain the security and confidentiality of related criminal investigations .

 ( 2 ) any award paid from the fund , as provided in paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) or ( c ) , shall be paid at the discretion of the attorney general or his delegate , under existing departmental delegation policies for the payment of awards , except that the authority to pay an award of $250,000 or more shall not be delegated to any person other than the deputy attorney general , the associate attorney general , the director of the federal bureau of investigation , or the administrator of the drug enforcement administration .

any award pursuant to paragraph ( 1 ) ( b ) shall not exceed $500,000 .

any award pursuant to paragraph ( 1 ) ( c ) shall not exceed the lesser of $500,000 or one - fourth of the amount realized by the united states from the property forfeited , without both the personal approval of the attorney general and written notice within 30 days thereof to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the committees on appropriations and the judiciary of the senate and of the house of representatives .

 ( 3 ) any amount under subparagraph ( g ) of paragraph ( 1 ) shall be paid at the discretion of the attorney general or his delegate , except that the authority to pay $100,000 or more may be delegated only to the respective head of the agency involved .

 ( 4 ) there shall be deposited in the fund — ( a ) all amounts from the forfeiture of property under any law enforced or administered by the department of justice , except all proceeds of forfeitures available for use by the secretary of the treasury or the secretary of the interior pursuant to section 11 ( d ) of the endangered species act ( 16 u.s.c .

1540 ( d ) ) or section 6 ( d ) of the lacey act amendments of 1981 ( 16 u.s.c .

3375 ( d ) ) , or the postmaster general of the united states pursuant to 39 u.s.c .

2003 ( b ) ( 7 ) ; ( b ) all amounts representing the federal equitable share from the forfeiture of property under any federal , state , local or foreign law , for any federal agency participating in the fund ; ( c ) all amounts transferred by the secretary of the treasury pursuant to section 9703 ( g ) ( 4 ) ( a ) ( ii ) of title 31 ; and ( d ) all amounts collected — ( i ) by the united states pursuant to a reimbursement order under paragraph ( 2 ) of section 413 ( q ) of the controlled substances act ( 21 u.s.c .

853 ( q ) ) ; and ( ii ) pursuant to a restitution order under paragraph ( 1 ) or ( 3 ) of section 413 ( q ) of the controlled substances act [21 u.s.c .

853 ( q ) ] for injuries to the united states .

 ( 5 ) amounts in the fund , and in any holding accounts associated with the fund , that are not currently needed for the purpose of this section shall be kept on deposit or invested in obligations of , or guaranteed by , the united states and all earnings on such investments shall be deposited in the fund .

 ( 6 ) ( a ) the attorney general shall transmit to congress and make available to the public , not later than 4 months after the end of each fiscal year , detailed reports for the prior fiscal year as follows: ( i ) a report on total deposits to the fund by state of deposit .

 ( ii ) a report on total expenses paid from the fund , by category of expense and recipient agency , including equitable sharing payments .

 ( iii ) a report describing the number , value , and types of properties placed into official use by federal agencies , by recipient agency .

 ( iv ) a report describing the number , value , and types of properties transferred to state and local law enforcement agencies , by recipient agency .

 ( v ) a report , by type of disposition , describing the number , value , and types of forfeited property disposed of during the year .

 ( vi ) a report on the year - end inventory of property under seizure , but not yet forfeited , that reflects the type of property , its estimated value , and the estimated value of liens and mortgages outstanding on the property .

 ( vii ) a report listing each property in the year - end inventory , not yet forfeited , with an outstanding equity of not less than $1,000,000 .

 ( b ) the attorney general shall transmit to congress and make available to the public , not later than 2 months after final issuance , the audited financial statements for each fiscal year for the fund .

 ( c ) reports under subparagraph ( a ) shall include information with respect to all forfeitures under any law enforced or administered by the department of justice .

 ( d ) the transmittal and publication requirements in subparagraphs ( a ) and ( b ) may be satisfied by — ( i ) posting the reports on an internet website maintained by the department of justice for a period of not less than 2 years ; and ( ii ) notifying the committees on the judiciary of the house of representatives and the senate when the reports are available electronically .

 ( 7 ) the provisions of this subsection relating to deposits in the fund shall apply to all property in the custody of the department of justice on or after the effective date of the comprehensive forfeiture act of 1983 .

 ( 8 ) ( a ) there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as necessary for the purposes described in subparagraphs ( b ) , ( f ) , and ( g ) of paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( b ) subject to subparagraphs ( c ) and ( d ) , at the end of each of fiscal years 1994 , 1995 , and 1996 , the attorney general shall transfer from the fund not more than $100,000,000 to the special forfeiture fund established by section 6073 of the anti - drug abuse act of 1988 .

 ( c ) transfers under subparagraph ( b ) may be made only from the excess unobligated balance and may not exceed one - half of the excess unobligated balance for any year .

in addition , transfers under subparagraph ( b ) may be made only to the extent that the sum of the transfers in a fiscal year and one - half of the unobligated balance at the beginning of that fiscal year for the special forfeiture fund does not exceed $100,000,000 .

 ( d ) for the purpose of determining amounts available for distribution at year end for any fiscal year , "excess unobligated balance" means the unobligated balance of the fund generated by that fiscal year's operations , less any amounts that are required to be retained in the fund to ensure the availability of amounts in the subsequent fiscal year for purposes authorized under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( e ) subject to the notification procedures contained in section 605 of p.l .

103-121 , and after satisfying the transfer requirement in subparagraph ( b ) of this paragraph , any excess unobligated balance remaining in the fund on september 30 , 1997 and thereafter shall be available to the attorney general , without fiscal year limitation , for any federal law enforcement , litigative / prosecutive , and correctional activities , or any other authorized purpose of the department of justice .

any amounts provided pursuant to this subparagraph may be used under authorities available to the organization receiving the funds .

 ( 9 ) ( a ) following the completion of procedures for the forfeiture of property pursuant to any law enforced or administered by the department , the attorney general is authorized , in her discretion , to warrant clear title to any subsequent purchaser or transferee of such property .

 ( b ) for fiscal years 2002 and 2003 , the attorney general is authorized to transfer , under such terms and conditions as the attorney general shall specify , real or personal property of limited or marginal value , to a state or local government agency , or its designated contractor or transferee , for use to support drug abuse treatment , drug and crime prevention and education , housing , job skills , and other community - based public health and safety programs .

each such transfer shall be subject to satisfaction by the recipient involved of any outstanding lien against the property transferred , but no such transfer shall create or confer any private right of action in any person against the united states .

 ( 10 ) the attorney general shall transfer from the fund to the secretary of the treasury for deposit in the department of the treasury forfeiture fund amounts appropriate to reflect the degree of participation of the department of the treasury law enforcement organizations ( described in section 9703 ( p ) of title 31 ) in the law enforcement effort resulting in the forfeiture pursuant to laws enforced or administered by the department of justice .

 ( 11 ) for purposes of this subsection and notwithstanding section 9703 of title 31 or any other law , property is forfeited pursuant to a law enforced or administered by the department of justice if it is forfeited pursuant to — ( a ) a judicial forfeiture proceeding when the underlying seizure was made by an officer of a federal law enforcement agency participating in the department of justice assets forfeiture fund or the property was maintained by the united states marshals service ; or ( b ) a civil administrative forfeiture proceeding conducted by a department of justice law enforcement component or pursuant to the authority of the secretary of commerce .

[ ( 12 ) redesignated ( 11 ) .

 ( a ) whenever a civil fine , penalty or pecuniary forfeiture is prescribed for the violation of an act of congress without specifying the mode of recovery or enforcement thereof , it may be recovered in a civil action .

 ( b ) unless otherwise provided by act of congress , whenever a forfeiture of property is prescribed as a penalty for violation of an act of congress and the seizure takes place on the high seas or on navigable waters within the admiralty and maritime jurisdiction of the united states , such forfeiture may be enforced by libel in admiralty but in cases of seizures on land the forfeiture may be enforced by a proceeding by libel which shall conform as near as may be to proceedings in admiralty .

 ( c ) if a person is charged in a criminal case with a violation of an act of congress for which the civil or criminal forfeiture of property is authorized , the government may include notice of the forfeiture in the indictment or information pursuant to the federal rules of criminal procedure .

if the defendant is convicted of the offense giving rise to the forfeiture , the court shall order the forfeiture of the property as part of the sentence in the criminal case pursuant to the federal rules of criminal procedure and section 3554 of title 18 , united states code .

the procedures in section 413 of the controlled substances act ( 21 u.s.c .

853 ) apply to all stages of a criminal forfeiture proceeding , except that subsection ( d ) of such section applies only in cases in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of such act .

 ( a ) upon the entry of a judgment for the claimant in any proceeding to condemn or forfeit property seized or arrested under any provision of federal law — ( 1 ) such property shall be returned forthwith to the claimant or his agent ; and ( 2 ) if it appears that there was reasonable cause for the seizure or arrest , the court shall cause a proper certificate thereof to be entered and , in such case , neither the person who made the seizure or arrest nor the prosecutor shall be liable to suit or judgment on account of such suit or prosecution , nor shall the claimant be entitled to costs , except as provided in subsection ( b ) .

 ( b ) ( 1 ) except as provided in paragraph ( 2 ) , in any civil proceeding to forfeit property under any provision of federal law in which the claimant substantially prevails , the united states shall be liable for — ( a ) reasonable attorney fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred by the claimant ; ( b ) post - judgment interest , as set forth in section 1961 of this title ; and ( c ) in cases involving currency , other negotiable instruments , or the proceeds of an interlocutory sale — ( i ) interest actually paid to the united states from the date of seizure or arrest of the property that resulted from the investment of the property in an interest - bearing account or instrument ; and ( ii ) an imputed amount of interest that such currency , instruments , or proceeds would have earned at the rate applicable to the 30-day treasury bill , for any period during which no interest was paid ( not including any period when the property reasonably was in use as evidence in an official proceeding or in conducting scientific tests for the purpose of collecting evidence ) , commencing 15 days after the property was seized by a federal law enforcement agency , or was turned over to a federal law enforcement agency by a state or local law enforcement agency .

 ( 2 ) ( a ) the united states shall not be required to disgorge the value of any intangible benefits nor make any other payments to the claimant not specifically authorized by this subsection .

 ( b ) the provisions of paragraph ( 1 ) shall not apply if the claimant is convicted of a crime for which the interest of the claimant in the property was subject to forfeiture under a federal criminal forfeiture law .

 ( c ) if there are multiple claims to the same property , the united states shall not be liable for costs and attorneys fees associated with any such claim if the united states — ( i ) promptly recognizes such claim ; ( ii ) promptly returns the interest of the claimant in the property to the claimant , if the property can be divided without difficulty and there are no competing claims to that portion of the property ; ( iii ) does not cause the claimant to incur additional , reasonable costs or fees ; and ( iv ) prevails in obtaining forfeiture with respect to one or more of the other claims .

 ( d ) if the court enters judgment in part for the claimant and in part for the government , the court shall reduce the award of costs and attorney fees accordingly .

 ( a ) in general . — there is established in the treasury of the united states a fund to be known as the "department of the treasury forfeiture fund" ( referred to in this section as the "fund" ) .

the fund shall be available to the secretary , without fiscal year limitation , with respect to seizures and forfeitures made pursuant to any law ( other than section 7301 or 7302 of the internal revenue code of 1986 ) enforced or administered by the department of the treasury or the united states coast guard for the following law enforcement purposes: ( 1 ) ( a ) payment of all proper expenses of seizure ( including investigative costs incurred by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization leading to seizure ) or the proceedings of forfeiture and sale , including the expenses of detention , inventory , security , maintenance , advertisement , or disposal of the property , and if condemned by a court and a bond for such costs was not given , the costs as taxed by the court .

 ( b ) payment for — ( i ) contract services ; ( ii ) the employment of outside contractors to operate and manage properties or to provide other specialized services necessary to dispose of such properties in an effort to maximize the return from such properties ; and ( iii ) reimbursing any federal , state , or local agency for any expenditures made to perform the functions described in this subparagraph .

 ( c ) awards of compensation to informers under section 619 of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

1619 ) .

 ( d ) satisfaction of — ( i ) liens for freight , charges , and contributions in general average , notice of which has been filed with the appropriate customs officer according to law ; and ( ii ) subject to the discretion of the secretary , other valid liens and mortgages against property that has been forfeited pursuant to any law enforced or administered by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization .

to determine the validity of any such lien or mortgage , the amount of payment to be made , and to carry out the functions described in this subparagraph , the secretary may employ and compensate attorneys and other personnel skilled in state real estate law .

 ( e ) payment of amounts authorized by law with respect to remission and mitigation .

 ( f ) payment of claims of parties in interest to property disposed of under section 612 ( b ) of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

1612 ( b ) ) , in the amounts applicable to such claims at the time of seizure .

 ( g ) equitable sharing payments made to other federal agencies , state and local law enforcement agencies , and foreign countries pursuant to section 616 ( c ) of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

1616a ( c ) ) , section 981 of title 18 , or subsection ( h ) of this section , and all costs related thereto .

 ( h ) payment for services of experts and consultants needed by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization to carry out the organization's duties relating to seizure and forfeiture .

 ( i ) payment of overtime salaries , travel , fuel , training , equipment , and other similar costs of state or local law enforcement officers that are incurred in joint law enforcement operations with a department of the treasury law enforcement organization ; ( j ) payment made pursuant to guidelines promulgated by the secretary , if such payment is necessary and directly related to seizure and forfeiture program expenses for — ( i ) the purchase or lease of automatic data processing systems ( not less than a majority of which use will be related to such program ) ; ( ii ) training ; ( iii ) printing ; and ( iv ) contracting for services directly related to — ( i ) the identification of forfeitable assets ; ( ii ) the processing of and accounting for forfeitures ; and ( iii ) the storage , maintenance , protection , and destruction of controlled substances .

 ( 2 ) at the discretion of the secretary — ( a ) payment of awards for information or assistance leading to a civil or criminal forfeiture involving any department of the treasury law enforcement organization participating in the fund ; ( b ) purchases of evidence or information by — ( i ) a department of the treasury law enforcement organization with respect to — ( i ) a violation of section 1956 or 1957 of title 18 ( relating to money laundering ) ; or ( ii ) a law , the violation of which may subject property to forfeiture under section 981 or 982 of title 18 ; ( ii ) the united states customs service with respect to drug smuggling or a violation of section 542 or 545 of title 18 ( relating to fraudulent customs invoices or smuggling ) ; ( iii ) the united states secret service with respect to a violation of — ( i ) section 1028 , 1029 , or 1030 or title 18 ; ( ii ) any law of the united states relating to coins , obligations , or securities of the united states or of a foreign government ; or ( iii ) any law of the united states which the united states secret service is authorized to enforce relating to fraud or other criminal or unlawful activity in or against any federally insured financial institution , the resolution trust corporation , or the federal deposit insurance corporation ; and ( iv ) the united states customs service or the internal revenue service with respect to a violation of chapter 53 of this title ( relating to the bank secrecy act ) .

 ( c ) payment of costs for publicizing awards available under section 619 of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

1619 ) ; ( d ) payment for equipment for any vessel , vehicle , or aircraft available for official use by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization to enable the vessel , vehicle , or aircraft to assist in law enforcement functions , and for other equipment directly related to seizure or forfeiture , including laboratory equipment , protective equipment , communications equipment , and the operation and maintenance costs of such equipment ; ( e ) the payment of claims against employees of the customs service settled by the secretary under section 630 of the tariff act of 1930 ; ( f ) payment for equipment for any vessel , vehicle , or aircraft available for official use by a state or local law enforcement agency to enable the vessel , vehicle , or aircraft to assist in law enforcement functions if the vessel , vehicle , or aircraft will be used in joint law enforcement operations with a department of the treasury law enforcement organization ; ( g ) reimbursement of private persons for expenses incurred by such persons in cooperating with a department of the treasury law enforcement organization in investigations and undercover law enforcement operations ; ( h ) payment for training foreign law enforcement personnel with respect to seizure or forfeiture activities of the department of the treasury ; and ( b ) limitations ( 1 ) any payment made under subparagraph ( d ) or ( e ) of subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) with respect to a seizure or a forfeiture of property shall not exceed the value of the property at the time of the seizure .

 ( 2 ) any payment made under subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ( g ) with respect to a seizure or forfeiture of property shall not exceed the value of the property at the time of disposition .

 ( 3 ) the secretary may exempt the procurement of contract services under the fund from division c ( except sections 3302 , 3501 ( b ) , 3509 , 3906 , 4710 , and 4711 ) of subtitle i of title 41 , section 6101 ( b ) to ( d ) of title 41 , and other provisions of law as may be necessary to maintain the security and confidentiality of related criminal investigations .

 ( 4 ) the secretary shall assure that any equitable sharing payment made to a state or local law enforcement agency pursuant to subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ( g ) and any property transferred to a state or local law enforcement agency pursuant to subsection ( h ) — ( a ) has a value that bears a reasonable relationship to the degree of participation of the state or local agency in the law enforcement effort resulting in the forfeiture , taking into account the total value of all property forfeited and the total law enforcement effort with respect to the violation of law on which the forfeiture is based ; and ( b ) will serve to encourage further cooperation between the recipient state or local agency and federal law enforcement agencies .

 ( 5 ) amounts transferred by the attorney general pursuant to section 524 ( c ) ( 1 ) of title 28 , or by the postmaster general pursuant to section 2003 of title 39 , and deposited into the fund pursuant to subsection ( d ) , shall be available for federal law enforcement related purposes of the department of the treasury law enforcement organizations .

 ( c ) funds available to united states coast guard ( 1 ) the secretary shall make available to the united states coast guard , from funds appropriated under subsection ( g ) ( 2 ) in excess of $10,000,000 for a fiscal year , an amount equal to the net proceeds in the fund derived from seizures by the coast guard .

 ( 2 ) funds made available under this subsection may be used to — ( a ) pay for equipment for any vessel , vehicle , or aircraft available for official use by the united states coast guard to enable the vessel , vehicle , or aircraft to assist in law enforcement functions ; ( b ) pay for equipment for any vessel , vehicle , equipment , or aircraft available for official use by a state or local law enforcement agency to enable the vessel , vehicle , or aircraft to assist in law enforcement functions if the vessel , vehicle , or aircraft will be used in joint law enforcement operations with the united states coast guard ; ( c ) pay for overtime salaries , travel , fuel , training , equipment , and other similar costs of state and local law enforcement officers that are incurred in joint law enforcement operations with the united states coast guard ; ( d ) pay for expenses incurred in bringing vessels into compliance with applicable environmental laws prior to disposal by sinking .

 ( d ) deposits and credits ( 1 ) with respect to fiscal year 1993 , there shall be deposited into or credited to the fund — ( a ) all currency forfeited during fiscal year 1993 , and all proceeds from forfeitures during fiscal year 1993 , under any law enforced or administered by the united states customs service or the united states coast guard ; ( b ) all income from investments made under subsection ( e ) ; and ( c ) all amounts representing the equitable share of the united states customs service or the united states coast guard from the forfeiture of property under any federal , state , local , or foreign law .

 ( 2 ) with respect to fiscal years beginning after fiscal year 1993 , there shall be deposited into or credited to the fund — ( a ) all currency forfeited after fiscal year 1993 , and all proceeds from forfeitures after fiscal year 1993 , under any law ( other than sections 7301 and 7302 of the internal revenue code of 1986 ) enforced or administered by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization or the united states coast guard ; ( b ) all income from investments made under subsection ( e ) ; and ( c ) all amounts representing the equitable share of a department of the treasury law enforcement organization or the united states coast guard from the forfeiture of property under any federal , state , local , or foreign law .

 ( e ) investments . — amounts in the fund , and in any holding accounts associated with the fund , which are not currently needed for the purposes of this section may be kept on deposit or invested in obligations of , or guaranteed by , the united states and all earnings on such investments shall be deposited in the fund .

 ( f ) reports to congress . — the secretary shall transmit to the congress , not later than february 1 of each year — ( 1 ) a report on — ( a ) the estimated total value of property forfeited with respect to which funds were not deposited in the fund during the preceding fiscal year — ( i ) under any law enforced or administered by the united states customs service or the united states coast guard , in the case of fiscal year 1993 ; and ( ii ) under any law enforced or administered by the department of the treasury law enforcement organizations or the united states coast guard , in the case of fiscal years beginning after 1993 ; and ( b ) the estimated total value of all such property transferred to any state or local law enforcement agency ; and ( 2 ) a report on — ( a ) the balance of the fund at the beginning of the preceding fiscal year ; ( b ) liens and mortgages paid and the amount of money shared with federal , state , local , and foreign law enforcement agencies during the preceding fiscal year ; ( c ) the net amount realized from the operations of the fund during the preceding fiscal year , the amount of seized cash being held as evidence , and the amount of money that has been carried over into the current fiscal year ; ( d ) any defendant's property , not forfeited at the end of the preceding fiscal year , if the equity in such property is valued at $1,000,000 or more ; ( e ) the total dollar value of uncontested seizures of monetary instruments having a value of over $100,000 which , or the proceeds of which , have not been deposited into the fund pursuant to subsection ( d ) within 120 days after seizure , as of the end of the preceding fiscal year ; ( f ) the balance of the fund at the end of the preceding fiscal year ; ( g ) the net amount , if any , of the excess unobligated amounts remaining in the fund at the end of the preceding fiscal year and available to the secretary for federal law enforcement related purposes ; ( h ) a complete set of audited financial statements ( including a balance sheet , income statement , and cash flow analysis ) prepared in a manner consistent with the requirements of the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-576 ) ; and ( i ) an analysis of income and expenses showing the revenue received or lost — ( i ) by property category ( such as general property , vehicles , vessels , aircraft , cash , and real property ) ; and ( ii ) by type of disposition ( such as sale , remission , cancellation , placement into official use , sharing with state and local agencies , and destruction ) .

the fund shall be subject to annual financial audits as authorized in the chief financial officers act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-576 ) .

 ( g ) appropriations ( 1 ) there are hereby appropriated from the fund such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes described in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) .

 ( 2 ) there are authorized to be appropriated from the fund to carry out the purposes set forth in subsections ( a ) ( 2 ) and ( c ) not to exceed — ( a ) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 ; and ( b ) $50,000,000 for each fiscal year after fiscal year 1993 .

 ( 3 ) ( a ) subject to subparagraphs ( b ) and ( c ) , at the end of each of fiscal years 1994 , 1995 , 1996 , and 1997 , the secretary shall transfer from the fund not more than $100,000,000 to the special forfeiture fund established by section 6073 of the anti - drug abuse act of 1988 .

 ( b ) transfers pursuant to subparagraph ( a ) shall be made only from excess unobligated amounts and only to the extent that , as determined by the secretary , such transfers will not impair the future availability of amounts for the purposes described in subsection ( a ) .

further , transfers under subparagraph ( a ) may not exceed one - half of the excess unobligated balance for a year .

in addition , transfers under subparagraph ( a ) may be made only to the extent that the sum of the transfers in a fiscal year and one - half of the unobligated balance at the beginning of that fiscal year for the special forfeiture fund does not exceed $100,000,000 .

 ( c ) the secretary of the treasury shall reserve an amount not to exceed $30,000,000 from the unobligated balances remaining in the customs forfeiture fund on september 30 , 1992 , and such amount shall be transferred to the fund on october 1 , 1992 , or , if later , the date that is 15 days after the date of the enactment of this section .

such amount shall be available for any expenses or activities authorized under this section .

at the end of fiscal year 1993 , 1994 , 1995 , and 1996 , the secretary shall reserve in the fund an amount not to exceed $50,000,000 of the unobligated balances in the fund , or , if the secretary determines that a greater amount is necessary for asset specific expenses , an amount equal to not more than 10 percent of the total obligations from the fund in the preceding fiscal year .

at the end of fiscal year 1997 , and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter , the secretary shall reserve any amounts that are required to be retained in the fund to ensure the availability of amounts in the subsequent fiscal year for purposes authorized under subsection ( a ) .

unobligated balances remaining pursuant to section 4 ( b ) of 9703 ( g ) shall also be carried forward .

 ( 4 ) ( a ) after reserving any amount authorized by paragraph ( 3 ) ( c ) , any unobligated balances remaining in the fund on september 30 , 1993 , shall be deposited into the general fund of the treasury of the united states .

 ( b ) after reserving any amount authorized by paragraph ( 3 ) ( c ) and after transferring any amount authorized by paragraph ( 3 ) ( a ) , any unobligated balances remaining in the fund on september 30 , 1994 , and on september 30 of each fiscal year thereafter , shall be available to the secretary , without fiscal year limitation , for transfers pursuant to subparagraph ( a ) ( ii ) and for obligation or expenditure in connection with the law enforcement activities of any federal agency or of a department of the treasury law enforcement organization .

 ( c ) any obligation or expenditure in excess of $500,000 with respect to an unobligated balance described in subparagraph ( b ) may not be made by the secretary unless the appropriations committees of both houses of congress are notified at least 15 days in advance of such obligation or expenditure .

 ( h ) retention or transfer of property . — ( 1 ) the secretary may , with respect to any property forfeited under any law ( other than section 7301 or 7302 of the internal revenue code of 1986 ) enforced or administered by the department of the treasury — ( a ) retain any of the property for official use ; or ( b ) transfer any of the property to — ( i ) any other federal agency ; or ( ii ) any state or local law enforcement agency that participated directly or indirectly in the seizure or forfeiture of the property .

 ( 2 ) the secretary may transfer any forfeited personal property or the proceeds of the sale of any forfeited personal or real property to any foreign country which participated directly or indirectly in the seizure of forfeiture of the property , if such a transfer — ( a ) is one with which the secretary of state has agreed ; ( b ) is authorized in an international agreement between the united states and the foreign country ; and ( c ) is made to a country which , if applicable , has been certified under section 481 ( h ) of the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( 22 u.s.c .

2291 ( h ) ) .

 ( 3 ) nothing in this section shall affect the authority of the secretary under section 981 of title 18 or section 616 of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

1616a ) .

 ( i ) regulations . — the secretary may prescribe such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out this section .

 ( j ) customs forfeiture fund . — notwithstanding any other provision of law — ( 1 ) during any period when forfeited currency and proceeds from forfeitures under any law ( other than section 7301 or 7302 of the internal revenue code of 1986 ) enforced or administered by the department of the treasury or the united states coast guard , are required to be deposited in the fund pursuant to this section — ( a ) all moneys required to be deposited in the customs forfeiture fund pursuant to section 613a of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

1613b ) shall instead be deposited in the fund ; and ( b ) no deposits or withdrawals may be made to or from the customs forfeiture fund pursuant to section 613a of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

1613b ) ; and ( 2 ) any funds in the customs forfeiture fund and any obligations of the customs forfeiture fund on the effective date of the treasury forfeiture act of 1992 , shall be transferred to the fund and all administrative costs of such transfer shall be paid for out of the fund .

 ( k ) limitation of liability .

 — the united states shall not be liable in any action relating to property transferred under this section or under section 616 of the tariff act of 1930 ( 19 u.s.c .

1616a ) if such action is based on an act or omission occurring after the transfer .

 ( l ) authority to warrant title . — following the completion of procedures for the forfeiture of property pursuant to any law enforced or administered by the department of the treasury , the secretary is authorized , at the secretary's discretion , to warrant clear title to any subsequent purchaser or transferee of such forfeited property .

 ( m ) forfeited property .

 — for purposes of this section and notwithstanding section 524 ( c ) ( 11 ) of title 28 or any other law — ( 1 ) during fiscal year 1993 , property and currency shall be deemed to be forfeited pursuant to a law enforced or administered by the united states customs service if it is forfeited pursuant to — ( a ) a judicial forfeiture proceeding when the underlying seizure was made by an officer of the united states customs service or the property was maintained by the united states customs service ; or ( b ) a civil administrative forfeiture proceeding conducted by the united states customs service ; and ( 2 ) after fiscal year 1993 , property and currency shall be deemed to be forfeited pursuant to a law enforced or administered by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization if it is forfeited pursuant to — ( a ) a judicial forfeiture proceeding when the underlying seizure was made by an officer of a department of the treasury law enforcement organization or the property was maintained by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization ; or ( b ) a civil administrative forfeiture proceeding conducted by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization .

 ( n ) transfers to attorney general and postmaster general ( 1 ) the secretary shall transfer from the fund to the attorney general for deposit in the department of justice assets forfeiture fund amounts appropriate to reflect the degree of participation of participating federal agencies in the law enforcement effort resulting in the forfeiture pursuant to laws enforced or administered by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization .

for purposes of the preceding sentence , a "participating federal agency" is an agency that participates in the department of justice assets forfeiture fund .

 ( 2 ) the secretary shall transfer from the fund to the postmaster general for deposit in the postal service fund amounts appropriate to reflect the degree of participation of the united states postal service in the law enforcement effort resulting in the forfeiture pursuant to laws enforced or administered by a department of the treasury law enforcement organization .

 ( o ) definitions .

 — for purposes of this section — ( 1 ) department of the treasury law enforcement organization. — the term "department of the treasury law enforcement organization" means the united states customs service , the united states secret service , the tax and trade bureau , the internal revenue service , the federal law enforcement training center , the financial crimes enforcement network , and any other law enforcement component of the department of the treasury so designated by the secretary .

 ( 2 ) secretary. — the term "secretary" means the secretary of the treasury .

 ( a ) establishment there is created in the treasury a separate account to be known as the crime victims fund ( hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the "fund" ) .

 ( b ) fines deposited in fund ; penalties ; forfeited appearance bonds except as limited by subsection ( c ) of this section , there shall be deposited in the fund — ( 1 ) all fines that are collected from persons convicted of offenses against the united states except — ( a ) fines available for use by the secretary of the treasury pursuant to — ( i ) section 11 ( d ) of the endangered species act ( 16 u.s.c .

1540 ( d ) ) ; and ( ii ) section 6 ( d ) of the lacey act amendments of 1981 ( 16 u.s.c .

3375 ( d ) ) ; and ( b ) fines to be paid into — ( i ) the railroad unemployment insurance account pursuant to the railroad unemployment insurance act ( 45 u.s.c .

351 et seq .

 ) ; ( ii ) the postal service fund pursuant to sections 2601 ( a ) ( 2 ) and 2003 of title 39 and for the purposes set forth in section 404 ( a ) ( 7 ) of title 39 ; ( iii ) the navigable waters revolving fund pursuant to section 311 of the federal water pollution control act ( 33 u.s.c .

1321 ) ; and ( iv ) county public school funds pursuant to section 3613 of title 18 ; ( 2 ) penalty assessments collected under section 3013 of title 18 ; ( 3 ) the proceeds of forfeited appearance bonds , bail bonds , and collateral collected under section 3146 of title 18 ; ( 4 ) any money ordered to be paid into the fund under section 3671 ( c ) ( 2 ) of title 18 ; and ( 5 ) any gifts , bequests , or donations to the fund from private entities or individuals , which the director is hereby authorized to accept for deposit into the fund , except that the director is not hereby authorized to accept any such gift , bequest , or donation that — ( a ) attaches conditions inconsistent with applicable laws or regulations ; or ( b ) is conditioned upon or would require the expenditure of appropriated funds that are not available to the office for victims of crime .

 ( c ) retention of sums in fund ; availability for expenditure without fiscal year limitation sums deposited in the fund shall remain in the fund and be available for expenditure under this chapter for grants under this chapter without fiscal year limitation .

notwithstanding subsection ( d ) ( 5 ) , all sums deposited in the fund in any fiscal year that are not made available for obligation by congress in the subsequent fiscal year shall remain in the fund for obligation in future fiscal years , without fiscal year limitation .

 ( d ) availability for judicial branch administrative costs ; grant program percentages the fund shall be available as follows: ( 1 ) repealed .

p.l .

105-119 , title i , §109 ( a ) ( 1 ) , nov. 26 , 1997 , 111 stat .

2457 ( 2 ) ( a ) except as provided in subparagraph ( b ) , the first $10,000,000 deposited in the fund shall be available for grants under section 10603a of this title .

 ( b ) ( i ) for any fiscal year for which the amount deposited in the fund is greater than the amount deposited in the fund for fiscal year 1998 , the $10,000,000 referred to in subparagraph ( a ) plus an amount equal to 50 percent of the increase in the amount from fiscal year 1998 shall be available for grants under section 10603a of this title .

 ( ii ) amounts available under this subparagraph for any fiscal year shall not exceed $20,000,000 .

 ( 3 ) of the sums remaining in the fund in any particular fiscal year after compliance with paragraph ( 2 ) , such sums as may be necessary shall be available for the united states attorneys offices and the federal bureau of investigation to improve services for the benefit of crime victims in the federal criminal justice system , and for a victim notification system .

 ( 4 ) of the remaining amount to be distributed from the fund in a particular fiscal year — ( a ) 47.5 percent shall be available for grants under section 10602 of this title ; ( b ) 47.5 percent shall be available for grants under section 10603 ( a ) of this title ; and ( c ) 5 percent shall be available for grants under section 10603 ( c ) of this title .

 ( 5 ) ( a ) in addition to the amounts distributed under paragraphs ( 2 ) , ( 3 ) , and ( 4 ) , the director may set aside up to $50,000,000 from the amounts transferred to the fund in response to the airplane hijackings and terrorist acts that occurred on september 11 , 2001 , as an antiterrorism emergency reserve .

the director may replenish any amounts obligated from such reserve in subsequent fiscal years by setting aside up to 5 percent of the amounts remaining in the fund in any fiscal year after distributing amounts under paragraphs ( 2 ) , ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) .

such reserve shall not exceed $50,000,000 .

 ( b ) the antiterrorism emergency reserve referred to in subparagraph ( a ) may be used for supplemental grants under section 10603b of this title and to provide compensation to victims of international terrorism under section 10603c of this title .

 ( c ) amounts in the antiterrorism emergency reserve established pursuant to subparagraph ( a ) may be carried over from fiscal year to fiscal year .

notwithstanding subsection ( c ) and section 619 of the departments of commerce , justice , and state , the judiciary , and related agencies appropriations act , 2001 ( and any similar limitation on fund obligations in any future act , unless the same should expressly refer to this section ) , any such amounts carried over shall not be subject to any limitation on obligations from amounts deposited to or available in the fund .

 ( e ) amounts awarded and unspent any amount awarded as part of a grant under this chapter that remains unspent at the end of a fiscal year in which the grant is made may be expended for the purpose for which the grant is made at any time during the 3 succeeding fiscal years , at the end of which period , any remaining unobligated sums shall be available for deposit into the emergency reserve fund referred to in subsection ( d ) ( 5 ) at the discretion of the director .

any remaining unobligated sums shall be returned to the fund .

 ( f ) "offenses against the united states" as excluding as used in this section , the term "offenses against the united states" does not include — ( 1 ) a criminal violation of the uniform code of military justice ( 10 u.s.c .

801 et seq .

 ) ; ( 2 ) an offense against the laws of the district of columbia ; and ( 3 ) an offense triable by an indian tribal court or court of indian offenses .

 ( g ) grants for indian tribes ; child abuse cases ( 1 ) the attorney general shall use 15 percent of the funds available under subsection ( d ) ( 2 ) of this section to make grants for the purpose of assisting native american indian tribes in developing , establishing , and operating programs designed to improve — ( a ) the handling of child abuse cases , particularly cases of child sexual abuse , in a manner which limits additional trauma to the child victim ; and ( b ) the investigation and prosecution of cases of child abuse , particularly child sexual abuse .

 ( 2 ) the attorney general may use 5 percent of the funds available under subsection ( d ) ( 2 ) of this section ( prior to distribution ) for grants to indian tribes to establish child victim assistance programs , as appropriate .

 ( 3 ) as used in this subsection , the term "tribe" has the meaning given that term in section 450b ( b ) of title 25 .

7 u.s.c .

1595 violation of the federal seed act ( seed ) 7 u.s.c .

2024 food stamp act felonies ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 7 u.s.c .

2024 ( e ) misuse of food stamp coupons or authorization cards ( nonfood items , money , negotiable instruments , securities , things of value furnished in exchange of coupons ) 7 u.s.c .

2024 ( f ) food stamp act felonies ( property traceable to proceeds and property used to facilitate ) * 7 u.s.c .

2156 animal fighting violations ( animals ) 8 u.s.c .

1324 bringing in and harboring aliens for profit ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 8 u.s.c .

1324 ( b ) bringing in or harboring aliens ( conveyances ) 8 u.s.c .

1327 aiding or assisting aliens to enter the u.s. for profit ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 8 u.s.c .

1328 importing aliens for immoral purpose for profit ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 11 u.s.c .

1 et seq .

bankruptcy fraud ( except 11 u.s.c .

157 cases ) ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 15 u.s.c .

6 restraint of interstate or foreign trade ( property in transit and involved in restraint ) 15 u.s.c .

11 restraint of trade ( property in transit ) 15 u.s.c .

77 unauthorized departure of vessel detained in time of war in the interests of american neutrality ( vessel ) 15 u.s.c .

77q fraud in the sale of securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 15 u.s.c .

78dd - 2 foreign corrupt practices act felonies ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 15 u.s.c .

292 falsely stamped gold or silver ( gold , silver , gold goods , silver goods in transit ) 15 u.s.c .

715f hot oil ( illegally transported contraband oil ) 15 u.s.c .

1177 illegally transporting gambling devices ( gambling devices ) 15 u.s.c .

1195 making , moving or dealing in materials without complying with the flammable fabrics act ( material ) 15 u.s.c .

1265 federal hazardous substances act violations ( misbranded and banned substances ) 15 u.s.c .

2071 ( b ) consumer product safety violations ( prohibited products and those which fail to comply with an applicable consumer product safety rule ) 15 u.s.c .

2104 political or numismatic items violations ( imported products ) 16 u.s.c .

26 hunting or fishing in yellowstone national park ( guns , traps , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

65 hunting or fishing in sequoia or yosemite national parks ( guns , teams , horses , means of transportation , and traps ) 16 u.s.c .

99 hunting or fishing in mt .

rainier national park ( guns , traps , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

117d hunting or fishing in mesa verde national park ( guns , traps , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

128 hunting or fishing in crater lake national park ( guns , traps , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

171 hunting or fishing in glacier national park ( guns , traps , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

198d hunting or fishing in rocky mountain national park ( guns , traps , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

204d hunting or fishing in lassen volcanic national park ( guns , traps , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

256c hunting or fishing in olympic volcanic national park ( guns , bows , traps , nets , seines , fishing tackle , clothing , beasts of burden , machinery , logging equipment , motor vehicles , aircraft , boats or means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

395d hunting or fishing in hawaii national park ( guns , traps , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

403c - 4 hunting or fishing in the shenandoah national park ( guns , traps , nets , seines , teams , horses , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

403h - 4 hunting or fishing in great smoky mountains national park ( guns , traps , nets , seines , fishing tackle , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

404c - 4 hunting or fishing in mammoth cave national park ( guns , traps , nets , seines , fishing tackle , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

408l hunting or fishing in isle royale national park ( guns , traps , nets , seines , fishing tackle , beasts of burden , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

470gg ( b ) excavation of and dealing in archaeological resources ( archaeological resources , vehicles and equipment used ) 16 u.s.c .

470aaa - 7 unlawfully acquired paleontological resources ( paleontological resources ) 16 u.s.c .

668b bald and golden eagle protection violations ( products , guns , traps , nets , equipment , vessels , vehicles , aircraft , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

668dd endangered species violations ( species members ) 16 u.s.c .

670j hunting or fishing on wetlands ( guns , traps , nets , equipment , vessels , vehicles and other means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

690e hunting in bear river migratory bird refuge ( game ) 16 u.s.c .

707 migratory bird hunting violations ( guns , traps , nets , equipment , vessels , vehicles , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

727 hunting and fishing in upper mississippi river wild life and fish refuge ( fish , game , guns , fishing equipment , boats , other paraphernalia ) 16 u.s.c .

742j - 1 hunting or harassing game from a plane ( game , guns , plane , equipment ) 16 u.s.c .

773h northern pacific halibut act violations ( vessel , fishing gear , furniture , appurtenances , stores , cargo , fish of fishing boat ) 16 u.s.c .

916f whaling convention violations ( whales , whale products ) 16 u.s.c .

957 violations of the tuna conventions ( fish ) 16 u.s.c .

959 tuna convention violations ( fish ) 16 u.s.c .

971e atlantic tuna convention violations ( fish ) 16 u.s.c .

972f eastern pacific tuna convention violations ( fish ) 16 u.s.c .

1171 north pacific fur seal violations ( vessel , gear , furniture , appurtenances , stores , cargo , furs ) 16 u.s.c .

1376 marine mammal violations ( vessel's unlawful cargo ) 16 u.s.c .

1417 sell or transport tuna not taken in compliance with an international dolphin conservation program ( vessel , equipment and fish ) 16 u.s.c .

1437 marine sanctuary violations ( vessel , equipment , stores , cargo , item used in violation , sanctuary resources ) 16 u.s.c .

1540 endangered species violations ( species , guns , traps , nets , equipment , vessels , vehicles , aircraft , means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

1860 fishery conservation and management act violations ( fishing vessels , their gear , furniture , appurtenances , stores , cargo , and fish ) 16 u.s.c .

2409 antarctic conservation violations ( game , guns , traps , nets , equipment , vessels , vehicles , aircraft , other means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

2439 antarctic marine living resources convention violations ( guns , traps , nets , other equipment , vessels , their gear , furniture , appurtenances , stoves , and cargo , vessels , vehicles , aircraft , and other means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

3374 transporting fish , wildlife or plants contrary to law ( fish , wildlife , plants , vessels , vehicles , aircraft , and other means of transportation ) 16 u.s.c .

3606 north atlantic salmon violations ( vessels and fish ) 16 u.s.c .

3637 pacific salmon violations ( fish and vessels , their gear , furniture , appurtenances , stores , and cargo ) 16 u.s.c .

5010 north pacific anadromous fish violations ( fish and vessels including fishing gear , furniture , appurtenances , stores and cargo ) 16 u.s.c .

5106 atlantic coastal fisheries moratorium violations ( fish , vessels , gear , equipment , appurtenances , stores and cargo ) 16 u.s.c .

5305a rhinoceros and tiger conservation violations ( derivative products ) 16 u.s.c .

5154 violations of atlantic striped bass moratorium ( vessel , equipment , cargo , fish ) 16 u.s.c .

5158 violations relating to striped bass in the exclusive economic zone ( vessel , equipment , cargo , fish ) 16 u.s.c .

5509 high seas fish conservation offenses ( fish , vessels , gear , equipment , furniture , appurtenances , stores , and cargo ) 16 u.s.c .

5606 northwest atlantic fisheries convention offenses ( fishing vessels , their gear , furniture , appurtenances , stores , cargo , and fish ) 17 u.s.c .

506 copyright infringement ( copies , and copying implements , devices , and equipment ) 17 u.s.c .

603 importation of items infringing on copyright ( copies ) 17 u.s.c .

1328 infringement on copyrighted original design ( articles imported ) 18 u.s.c .

32 destruction of aircraft ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

37 violence at international airports ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

38 fraud involving aircraft or spacecraft parts ( proceeds and property used to facilitate offenses ) 18 u.s.c .

81 arson within u.s. special maritime and territorial jurisdiction ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

115 influencing , impeding , or retaliating against a federal official by threatening or injuring a family member ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

152 concealment of assets ; false oaths and claims ; bribery ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

175 biological weapons offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

175b unlawful possession of biological materials ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

175c unlawful possession of smallpox materials ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

176 biological weapons act violations ( biological agent , toxin and delivery system ) 18 u.s.c .

201 bribery of u.s. officials ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

215 commissions or gifts for procuring loans ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

224 sports bribery ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

229 chemical weapons offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

229b chemical weapons act offenses ( property used in , constituting the proceeds from , or facilitating offenses ) 18 u.s.c .

287 false claims involving health care benefits ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

351 congressional or cabinet officer assassination ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

371 conspiracy to defraud health care programs ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

471 counterfeiting obligations or securities of the united states ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

472 uttering counterfeit obligations or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

473 dealing in counterfeit obligations or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

474 possession of plates or stones for counterfeit obligations or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

476 taking impressions of tools used for obligations or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

477 sale or possession of impressions of tools used for obligations or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

478 counterfeiting foreign obligations or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

479 uttering counterfeit foreign obligations or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

480 possessing counterfeit foreign obligations or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

481 possession of plates or stones for counterfeit foreign obligations or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

485 counterfeiting u.s. coins ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

486 uttering counterfeit coins ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

487 possession of counterfeit dies for u.s. coins ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

488 possession of counterfeit dies for foreign coins ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

492 counterfeiting u.s. or foreign government coins , obligations or securities ( counterfeits , and any articles , devices , and things used to counterfeit ) 18 u.s.c .

500 counterfeiting u.s. postal money orders ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

501 counterfeiting u.s. postage stamps ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

502 counterfeiting foreign postage stamps ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

503 counterfeiting u.s. postmarking stamps ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

510 forging u.s. checks , bonds or securities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

511 altering motor vehicle identification numbers ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

512 removing or changing motor vehicle identifications numbers ( vehicle or part with altered or removed id .

number ) 18 u.s.c .

513 counterfeiting securities of states and private entities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

541 entry of falsely classified goods ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

542 entry of goods by means of false statements ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

544 relanding goods ( goods ) 18 u.s.c .

545 smuggling ( goods smuggled ) 18 u.s.c .

545 smuggling goods into the united states ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

548 removing or repacking goods stored in customs warehouses ( goods ) 18 u.s.c .

549 removing goods from customs custody ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

550 false claims for refund of duties ( merchandise ) 18 u.s.c .

553 importing / exporting stolen motor vehicles ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

554 smuggling goods from the united states ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

55 5 border tunnels ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

641 theft of public money , property , or records ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

656 theft , embezzlement , or misapplication by bank officer or employee ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

657 theft from lending , credit , and insurance institutions ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

658 property mortgaged or pledged to farm credit agencies ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

659 felonious theft from interstate shipments ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

664 pension fund embezzlement ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

666 theft or bribery concerning programs receiving federal funds ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

669 health care theft or embezzlement ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

6 70 theft of medical products ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

793 espionage ( property derived from payments from foreign sources ) 18 u.s.c .

793 espionage ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

794 serious espionage ( property derived from or used in commission of violation ) 18 u.s.c .

794 serious espionage ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

798 disclosure of classified information ( property derived from or used in violation ) * 18 u.s.c .

798 disclosure of classified information ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

831 transactions involving nuclear materials ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

832 participation in foreign terrorist production of weapons of mass destruction ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

842 explosives offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

844 explosives offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

844 explosives violations ( explosives ) 18 u.s.c .

875 threats in interstate communications ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

892 loansharking ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

893 financing a loansharking operation ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

894 collecting extortionate loans ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

922 ( l ) unlawfully importing firearms ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

924 ( d ) firearms violations ( guns and ammunition ) 18 u.s.c .

924 ( n ) gun running ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

930 ( c ) armed violence at federal facility ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

956 conspiracy to kill , kidnap , maim , or injure certain property in a foreign country ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

962 arming vessel against friendly nation ( vessel , its tackle , apparel , furniture , arms , materials , ammunition and stores ) 18 u.s.c .

963 departure of detained vessel in violation of neutrality ( vessel , its tackle , apparel , furniture , equipment and cargo ) 18 u.s.c .

964 delivery of armed vessel to belligerent ( vessel , its tackle , apparel , furniture , equipment and cargo ) 18 u.s.c .

965 departure without filing verification statements ( vessel , its tackle , apparel , furniture , equipment and cargo ) 18 u.s.c .

966 departure after filing falsified statements ( vessel , its tackle , apparel , furniture , equipment and cargo ) 18 u.s.c .

967 departure without clearance ( vessel , its tackle , apparel , furniture , equipment and cargo ) 18 u.s.c .

981 money laundering , civil forfeiture ( all property , real or personal , constituting , derived from , or traceable to a violation ) 18 u.s.c .

982 money laundering , criminal forfeiture ( all property , real or personal involved in or traceable to a violation ) 18 u.s.c .

984 fungible property involved in money laundering ( fungible property ) 18 u.s.c .

1001 false statements in a matter with the jurisdiction of a federal agency with respect to health care benefits ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1005 fraudulent bank entries ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1006 fraudulent federal credit institution entries ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1007 fraudulent federal deposit insurance transactions ) ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1014 fraudulent loan or credit applications ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1027 erisa fraud involving health care benefits ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1028 identification fraud ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1028 fraud with respect to identification documents ( property used ) 18 u.s.c .

1029 access device fraud ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1029 fraud with respect to access devices ( property used ) 18 u.s.c .

1030 computer fraud and abuse ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1031 major fraud against the u.s. involving the assets of a financial institution ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1032 concealment of assets from conservator , receiver , or liquidating agent of financial institution ) ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1035 false statements in health care matters ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1037 fraud relating to electronic mail ( property traceable to or used to facilitate the offense ) 18 u.s.c .

1082 gambling ships ( vessel , its tackle , apparel , and furniture ) 18 u.s.c .

1084 interstate transmission of gambling information ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1111 murder in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the united states ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1114 federal officers or employees ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1116 murder of foreign officials , official guests , or internationally protected persons ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1165 hunting , trapping or fishing on indian land ( game , pelts , and fish ) 18 u.s.c .

1201 kidnaping ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1203 hostage taking ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1341 mail fraud ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1343 wire fraud ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1344 bank fraud ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1347 health care fraud ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

13 5 1 fraud in foreign labor contracts ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1361 willful injury of government property ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1362 destruction of communications facilities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1363 destruction of property within u.s. special maritime and territorial jurisdiction ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

13 6 6 destruction of energy facilities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1425 procuring citizenship unlawfully ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1426 reproducing of citizenship papers ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1427 sale of citizenship papers ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1461 mailing obscene material ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1462 importing / exporting obscene material ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1463 mailing indecent material ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1464 broadcasting obscene language ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1465 transporting obscene material for sale ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1467 obscene material ( material , real and personal property derived from , traceable to , or used to commit a violation ) 18 u.s.c .

1503 obstruction of justice ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1510 obstructing criminal investigations ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1511 obstructing state law enforcement ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1512 tampering with federal witnesses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1513 retaliating against federal witnesses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1518 obstruction of health care crime investigations ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1542 false statement in a passport application ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1543 passport forgery ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1544 passport misuse ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1546 visa fraud ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1581 peonage ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1582 vessels in the slave trade ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1583 enticing another into slavery ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1584 selling another into slavery ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1585 slave trading ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1586 service on a slave ship ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1587 possession of slaves aboard ship ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1588 transportation of slaves to the united states ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1589 forced labor ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1590 trafficking relating to peonage , slavery , involuntary servitude or forced labor ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1591 sex trafficking in children ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1592 false statements relating to peonage ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1594 peonage , slavery , and forced labor violations ( property derived from or used to facilitate the offense ) 18 u.s.c .

1708 theft from the mail ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1751 presidential assassination ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1762 illicit transportation of prisoner - made goods ( goods ) 18 u.s.c .

1834 trade secret offenses ( proceeds and property used to facilitate offenses ) 18 u.s.c .

1951 robbery or violence affecting interstate commerce ( hobbs act ) ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1952 use of interstate commerce to facilitate unlawful activity ( travel act ) ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1953 interstate transportation of wagering paraphernalia ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1954 corruption of employee benefit plans ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1955 illegal gambling business ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1955 illegal gambling business ( any property including money used in violation ) 18 u.s.c .

1956 money laundering ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1957 unlawful monetary transactions ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1958 interstate murder for hire ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1960 unlawful money transmission business ( property involved or traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

1963 racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations ( rico ) ( property derived from and interest acquired and maintained in violation ) 18 u.s.c .

1992 terrorist attacks on mass transit ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2113 bank robbery ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2114 postal robbery and theft ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2119 carjacking ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2155 destruction of national defense material ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2156 product of defective national defense material ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2241 ( c ) , 2253 , 2254 aggravated sexual abuse ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

2242 , 2253 , 2254 sexual abuse ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

2243 , 2253 , 2254 sexual abuse of a minor or ward ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

224 4 , 2253 , 2254 abusive sexual contact ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

22 51 , 2253 , 2254 sexual exploitation of children ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

2251 sexual exploitation of children ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

22 51a , 2253 , 2254 selling children ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

2251a selling children ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

22 52 , 2253 , 2254 material involving sexual exploitation of children ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

2252 material involving sexual exploitation of children ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2252a , 2253 , 2254 activities relating to child pornography ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

2252b , 2253 , 2254 misleading internet domain names ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

22 60 , 2253 , 2254 production of sexual exploitative material for importation ( property traceable to proceeds or used to commit or promote ) 18 u.s.c .

2260 production of sexual exploitative material for importation ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2274 destruction or misuse of vessel by owner ( vessel , its tackle , apparel , furniture and equipment ) 18 u.s.c .

2280 violence against maritime navigation ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2281 violence against maritime fixed platforms ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2312 interstate transportation of stolen motor vehicles ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2313 receipt of a stolen motor vehicle transported interstate ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 1 8 u.s.c .

2314 interstate transportation of stolen property ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2315 receipt of a stolen property transported interstate ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2318 trafficking in counterfeit labels affixed or to be affixed to phonograph records , motion pictures or other audiovisual works ( counterfeit labels and articles to which they are affixed ) 18 u.s.c .

2318 same ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2319 copyright infringement ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2319a unauthorized commercial exploitation of sound recordings ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2319a same ( recordings and phonorecords ) 18 u.s.c .

2320 trafficking in counterfeit goods and services ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2321 chop shop offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2332 terrorist acts abroad against united states nationals ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2332a weapons of mass destruction ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2332b international terrorist acts transcending national boundaries ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2332f bombing public places and facilities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2332g anti - aircraft missile offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2332h radiological dispersal device offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2339 harboring terrorists ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2339a providing material support to terrorists ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2339b providing material support to terrorist organizations ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2339c financing terrorism ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2339d receipt of military training from a foreign terrorist organization ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2340a torture ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2342 trafficking in untaxed cigarettes ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2344 same ( cigarettes ) 18 u.s.c .

2421 interstate transportation for sexual purposes ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2422 coercing or enticing another to travel interstate for sexual purposes ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2423 interstate transportation of minors for sexual purposes ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2424 keeping a house of alien prostitution without registering with immigration officials ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 18 u.s.c .

2513 interception of wire , oral or electronic communications ( wiretapping and bugging devices ) 18 u.s.c .

3113 liquor violations in indian country ( unlawful liquor and the conveyances and packages in which it is found ) 18 u.s.c .

3665 interstate transportation of a stolen vehicle or commission of a violent federal crime while armed with a firearm ( firearms and ammunition ) 18 u.s.c .

3667 liquors involved in violations of 18 u.s.c .

1261-1265 relating to tax and transportation of liquor ( liquor and conveyances ) 18 u.s.c .

3669 using conveyances to unlawful transport liquor into indian country ( conveyances ) 18 u.s.c .

4012 prison contraband ( contraband ) 19 u.s.c .

467 unstamped imported distilled spirits ( spirits ) 19 u.s.c .

469 dealing in empty stamped imported liquor containers ( containers ) 19 u.s.c .

1305 importation of immoral materials ( contents of packages in which immoral materials are found ) 19 u.s.c .

1322 rescue and relief equipment imported contrary to regulations for admission pursuant to treaty with mexico ( equipment ) 19 u.s.c .

1338 foreign discrimination against american commerce ( articles imported in violation ) 19 u.s.c .

1436 failure to comply with customs entry requirements ( goods ) 19 u.s.c .

1453 unloading without meeting customs requirements ( goods and , if their value exceeds $500 , the importing vessel ) 19 u.s.c .

1462 refusal to allow customs inspection of container or vehicle ( container or vehicle and its contents ) 19 u.s.c .

1464 failure to comply with customs requirements for sealed conveyances ( conveyances and contents ) 19 u.s.c .

1466 avoiding duty on repairs made overseas ( vessel ) 19 u.s.c .

1497 failure to declare goods upon entry ( goods ) 19 u.s.c .

1526 import of foreign made goods with american labels ( goods ) 19 u.s.c .

1527 import of animals and birds contrary to foreign law ( animals and birds ) 19 u.s.c .

1584 failure to describe goods in a manifest ( goods and importing vessels of less than 500 tons ) 19 u.s.c .

1586 unlawful unloading or shipment ( vessel and cargo ) 19 u.s.c .

1587 smuggled goods discovered on inspection ( vessel and cargo ) 19 u.s.c .

1588 transportation of goods between u.s. ports via foreign ports ( goods ) 19 u.s.c .

1590 aviation smuggling ( plane or vessel ) 19 u.s.c .

1590 same ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 19 u.s.c .

1592 false or incomplete statements to customs ( goods ) 19 u.s.c .

1594 smuggling ( conveyances ) 19 u.s.c .

1595a use of conveyances for smuggling ( conveyances and merchandise ) 19 u.s.c .

1627a importing or exporting stolen conveyances ( conveyances ) 19 u.s.c .

1703 smuggling ( vessel and cargo ) 19 u.s.c .

1706 importation in unlicensed planes and small boats ( planes , small boats and goods ) 19 u.s.c .

2093 unlawfully imported pre - columbian art ( art ) 19 u.s.c .

2609 theft or unlawfully importing archaeological or ethnological material or articles ( material or articles ) 21 u.s.c .

334 misbranded or adulterated foods , drugs and cosmetics ( products , counterfeit drugs , their containers , manufacturing equipment ) 21 u.s.c .

467b processing , transporting or distributing diseased poultry and poultry products ( poultry and poultry products ) 21 u.s.c .

673 processing , transporting or distributing diseased meat ( meat ) 21 u.s.c .

841 controlled substance trafficking ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

842 controlled substance regulatory offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

843 unlawful conduct relating to controlled substance ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

846 attempt or conspiracy to a commit controlled substance offense ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

848 drug kingpin offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

853 controlled substance violations , criminal forfeiture ( property derived from , traceable to , used to facilitate violation ) 21 u.s.c .

854 investment of controlled substance offense proceeds ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

856 maintaining drug - involved premises ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

858 endangerment in the illicit production of controlled substances ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

859 drug trafficking to minors ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

860 drug trafficking near schools and similar facilities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

861 drug trafficking using minors ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

863 transportation of drug paraphernalia ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

863 same ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

881 controlled substance violations , civil forfeiture ( substance , raw materials , precursor chemicals , records , containers , conveyances , property including real property traceable to , derived from or used to facilitate violations ) 21 u.s.c .

952 unlawfully importing controlled substances ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

953 unlawfully exporting controlled substances ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

957 unlicensed exporting or importing controlled substances ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

959 overseas controlled substance offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

960 violations of 21 u.s.c .

952 , 953 , 957 , 959 ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

960a narcoterrorism ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

961 regulatory import / export offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

963 attempt or conspiracy to commit controlled substance import / export offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 21 u.s.c .

970 controlled substance importing and exporting violations ( property derived from , traceable to , used to facilitate violation ) 21 u.s.c .

1049 processing , transporting or distributing contaminated eggs ( eggs ) 22 u.s.c .

401 illegal exportation of war materials ( arms , munitions of war and other articles , vessels , vehicles , and aircraft ) 22 u.s.c .

611 et seq .

felonious violations of the foreign agents registration act ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 22 u.s.c .

1978 importing fish and wildlife from countries threatening endangered species ( fish and wildlife ) 22 u.s.c .

2778 arms export control act offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 22 u.s.c .

6744 disclosure trade secrets acquired through chemical weapons convention implementation ( property used in , constituting the proceeds from , or facilitating offenses ) 25 u.s.c .

264 trading in indian country without a license ( merchandise ) 26 u.s.c .

5607 unlawful use , recovery or concealment of denatured distilled spirits ( all personal property used , buildings and grounds constituting business premises on which violations occurred ) 26 u.s.c .

5608 smuggling liquor ( liquor , vessels , vehicles and planes ) 26 u.s.c .

5612 mingling taxed and untaxed liquor in distilling plants ( liquor ) 26 u.s.c .

5613 improperly marked liquor ( liquor ) 26 u.s.c .

5615 bootlegging ( unregistered stills , distilling apparatus , products , land used or facilitating , personal property proximate ) 26 u.s.c .

5661 wine tax evasion ( property used ) 26 u.s.c .

5671 beer tax evasion ( beer , vessels , utensils , and apparatus ) 26 u.s.c .

5673 evading beer tax ( lands and buildings holding brewery ) 26 u.s.c .

5681 transporting liquor or raw materials to plants or warehouses with insufficient signs ( vehicles , planes , and vessels used ) 26 u.s.c .

5683 transporting liquor under improper brands ( liquor ) 26 u.s.c .

5685 possession of illegal firearms ( firearms ) 26 u.s.c .

5763 tobacco tax violations ( all property , real and personal , used in violation , property of illicit operators used to defraud , tobacco and tobacco products ) 26 u.s.c .

5872 firearms tax violations ( firearms ) 26 u.s.c .

7301 tax avoidance ( property subject to taxation , and associated raw material , equipment , containers , conveyances ) 26 u.s.c .

7302 possession of property to be used to violate the tax laws ( property intended to such use ) 26 u.s.c .

7303 use of counterfeit tax stamps and documents ( counterfeit stamps , falsely stamped containers and their contents , fraudulent permits and like documents ) 27 u.s.c .

206 violation of bulk intoxicating liquor sales regulations ( liquor ) 29 u.s.c .

186 restrictions on payments and loans to labor organizations ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 29 u.s.c .

501 ( c ) embezzlement from union funds ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 30 u.s.c .

1466 deep seabed hard mineral resource act violations ( minerals , vessel and its gear , furniture , appurtenances , stores and cargo ) 31 u.s.c .

5111 u.s. coins exported , melted or treated contrary to regulation ( coins ) 31 u.s.c .

5 3 17 crossing a u.s. border with more than $10,000 in unreported cash ( cash ) 31 u.s.c .

5311 et seq .

currency and foreign transaction reporting violations ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 33 u.s.c .

384 piracy ( vessels ) 33 u.s.c .

1251 et seq .

federal water pollution control act felonies ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 33 u.s.c .

1401 et seq .

ocean dumping act felonies ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 33 u.s.c .

1415 ocean dumping ( proceeds of , property used in , property facilitate violation ) 33 u.s.c .

1901 et seq .

act to prevent pollution from ships felonies ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 33 u.s.c .

2236 failure pay harbor dues ( cargo ) 33 u.s.c .

2716 oil tankers failure to maintain evidence of financial responsibility ( vessel ) 42 u.s.c .

300f et seq .

safe drinking water act felonies ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 42 u.s.c .

1490s equity skimming ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 42 u.s.c .

2122 atom weapons offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 42 u.s.c .

2284 sabotage of nuclear facilities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 42 u.s.c .

6901 et seq .

resources conservation and recovery act felonies ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 46 u.s.c .

12118 unlawful foreign shipping in domestic commerce ( vessel and merchandise ) 46 u.s.c .

12151 failure to report foreign rebuilding ( vessel , tackle , apparel , equipment and furniture ) 46 u.s.c .

12507 vessel identification offenses ( vessel and its equipment ) 46 u.s.c .

31330 violation of restrictions on sale of mortgaged vessels ( vessel ) 46 u.s.c .

55109 use of unlicensed foreign built dredges ( dredge ) 46 u.s.c .

55118 unlawful salvage operations by foreign vessels ( vessel ) 46 u.s.c .

56101 improper transfer of a u.s. registered vessel to foreign registry ( vessel ) 46 u.s.c .

56102 violation of restrictions on transfer of shipping facilities ( vessel , shipyard , drydock , ship building or repairing facilities , or interest therein ) 46 u.s.c .

60505 retaliatory suspension of commercial privileges to foreign vessels ( vessel and goods ) 46 u.s.c .

70507 manufacture , distribution or possession of controlled substances in violation of the maritime drug enforcement act ( controlled substances and other property used or intended for use in violation of act ) 46 u.s.c .

80103 carrying property from ship wrecks to foreign ports ( vessel , its tackle , apparel and furniture ) 47 u.s.c .

510 broadcasting without a license ( radio equipment ) 49 u.s.c .

46306 aircraft registration violations ( plane ) 49 u.s.c .

46502 chemical trafficking offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 49 u.s.c .

46504 assault of aircraft flight crew with a dangerous weapons ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 49 u.s.c .

46505 placing explosives aboard an aircraft ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 49 u.s.c .

46506 homicide or attempted homicide aboard an aircraft ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 49 u.s.c .

80303 contraband in the guam and the north marianas ( conveyances ) 49 u.s.c .

60123 destruction of interstate gas pipeline facilities ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 50 u.s.c .

192 failure to comply with regulations during a national emergency ( vessel , tackle , apparel , furniture and equipment ) 50 u.s.c .

205 suspension of commercial intercourse with state in insurrection ( goods , vessels or vehicles entering or departing after suspension ) 50 u.s.c .

212 property employed in aid of insurrection ( property used ) 50 u.s.c .

216 transportation of goods in aid of insurrection ( goods ) 50 u.s.c .

221 entering ports of entry closed due to insurrection ( vessel and its tackle , apparel , furniture and cargo ) 50 u.s.c .

223 states in insurrection ( vessels ) 50 u.s.c .

224 unauthorized departure during time of insurrection ( vessel and its tackle , apparel , furniture and cargo ) 50 u.s.c .

783 unlawful communication of classified information ( proceeds from , property used , or property facilitating offense ) 50 u.s.c .

1705 international emergency economic powers act offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 50 u.s.c .

app .

16 trading with the enemy act violations ( property and vessels that is the subject of a violation ) 50 u.s.c .

app .

16 trading with the enemy act offenses ( property traceable to proceeds ) * 50 u.s.c .

app .

2410 export regulation violations ( resulting property interests and proceeds ) .

