stormwater discharge systems are the pipes and sewer lines that carry rainwater or snow melt , but not domestic sanitary wastes , away from urban areas and commercial and industrial facilities .

for many years the focus of the nation's water quality programs was on controlling pollutants associated with industr ial process wastewaters and municipal sewage discharges .

more diffuse and episodic discharges ( such as rainfall runoff from farm lands and urban runoff ) and discharges believed to be relatively uncontaminated received less attention from policymakers and regulators .

however , as the traditional sources of water pollution have become better controlled through laws and regulations , attention has increasingly focused on remaining problems that continue to prevent attainment of state and tribal water quality standards .

stormwater is one such source of pollution .

for some time , it was generally believed that stormwater was largely clean , or uncontaminated .

however , studies have demonstrated that this type of discharge — from rainfall and snow melt — carries with it large amounts of organic and toxic pollutants that can harm water quality , including oil and grease , heavy metals , pesticides , soil , and sediment .

in urban areas , widespread residential and commercial development results in the removal of vegetation cover and building of impervious structures such as roads and parking lots .

these activities may change natural drainage patterns in an area , causing higher runoff flows during wet weather events .

urbanization and the human alteration of landscapes and land uses that is associated with it have resulted in the degradation of conditions in downstream waterbodies .

states report that stormwater discharges , including urban runoff , industrial activity , construction , and mining , are a significant source of surface water quality problems today .

but control of stormwater discharges and other sources of wet weather pollution , including overflows from combined and separate sewer systems , is complicated because discharges generally are intermittent and are less amenable to "end of pipe" solutions than conventional industrial and municipal water pollution .

recognition of the water quality problems of stormwater runoff led congress in 1987 , when it last comprehensively amended the clean water act ( cwa ) , to direct epa to implement a specific permit program for stormwater discharges from industrial sources and municipalities ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

even before the 1987 amendments , the issue of how to regulate stormwater discharges had a lengthy history of regulatory proposals , delays , legal challenges , and court decisions .

still , epa had been unable to devise a comprehensive and flexible administrative process for regulating stormwater discharges before requirements were legislated in 1987 .

in that legislation , congress established a phased and tiered approach to permitting of stormwater discharges that fundamentally redesigned the cwa's approach to stormwater discharges .

congress recognized that epa's difficulties in addressing sources of stormwater stemmed in part from the large number of sources potentially subject to regulation , so the 1987 legislation adopted a procedure that would enable the major contributors of stormwater pollutants to be addressed first , and remaining stormwater discharges in later phases .

epa initially issued regulations to implement congress's legislative mandate in 1990 , utilizing a series of phased requirements .

phase i applied to large dischargers: those associated with industrial activities , municipal separate storm sewer systems serving 100,000 people or more , and construction projects disturbing more than 5 acres .

smaller sources were slated for possible regulation under phase ii of the program ( discussed below ) and included cities and towns with separate storm sewer systems serving fewer than 100,000 people , commercial operations , and smaller construction projects .

stormwater requirements are one element of the comprehensive permit program , the national pollutant discharge elimination system ( npdes ) , authorized in section 402 of the act .

under the act , it is illegal to discharge pollutants from point sources ( eg , industrial plant pipes , sewage treatment plants , or storm sewers ) into the nation's waters without an npdes permit — permits are the fundamental compliance and enforcement mechanism of the law .

epa manages the npdes stormwater program in four states ( idaho , massachusetts , new hampshire , and new mexico ) , plus the district of columbia and most u.s. territories , and has delegated that authority to the remaining 46 states and the virgin islands .

an estimated 123,000 industrial facilities ( twice the number of industrial sources subject to the base npdes program ) and 220 municipalities and counties were covered by the 1990 permit rules for phase i of the program .

the initial procedures and deadlines were complex and were made more confusing by subsequent deadline extensions .

the 1987 cwa amendments directed delegated states ( or epa ) to issue stormwater permits not later than four years after enactment of that legislation .

this would have required permits to be issued by february 4 , 1991 , but this did not occur , in part because epa's 1990 rule was issued 21 months after the statutory deadline .

regulated sources must comply with stormwater permits within three years of their issuance .

permits require dischargers , at a minimum , to implement pollution prevention plans , although remediation or additional treatment of runoff may also be required .

permits issued to municipalities require cities to develop , implement , and enforce a stormwater management program that addresses key areas such as public education , eliminating illicit connections to storm sewers , good housekeeping of municipal operations , and control of erosion and sedimentation from construction sites .

prior to implementation of the stormwater regulatory program , the universe of npdes permittees nationwide was less than 70,000 industrial and municipal facilities .

the addition of stormwater permittees greatly expanded this regulatory program .

epa estimates that the total number of stormwater permittees at any one time exceeds half a million — thus , npdes stormwater permittees outnumber wastewater permittees more than five - fold .

prior to issuance of the final phase ii rule in 1999 , congress included language in epa's fy2000 appropriation bill ( p.l .

106-74 ) directing the agency not to issue the final rule before submitting a detailed impact analysis to congress .

to meet a court - ordered deadline for the regulation , epa released the report concurrently with the phase ii rule .

in the 106 th congress , legislation was introduced to exempt construction sites of less than 5 acres and certain above - ground drainage ditches from stormwater permitting requirements .

at a 1999 senate hearing , epa witnesses opposed the bill , saying that above - ground drainage ditches and small construction sites are significant sources of water pollution and thus should be subject to stormwater management requirements .

no further action occurred .

in response to concerns about program impacts and costs , the 107 th congress enacted legislation allowing states to use section 319 grant funds , which are used for projects to manage nonpoint sources of water pollution , for projects or activities related to developing and implementing a phase ii stormwater program ( §301 of p.l .

107-303 ) .

this authority only applied to section 319 funds in fy2003 .

legislation to extend this authority beyond fy2003 was introduced in the 108 th congress , but was not enacted .

in 2006 epa requested the national research council of the national academy of sciences ( nrc ) to conduct a review of the existing stormwater regulatory program .

the resulting report , issued in 2009 , called for major changes to epa's stormwater control program that would focus on the flow volume of stormwater runoff instead of just its pollutant load .

the committee observed that — stormwater discharges would ideally be regulated through direct controls on land use , strict limits on both the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff into surface waters , and rigorous monitoring of adjacent waterbodies to ensure that they are not degraded by stormwater discharge... .

presently , however , the regulation of stormwater is hampered by its association with a statute that focuses primarily on specific pollutants and ignores the volume of discharges .

the nrc report recommended that epa adopt a watershed - based permitting system encompassing all discharges — stormwater and wastewater — that could affect waterways in a particular drainage basin , rather than individual permits that do not account for cumulative conditions from multiple sources in the same watershed .

under the proposed watershed permitting strategy , responsibility to implement watershed - based permits and control all types of municipal , industrial , and construction stormwater discharges would reside with ms4 permittees .

the report criticized epa's current approach , which leaves much discretion to regulated entities to set their own standards through stormwater management plans and to self - monitor .

as a result , enforcement is difficult and variable , and information to assess the water quality benefits of the regulatory program is limited .

the report also noted that adequate resources , including new levels of public funds , will likely be required to operate a more comprehensive and effective stormwater permitting program .

subsequently , epa initiated information - gathering and public dialogue activities as a prelude to possible regulatory changes that would respond to the nrc's criticism of inconsistency in stormwater requirements nationally and embrace the report's recommendation to adequately control all sources of stormwater discharge that contribute to waterbody impairment .

epa proposed to collect data from ms4s , states , and industry entities involved in developing or redeveloping sites on the scope of the current regulatory program and management practices , as well as information on control , pollution prevention technologies , and bmps applied to stormwater discharges from newly developed and redeveloped sites .

in response to the nrc report , epa began work to develop a rule to revise the existing stormwater regulatory program .

the rule also followed a 2010 settlement agreement between epa and environmental litigants , which called for epa to revise existing rules "to expand the universe of regulated stormwater discharges and to control , at a minimum , stormwater discharges from newly developed and redeveloped sites. .

in the settlement , epa committed to consider supplemental provisions as part of the national rule that would apply only to the chesapeake bay watershed , a region where municipal stormwater discharges are a significant cause of water quality impairment and are one of the only sources of pollutants with increasing loads to the bay and its tributaries .

in early 2010 epa held a series of listening sessions across the country as part of a process seeking public comments on potential considerations for regulatory changes .

the agency also sent survey questionnaires to property owners and developers , municipal sewer system authorities , state regulators , and epa regional offices to obtain their input .

some industry groups reportedly criticized possible expansion of the current program , saying that epa's authority to regulate stormwater does not extend to regulation of post - construction discharges .

some states also said that epa lacks the technical knowledge to regulate stormwater across the nation , while states with comprehensive regulations , such as florida and maryland , demonstrate that regulation is best done at the state and local level , because of locational differences in stormwater discharges .

epa officials noted that a number of states have developed their own stormwater management programs , particularly in the northeast , where lawsuits have pushed regulators , and also in some high - precipitation states in the northwest .

a number of commenters urged epa to ensure that performance standards designed to reduce storm runoff be flexible so that communities can create requirements appropriate to their stormwater needs .

cost is a key issue raised by some states and municipalities concerned about the possibility of mandatory retrofit requirements that would impose a significant economic burden on cities .

some state and local government representatives — while they concerned about details of a rule — believed that a national rule would provide needed uniformity and consistency in stormwater programs across the nation .

during efforts to develop a national rule , epa explored regulatory options that would strengthen the regulatory program by establishing specific post - construction requirements for stormwater discharges from new development and redevelopment , which currently are not regulated .

while ms4s are required to address stormwater discharges from new development and redevelopment in their management plans , existing rules do not include specific management practices or standards to be implemented .

other options that epa considered included expanding the area defined as ms4s to include rapidly developing areas , devising a single set of consistent regulations for all ms4s , and requiring ms4s to address stormwater discharges in areas of existing development through retrofit practices .

epa officials said that the rule would focus on stormwater discharges from developed , or post - construction , sites , such as subdivisions , roadways , industrial facilities , and commercial buildings or shopping centers , and to seek to ensure that even after development projects are completed , runoff levels from sites are equivalent to pre - construction hydrology .

the proposal , referred to as the "post - construction rule," likely would set a first - time stormwater retention performance standard to limit runoff that would otherwise enter an ms4 system .

by retaining a portion of rainfall on - site , the discharge of pollutants for that volume is prevented from entering the sewer system .

requirements in the post - construction rule , once finalized , would be incorporated into ms4 permits as permits come up for renewal .

the stormwater rulemaking drew some interest from members of congress .

in 2013 , republican members of the senate environment and public works committee urged epa to suspend work on the rulemaking until the agency could seek meaningful input from small businesses and provide a report to congress on the necessity for new stormwater regulations .

under the 2010 settlement with environmentalists , epa was initially due to propose a national rule by september 2011 and complete the rule in 2014 .

subsequently , the deadlines were renegotiated several times .

under the last deadline , epa was to propose regulations by june 17 , 2013 , but epa missed that deadline , and on june 18 , the environmental plaintiffs notified the agency that it was in breach of the legal settlement .

at that point , epa and the plaintiffs had reached a legal impasse ; epa reportedly continued to work on the rule , while the environmental groups considered further legal action .

finalizing a rule with national application was said to be complicated by a number of analytic issues , particularly how to calculate costs and benefits of the proposal and how to incorporate flexibility , such as possibly including lengthy implementation plans for retrofit projects and allowing states with equivalent stormwater programs to regulate in lieu of epa .

in mid - march 2014 , epa announced that it would defer action on the post - construction stormwater rule and instead will provide incentives , technical assistance , and other approaches for cities to address stormwater runoff themselves .

in particular , the agency said that it will leverage existing requirements to strengthen municipal stormwater permits and will continue to promote green infrastructure as an integral part of stormwater management .

although epa discontinued development of a national stormwater rule , the agency continues to pursue some of the ideas that the rule had been expected to incorporate , such as emphasizing on - site retention of stormwater at construction sites or requiring green infrastructure , when individual ms4 permits come up for renewal .

these concepts are reflected , for example , in the ms4 permit for washington dc , issued by epa in 2013 , and epa's 2014 proposed ms4 general permit for massachusetts ; both were crafted by epa , which is the npdes permitting authority in dc and massachusetts .

in the majority of states , permitting authority has been delegated to states ( see page 2 ) .

in those cases , environmental groups are reportedly pursuing a permit - by - permit approach of encouraging states to strengthen the terms of new and reissued ms4 permits .

