federal laws require government approval prior to beginning any work in or over waters of the united states that affects the course , location , condition , or capacity of such waters , or prior to discharging dredged or fill material into u.s. waters .

regulatory programs that implement these laws are administered through permits issued by the u.s. army corps of engineers ( the corps ) , which shares responsibility with the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , under the authority of the clean water act ; the rivers and harbors act ; and the marine protection , research , and sanctuaries act .

the corps' regulatory process involves two types of permits: general permits for actions by private landowners that are similar in nature and will likely have a minor effect on waters and wetlands , and individual permits for more significant action .

a nationwide permit ( nwp ) is a form of general permit that authorizes a category of activities throughout the nation and is valid only if the conditions applicable to the permit are met .

the nwp program is intended to provide timely authorizations for the regulated public while protecting the nation's aquatic resources .

these permits are issued under authority of section 404 ( e ) of the clean water act ( cwa ) and section 10 of the rivers and harbors act of 1899 ( rha ) .

under section 404 , permits are required for discharges of dredged or fill material into jurisdictional waters of the united states , including wetlands , such as fills to convert waters and wetlands to dry land .

under section 10 , permits are required for any structures or other work that affect the course , location , or condition of navigable waters of the united states , such as piers , dredging , and aids to navigation .

nationwide permits , which number 52 and cover a range of activities , can be issued for a period of no more than five years and cannot be extended .

they automatically expire and become null and void if they are not modified or reissued within five years of their effective date .

they were last reissued in total in 2012 .

in advance of their scheduled expiration in 2017 , the corps issued a proposal to reissue and modify the existing nationwide permits on june 1 , 2016 , and issued final permits on january 6 , 2017 .

at issue in the program is the balance of two objectives: providing regulatory protection to ensure minimal impacts on aquatic resources , and providing a fair and efficient regulatory system .

for several years , interest groups of differing perspectives have criticized the program and increasingly questioned whether either objective is being achieved , much less both objectives .

stakeholders involved in this debate include , on the one hand , industry groups ( eg , members of building — especially homebuilding — design , realtor , and petroleum and mining organizations ) and , on the other , environmental advocacy groups , along with many state water quality , water resources , and environmental agencies .

particularly under the cwa , the corps' regulatory authority is broadly defined .

it covers waters of the united states , including the territorial seas , and includes traditionally navigable waterways capable of supporting interstate and foreign commerce , plus their tributaries , and adjacent wetlands and isolated waters where the use , degradation , or destruction of such waters could affect interstate or foreign commerce .

in fact , much of the public concern about the nationwide permit program — with regard to impacts of authorized activities , and terms and conditions intended to limit impacts — often focuses on permits for projects that affect the nation's wetlands .

controversies about the permit program are compounded by disputes about the corps' assessment that adverse environmental impacts of authorized activities are minimal .

critics , especially environmental advocates , argue that the corps lacks an effective tracking and monitoring system for evaluating impacts and thus lacks adequate information to assess the permit program .

the nationwide permit regulatory program has drawn congress's attention several times in the past , but not recently .

in 1997 , house and senate committees held oversight hearings to review several issues and controversies .

in 1999 and 2000 , congressional appropriators directed the corps to take certain actions concerning its overall regulatory program , and nationwide permits in particular .

this report describes and reviews the nationwide permit program and discusses several major issues that have drawn the attention of stakeholder interest groups , including program complexity , coordination with states , and mitigation requirements .

general permits , including nationwide permits , are a key means by which the corps seeks to minimize the burden and delay of its regulatory program: they authorize a landowner or developer to proceed with the covered activity without having to obtain an individual , site - specific permit in advance .

individual permits are subject to public notice , public interest review , public hearing , activity - specific environmental documentation , and case - by - case evaluation which typically involve longer time before the activity is authorized .

general permits are intended to allow certain activities to proceed with little delay or paperwork , thus reducing regulatory burden on applicants and the corps .

according to corps data , in fy2016 , nationwide and other general permits that required corps approval entailed average processing time of 40 days , in contrast with standard individual permits , which , on average , took 217 days of processing and evaluation , once an application was completed .

the specific statutory authority for these permits in cwa section 404 ( e ) emphasizes that to qualify for a general permit , activities must have minimal adverse impact on the environment , individually and cumulatively .

in carrying out the functions relating to the discharge of dredged or fill material under this section , the secretary [of the army] may , after notice and opportunity for public hearing , issue general permits on a state , regional , or nationwide basis for any category of activities involving discharges of dredged or fill material if the secretary determines that the activities in such category are similar in nature , will cause only minimal adverse environmental effects when performed separately , and will have only minimal cumulative adverse effect on the environment .

according to the corps , between 2012 and 2015 , the agency authorized an average of 63,000 activities per year ; 97% were authorized by nationwide and other general permits .

more than half require advance notification to the corps and written verification by the agency before applicants may proceed for some activities ( i.e. , 10 nwps ) or all covered activities ( i.e. , 21 nwps ) .

for 19 others , proponents may proceed without application to the corps ( about 31,000 authorized activities are "non - reporting" each year ) , unless advance notification is required to comply with certain general conditions and related laws such as the endangered species act or the national historic preservation act .

the following are examples of nationwide permits: placement of aids to navigation approved by , and installed according to , u.s. coast guard requirements ( nwp 1 ) ; stream or river bank stabilization activities necessary to prevent erosion ( nwp 13 ) ; minor dredging , that is , dredging of no more than 25 cubic yards of material ( nwp 19 ) ; activities associated with restoration , enhancement , or establishment of wetlands and riparian areas where the activities result in net increase in aquatic resource functions and services ( nwp 27 ) ; and discharges of dredged or fill material for the construction or expansion of residential developments ( nwp 29 ) .

many nationwide permits have specific conditions and terms ( such as maximum acreage limitations ) .

in addition , a number of general conditions apply to some or all nwps ; for example , no activity may cause more than a minimal adverse effect on navigation ; no activity may jeopardize a threatened or endangered species ; discharges into spawning areas and migratory waterfowl breeding areas must be avoided , to the maximum extent practicable ; and discharges of dredged or fill material must be minimized or avoided through mitigation to offset more than minimal impacts on the aquatic environment , to the maximum extent practicable .

several permits also require coordination with other federal and state resource agencies , for example , if the activity will result in loss of more than a specified acreage of waters of the united states or linear feet of stream bed .

when coordination is required , the corps will consider the agency's comments concerning the proposed activity's compliance with terms and conditions of the permit , including the need for mitigation .

the corps is not required to adopt another agency's recommendations but is required to record its response to agency comments in the administrative record .

the corps believes that nwps provide a benefit by encouraging applicants to minimize a project's environmental impacts in order to qualify for nwp authorization .

if nwps did not exist , or were not reissued prior to expiration ( they cannot be administratively extended ) , project proponents would have to apply for standard individual permits .

the corps believes that the likely result would be greater annual acreages of authorized impacts to aquatic resources , because standard individual permits have no acreage limits .

a project proponent who wants to use one or more of the nwps to fulfill requirements for authorization by the corps must comply with regulations that implement the nwp program ( at 33 c.f.r .

part 330 ) and all applicable terms and conditions of the appropriate nwps , including any regional conditions imposed by the corps division engineer and any activity - specific conditions imposed by the district engineer ( see " regional conditioning " ) .

if the proponent does not fully comply , the activity is unauthorized , and the person may be subject to an enforcement action .

as the nationwide permit program has grown ( from 15 permits in 1977 to 52 currently ) and become more complex over time , interest groups have increasingly united to argue that the program as it has developed fails to meet its overall objectives , although their reasons for this criticism are very different .

for example , one view was expressed by a coalition of environmental advocacy groups .

the nationwide permit system was presumably developed in order to balance two somewhat contrary objectives: to ensure that the permits issued result in only minimal impacts on aquatic resources , and to provide a predictable , fair , and simple regulatory system for citizens applying for permits .

given the complexity and confusion surrounding the nationwide permit program , together with the clearly more than minimal environmental impacts , we question whether either of these objectives is being achieved .

critical views of a different sort were expressed by a group representing one set of developers .

over time , however , the nwps have become increasingly restrictive and complex to the point that they faintly resemble the streamlined permitting process congress envisioned when it enacted section 404 ( e ) .... [t]he program waivers between providing administrative relief and imposing red tape , between a truly streamlined process and one that is so severely limited that few projects can qualify... .

the history of the nwp has been a consistent tightening of the eligibility for the program.... each time the corps has drawn the line between nwp eligibility and ineligibility , eligibility has been restricted , never relaxed .

beyond apparent broad agreement that the program fails to meet its objectives , the views of industry and environmental advocacy groups diverge greatly .

industry groups support the nwp program , or the type of streamlined program that they believe was originally intended , and agree with the corps that the use of nationwide permits will result in minimal adverse environmental impacts .

nevertheless , they have been highly critical of many of its aspects .

the corps' attempt to illegally expand its jurisdiction , the stringent and largely inflexible acreage and pcn [preconstruction notification] thresholds , the lack of a proper administrative process and record to support the proposal , the problematic regional conditions and the overall trend toward the elimination of nwps all contribute to a permit package that is hardly even a semblance of the streamlined process directed by congress .

environmental groups argue that permitted activities will have more than minimal impacts on the environment and that the corps has no substantial or scientific evidence to conclude otherwise .

they argue that the permits are unlawful because they violate the requirements of section 404 ( e ) that there may be no more than minimal adverse environmental effects on aquatic resources , both individually and cumulatively .

further , they criticize what they view as inconsistent and inadequate pcn requirements , overly vague requirements which will result in weakened regulatory protection , the granting of excessive authority to corps district engineers to waive permit limits in individual cases , and excessive reliance on compensatory mitigation to offset the harmful effects of permitted activities .

congress has shown some interest in cwa permitting issues and the nwp program specifically , but not for some time .

in 1997 , a house transportation and infrastructure subcommittee held an oversight hearing on developments concerning nationwide permits and other issues .

a senate environment and public works subcommittee held a similar hearing that year .

at both hearings , a number of witnesses were critical of the 1996 proposed changes to the nationwide permit program , saying that the changes would be costly and could result in project delays .

administration witnesses supported the modifications , responding that the changes would allow the corps to implement a more fair , flexible , and effective program that is appropriately responsive to environmental protection needs .

subsequently , on two occasions congress addressed aspects of the nwp program in the context of appropriations legislation .

both reflected congressional interest in the costs of the program and permit processing times and concerns that the increasing activity restrictions and general conditions in nwps were also increasing permit processing time .

first , in the fy2000 energy and water development appropriations act ( p.l .

106-60 ) , congress directed the corps to study the workload impacts and costs of compliance with the 2000 nationwide permits .

second , the fy2001 energy and water development appropriations act ( p.l .

106-377 ) directed the corps to prepare another cost estimate of the nwp program , along with providing the public with additional information on permit applications .

the corps responded to these mandates with reports in march 2000 and august 2001 that acknowledged some increases in processing time and individual permit applications .

it has been more than 15 years since congress examined the nationwide permit program through oversight hearings or legislation ( in connection with appropriations bills ) .

as this report has described , the program has continued to evolve and to generate wide - ranging concerns among stakeholder and interest groups .

while the obama administration's initiatives concerning some activities that are authorized by nationwide permits have drawn congressional attention and criticism — such as surface coal mining activities in appalachia — that attention has not extended to oversight of the corps' regulatory program generally .

whether recent controversies about nwp 12 and its use in siting of pipeline and utility line projects , or other issues , will lead to greater congressional interest in the program is unknown for now .

the following is a list of the nationwide permits as issued in january 2017 .

these permits will be effective from march 19 , 2017 , through march 18 , 2022 .

the full text of these permits and related general conditions is available at http: / / www.usace.army.mil / missions / civilworks / regulatoryprogramandpermits / nationwidepermits.aspx .

1 .

aids to navigation 2 .

structures in artificial canals 3 .

maintenance 4 .

fish and wildlife harvesting , enhancement , and attraction devices and activities 5 .

scientific measurement devices 6 .

survey activities 7 .

outfall structures and associated intake structures 8 .

oil and gas structures on the outer continental shelf 9 .

structures in fleeting and anchorage areas 10 .

mooring buoys 11 .

temporary recreational structures 12 .

utility line activities 13 .

bank stabilization 14 .

linear transportation projects 15 .

u.s. coast guard approved bridges 16 .

return water from upland contained disposal areas 17 .

hydropower projects 18 .

minor discharges 19 .

minor dredging 20 .

response operations for oil and hazardous substances 21 .

surface coal mining operations 22 .

removal of vessels 23 .

approved categorical exclusions 24 .

indian tribe or state administered section 404 programs 25 .

structural discharges 26 .

[reserved] 27 .

aquatic habitat restoration , establishment , and enhancement activities 28 .

modifications of existing marinas 29 .

residential developments 30 .

moist soil management for wildlife 31 .

maintenance of existing flood control facilities 32 .

completed enforcement actions 33 .

temporary construction , access and dewatering 34 .

cranberry production activities 35 .

maintenance dredging of existing basins 36 .

boat ramps 37 .

emergency watershed protection and rehabilitation 38 .

cleanup of hazardous and toxic waste 39 .

commercial and institutional developments 40 .

agricultural activities 41 .

reshaping existing drainage ditches 42 .

recreational facilities 43 .

stormwater management facilities 44 .

mining activities 45 .

repair of uplands damaged by discrete events 46 .

discharges in ditches 47 .

[reserved] 48 .

existing commercial shellfish aquaculture activities 49 .

coal remining activities 50 .

underground coal mining activities 51 .

land - based renewable energy generation facilities 52 .

water - based renewable energy generation pilot projects 53 .

removal of low - head dams 54 .

living shoreline .

