at the beginning of each congress , the house adopts its rules of procedure for that congress .

although it usually readopts most provisions of its rules from the previous congress , the house also changes some aspects of its procedures for each new congress .

rules x - xiii are the primary house rules that govern the authority and operations of house committees and subcommittees .

because the committees are the agents of the house , they are obligated to comply with all house directives that apply to them .

however , in some respects the house allows each of its committees to decide for itself how to conduct its business .

for this purpose , each committee is required to adopt written rules of procedure within the limitations of house rules .

this report identifies and summarizes the provisions of the house's standing rules and certain other directives that affect committee powers , authority , activities , and operations .

it does not address party conference rules , the rules adopted by individual committees that supplement house rules , or committee practices on matters not covered by house rules .

the report is organized under seven headings: ( 1 ) general , ( 2 ) establishment and assignments , ( 3 ) hearings , markups , and other meetings , ( 4 ) reporting , ( 5 ) oversight and investigations , ( 6 ) funding , staff , and travel , and ( 7 ) other duties .

this report primarily covers requirements and prohibitions contained in the rules of the house of representatives that are of direct and general applicability to most or all house committees .

the report does not encompass most other provisions of law or the house's rules that apply only to one committee , such as the intelligence or standards of official conduct committee , or house rules governing certain appropriations hearings and the content of appropriations measures .

the summaries presented here are not intended to capture every nuance and detail of the rules themselves .

members and staff are advised to consult the text of the appropriate standing rule or provision of law .

rule x , clause 4 ( e ) in general each standing committee is to ensure that continuing programs and activities are appropriated annually , and must review programs that are not appropriated annually to determine whether changes would allow them to be .

rule x , clause 4 ( f ) ( 1 ) each standing committee must submit to the committee on the budget its views and estimates on spending within its jurisdiction .

these statements are to be submitted no later than six weeks after the president submits his budget or at such time as the budget committee requests .

rule x , clause 4 ( a ) - 4 ( e ) the clause assigns particular functions and duties to the committees on appropriations , budget , government reform , and house administration .

