article i , section 1 of the constitution vests all federal legislative power in congress , while article i , section 7 sets forth the process for effectuating this power through passage of legislation by both houses and either presidential approval or veto override .

the exercise of the judicial power of the united states often requires that courts construe statutes so enacted to apply them in concrete cases and controversies .

judicial interpretation of a statute is authoritative in the matter before the court , and may guide courts in future cases .

beyond this , the methodologies and approaches taken by the courts in interpreting meaning also can help guide legislative drafters , legislators , implementing agencies , and private parties .

this report provides an overview of how the supreme court approaches statutory interpretation , with particular emphasis on rules and conventions that focus on the text itself .

that is , to inform congress on how the court might go about analyzing the meaning of particular legislative language , this report emphasizes "textualist" - based means of interpretation .

"textualism" considers the "law" to be embodied in the language of the statute , construed according to its "plain meaning," which can be discerned through the aid , as necessary , of various judicially developed rules of interpretation .

as put by justice oliver wendell holmes in an oft - quoted aphorism: "we do not inquire what the legislature meant ; we ask only what the statute means. .

"textualism," as captured in justice holmes' quote , eschews explanatory legislative materials , and inferences drawn from them and other extrinsic sources , in applying statutory language to particular circumstances .

despite its currency in recent decades , "textualism" is not the exclusive means of statutory analysis , and this report also briefly discusses "intentionalist" - based means of interpretation and the court's approach toward relying on legislative history and other extrinsic considerations .

this report is not intended as an examination of all schools of judicial decision making , or as an analysis of the merits or limits of the many methodologies used by courts in applying statutes in specific cases .

in this regard , even though textualism may be the primary approach toward interpreting statutes , individual supreme court opinions often employ multiple types of statutory analysis to support their conclusions and critique majority / dissenting opinions with which they do not agree .

moreover , as general approaches for inferring meaning , neither textualism nor intentionalism is rigidly mechanistic or limited to the action of the enacting congress , with "textualists," for example , sometimes looking to broader legal contexts and "intentionalists" at times venturing beyond the enacting congress's particular intent to preserve a statute's purposes .

when reading statutory text , the supreme court uses content - neutral canons developed by the judiciary that focus on word usage , grammar , syntax and the like .

sometimes , the court also brings to bear various presumptions that reflect broader judicial concerns and can more directly favor particular substantive results .

other conventions assist the court in determining whether to go beyond the corners of a statute and judicial - based rules of interpretation to also consider the congressional deliberations that led to a statute's passage .

although there is some overlap and inconsistency among these rules and conventions , and although the court's pathway through the mix is often not clearly foreseeable , an understanding of interpretational possibilities may nonetheless aid congress in choosing among various drafting options .

to this end , the court has expressed an interest "that congress be able to legislate against a background of clear interpretive rules , so that it may know the effect of the language it adopts. .

of course , congress can always amend a statute to supersede the reading given it by the court .

in interpreting statutes , the court recognizes that legislative power resides in congress , and that congress can legislate away interpretations with which it disagrees .

congress has revisited statutory issues fairly frequently to override or counter the court's interpretations .

corrective amendment can be a lengthy and uncertain process , however .

in some circumstances , the court subordinates the general , linguistic canons of statutory construction , as well as other interpretive principles , to overarching presumptions that , unless rebutted , favor particular substantive results .

some of the "weighty and constant values" protected by these "substantive" canons of construction are derived from the constitution , others from notions of federalism , and yet others from interests in judicial administration and ordered governance .

application of a substantive canon often , but not always , results in some form of "clear statement" rule , requiring that congress , if it wishes to achieve a particular result inconsistent with the court's view of legal traditions , must state such an intent with unmistakable clarity .

different schools of statutory interpretation regard text differently .

textualists regard the words embodied in the text of a statute as the "law": "congress' intent is found in the words it has chosen to use. .

intentionalism and related methods are less sanguine about whether statutory language alone can fully and adequately embody the "law" for purposes of applying statutes in individual cases .

yet textualists on occasion recognize the value of extrinsic perspectives , and intentionalists regard statutory language as the analytical starting point and at least strong evidence of what a law intends .

the primacy of text in discerning meaning is expressed in the "plain meaning rule. .

that rule holds that where the language of a statute is plain , the sole role of the courts is to enforce it according to its terms .

in practice , the cases vary in characterizing the rule as mandatory or prudential , and those differences often play out indirectly through arguments about whether particular language is sufficiently clear and unambiguous to preclude further inquiry .

there seems to be general consensus that the plain meaning rule aptly characterizes interpretational priorities ( statutory language is primary , other considerations of intent and purpose secondary ) .

however , agreement on the basic meaning of the plain meaning rule — if it occurs — does not guarantee agreement in the rule's application .

there have been cases in which justices of the supreme court have agreed that the statutory provision at issue is plain , but have split 5-4 over what that plain meaning is .

there are other cases in which strict application is simply ignored ; courts , after concluding that the statutory language is plain , nonetheless look to legislative history , either to confirm that plain meaning , or to refute arguments that a contrary interpretation was "intended. .

the one generally recognized exception to the rule is that a plain meaning is rejected if it would produce an "absurd result. .

nevertheless , even in cases of "absurd results" justices can disagree over whether it is appropriate to consult legislative materials for interpretational insight .

the commonest bridge from text to legislative history is a finding that the statutory language is not plain , but instead is unclear or "ambiguous. .

significant differences arise , however , in the willingness of courts to label particular statutory language as "ambiguous" and thereby resort to legislative history .

some judges are more sanguine than others in the ability to interpret statutory text without resort to the "extrinsic" aid of legislative history .

some judges limit themselves to a narrow focus on the clarity or ambiguity of a particular statutory phrase , while others look more broadly to statutory context for insight into phrases that may seem ambiguous in isolation .

and , inevitably , tensions may arise between apparently clear language and perceived intent .

over time , the court has by turns been relatively more receptive or skeptical toward mining the legislative process for insight into a statute's meaning .

legislating is a collective exercise .

drafters seek to capture a sponsor's intent in words , however imperfectly .

language introduced as legislation is subjected to examination , criticism and revision in diverse congressional fora — large and small , formal and informal — as it moves toward approval — again , via diverse groups with varying degrees of expertise and interest — and eventual enactment into law .

particularly since the 1980s , some court opinions have characterized modern congressional processes as too fractured to admit any statement or explanation made in any step along the way as an authoritative declaration by congress as a whole ( assuming congress had a discernible "collective understanding" on the matter at issue before the court in the first place ) .

adding to this reluctance is the perception of some that the published history could be skewed by the partisanship of committee staff , the manipulation of interest groups , or the dominant influence of federal agencies .

it is preferable , under this view , to re - focus on the statutory text to gain some space for judicial independence and clarity .

more recently , some commentators and jurists who look at congressional processes have had a different take .

they , too , see complexity and fragmentation in congress , but argue that one can ascribe an "institutional purpose" to legislation even though the motives of individual legislators may be unknown or unknowable .

under this "busy congress" model , for example , congressional committees , as specialists in their field , are regarded as reporting accurate accounts of information and insight to their respective chambers so that members may better consider legislation they have limited knowledge of .

the stuff of legislative history itself potentially comprises a wide variety of materials .

on the one hand , a current statute may be compared to its predecessors and differences among their language and structure analyzed .

this use is limited to examining language passed by congress , which , unlike materials attending congressional deliberations , is often thought to best reflect the intent of congress as a whole .

considering past statutes and their evolution is not a particularly controversial exercise .

on the other hand are the committee reports , hearings , floor debates , and other records of deliberations and correspondence on legislation as it moves through the legislative process .

one aspect of examining this material can be to compare different versions of a provision as it progresses , a use somewhat like the comparing of statutes to their predecessors , but without each version having been approved by congress as a whole .

courts may read contemporaneous congressional materials for many reasons: background information and context , explanations of specific legislative language , or expectations of how a provision will be applied to the particular fact situation before them .

reliance on these materials varies among courts , with the circumstances of a statute's passage and its clarity or complexity being factors .

courts also may be more willing to consult committee reports and the like for insight into the particular problem congress sought to address than they are to consult language that purports to direct certain interpretations or outcomes .

the nature of the issue before a court is another variable that may bear on what materials the court uses and why .

among published history , some sources may be considered relatively more authoritative .

as a rule , committee report explanations , and especially those of conference committees , are considered more persuasive and reliable than statements made during floor debates or hearings .

within floor debates , statements of sponsors and explanations by floor managers are usually accorded the most weight , and statements by other committee members of the reporting committee[s] next .

floor statements by members not associated with sponsorship or committee consideration of a bill have little weight , and statements by bill opponents less weight still .

hearings may be useful in providing background , less so as to illuminating the meaning of particular language .

this hierarchy generally characterizes where a court might go to seek to clarify an unclear statute , but several factors might tip the scales in favor of one bit of history or another of a particular bill .

final language might have arisen from a floor amendment , in which case earlier reports and debates may be of interest only as a point of contrast .

similarly , final language might have been added by the second chamber to consider a bill , in which case the history developed in it would be most pertinent , especially absent conference consideration .

also , a court's willingness to delve into the more remote reaches of legislative history can vary with the issue at hand and the point sought to be clarified .

again , courts may consult explanatory documents to gain a better feel for context or to shed light on particular language .

reference to legislative history for background is commonplace .

a "proper construction frequently requires consideration of [a statute's] wording against the background of its legislative history and in the light of the general objectives congress sought to achieve. .

looking to published history to help explain the meaning of statutory terms may be more controversial , either because contrary indications may be present in other passages of legislative history , or because the degree of direction or detail may be an unwarranted narrowing of a more general statutory text .

the concern in the latter instances is whether the legislative history is a plausible explanation of language actually contained in the statutory text , or whether instead explanatory language ( eg , report language containing committee directives or "understandings" ) outpaces that text .

as the court observed in rejecting reliance on "excerpts" said to reflect congressional intent to preempt state law , "we have never [looked for] congressional intent in a vacuum , unrelated to the giving of meaning to an enacted statutory text ... [u]nenacted approvals , beliefs , and desires are not laws. .

a distinct but related inquiry focuses not on the explanations that accompanied committee or floor consideration , but rather on the sequence of changes in bill language .

consideration of the "specific history of the legislative process that culminated in the [statute at issue] affords ... solid ground for giving it appropriate meaning" and for resolving ambiguity present in statutory text .

selection of one house's version over that of the other house may be significant .

in some circumstances rejection of an amendment or earlier version can be important , but there is no general "rejected proposal rule. .

while courts are naturally reluctant to attribute significance to the failure of congress to act , that reluctance may be overcome if it can be shown that congress considered and rejected bill language that would have adopted the very position being urged upon the court .

even more than in the case of legislative language , discussed above , silence in the published legislative history of a bill is seldom significant .

there is no requirement that "every permissible application of a statute be expressly referred to in its legislative history. .

the court does , however , occasionally attach importance to the absence of any indication in a statute or its legislative history of an intent to effect a "major change" in well - established law .

and sometimes the justices disagree over the significance of congressional silence .

once a statute is enacted , later congresses may comment on it or choose to revisit it ( or not ) as circumstances change .

views expressed in the documents or deliberations of a subsequent congress generally are eschewed .

it has been stated in this context that "[t]he legislative history of a statute is the history of its consideration and enactment .

'subsequent legislative history' — which presumably means the post - enactment history of a statute's consideration and enactment — is a contradiction in terms. .

the court also is wary about reading significance into the actions of a subsequent congress , having warned that they are "a hazardous basis for inferring the intent of an earlier one.' .

to the degree congressional action is considered ( as opposed to the statutory language ) , it is the enacting congress that is key , and interpretation is ordinarily not affected by the several different kinds of congressional actions and inactions frequently characterized as "post - enactment history. .

however , depending on context , including intervening developments , what a subsequent congress does may have interpretational value .

if the views of a later congress are expressed in a duly enacted statute , then the views embodied in that statute must be interpreted and applied .

occasionally a later enactment declares congressional intent about interpretation of an earlier enactment rather than directly amending or clarifying the earlier law .

such action can be given prospective effect because , "however inartistic , it ... stands on its own feet as a valid enactment. .

"subsequent legislation declaring the intent of an earlier statute is entitled to great weight in statutory construction. .

other statutes may be expressly premised on a particular interpretation of an earlier statute ; this interpretation may be given effect , especially if a contrary interpretation would render the amendments pointless or ineffectual .

the court closely adheres to judicial precedents in interpreting statutes , on the grounds that congress is free to supersede the court's interpretation of a particular statute through subsequent legislation .

but it may not always be evident exactly how far congress went in subsequent legislation to sweep aside an earlier construction .

for example , when congress acts narrowly against a result in a court decision , is it also discrediting the court's reasoning that led to the result ? .

a female employee who is adversely affected by a discriminatory seniority system is barred from relief under a supreme court decision that holds title vii's statute of limitation clock is intended to tick solely from the time of the discriminatory act , not from the time harm is realized .

congress adopts a provision that specifies time of harm as restarting the statute of limitations clock for those discriminated against under a seniority system .

later , a female brings suit alleging that she had been discriminated against in raise decisions over time and that consequently her pay continued to be lower than that of men in similar positions .

is the court's more general "time of the act" interpretation in the seniority case still to be accorded weight in the later raise discrimination case , even though the interpretation no longer pertains in a seniority system context ? .

in ledbetter v. goodyear tire & rubber co. , inc. , five justices substantially relied on the earlier interpretation to hold that the raise discrimination was barred by the statute of limitations , over the objection of a four - justice dissent .

if congress reenacts a statute and leaves unchanged a provision that had received a definitive administrative or judicial interpretation , the court sometimes holds that congress has ratified that interpretation .

the stated rationale is that "congress is presumed to be aware of an administrative or judicial interpretation of a statute and to adopt that interpretation when it re - enacts a statute without change. .

similarly , if congress in enacting a new statute incorporates sections of an earlier one , "congress normally can be presumed to have had knowledge of the interpretation given to the incorporated law , at least insofar as it affects the new statute. .

however , congressional ratification of a judicial interpretation will not be inferred from reenactment unless "the supposed judicial consensus [is] so broad and unquestioned that congress knew of and endorsed it. .

also , the reenactment presumption is usually indulged only if the history of enactment shows that congress conducted a comprehensive review of the reenacted or incorporated statute , and changed those aspects deemed undesirable .

though the presumption can come into play in the absence of evidence that congress directly considered the issue at hand , the court may require other indicia of congressional awareness of the issue before reading significance into reenactment .

congress may have simply overlooked the matter , or may have intended to leave it "for authoritative resolution in the courts. .

congressional inaction is sometimes construed as approving or "acquiescing" in an administrative or judicial interpretation .

there is no general presumption that congressional inaction in the face of interpretation bespeaks acquiescence , and there is no consistent pattern of application by the court .

when the court does infer acquiescence , the most important factor seems to be congressional awareness that an interpretation has generated widespread attention and controversy .

as with reenactment , however , there are other inferences that can be drawn from congressional silence .

although congressional inaction or silence is sometimes accorded importance in interpreting an earlier enactment , post - enactment explanations or expressions of opinion by committees or members are often dismissed as "isolated statements" or "subsequent legislative history" not entitled to much if any weight .

as the court has noted , statements as to what a committee believes an earlier enactment meant are "obviously entitled to less weight" than is subsequent legislation declaring such intent , because in the case of the committee statement congress had not "proceeded formally through the legislation process. .

the court has also explained that "isolated statements by individual members of congress or its committees , all made after enactment of the statute under consideration , cannot substitute for a clear expression of legislative intent at the time of enactment. .

"it is the function of the courts and not the legislature , much less a committee of one house of the legislature , to say what an enacted statute means. .

the disfavor in which post - enactment explanations are held is sometimes expressed more strongly when the views are those of a single member .

the court has declared that " post hoc observations by a single member carry little if any weight. .

under the constitution , the president's formal role in enacting statutes is one of "take it or leave it. .

article i , section 7 , clause 2 provides that , after congress passes a bill and presents it to the president , "if he approves he shall sign it , but if not he shall return it , with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated , who shall enter the objections at large on their journal , and proceed to reconsider it. .

thus , the recording of a president's views as part of the constitutional lawmaking process is limited to objections attending a veto .

also , the president may not amend the language of a presented bill before acting on it .

nor may the president pick and choose which provisions of a presented bill to sign into law , while vetoing others .

the president's options are "thumbs up" or "thumbs down" on a bill in its entirety .

the president may have an integral role in the enactment of statutes into law , but "[a]ll legislative powers" reside in congress , and it is exclusively up to the houses of congress , at least formally , to come to common agreement on statutory language .

nevertheless , recent presidents have frequently used the occasion of signing a bill into law to issue statements that contend that portions of the bill are unconstitutional , claim a law is of limited application , or otherwise signal that a law will be implemented strictly in accord with the president's views of the office's prerogatives and authorities .

assertions in signing statements vary in specificity and purported scope ; the statements would not appear to have any immediate , direct legal effect in and of themselves ; and they may best be understood in the context of the enduring tension between the political branches over accountability , control of executive agencies , and similar institutional concerns .

at the same time , administrations since the 1980s have asserted that signing statements have weight as legislative history and should be taken into account by courts .

there is no legal impediment to a president commenting on a statute's meaning in a signing statement , and the political reality is that an administration is not a passive spectator during congressional deliberations .

often , the administration forwards draft legislation for introduction , and liaisons from the executive branch regularly communicate its views on bills as they proceed .

if the president or the administration worked closely with congress in developing legislation , and if the approved version incorporated the president's recommendations , reference to a signing statement arguably may help complete the picture of a bill's purpose , especially in the absence of published congressional documents on a bill .

the same might also be said with respect to bills whose final content arose from compromise negotiations between the administration and congress .

citation of signing statements may be more controversial when statutory language appears clear or the meaning attributed in a signing statement conflicts with congressional history .

congress has no opportunity during the legislative process to respond as an institution to a characterization in a signing statement .

giving the president "the last word" on the meaning of a bill he approves , it may be pointed out , stands in contrast to the procedure for congressional consideration of the president's objections in the case of a vetoed bill .

the supreme court has not accorded legal weight to signing statements .

and , in longstanding litigation on a statute implicating the status of jerusalem , the prominence of president george w. bush's signing statement as an issue has steadily declined .

neither the latest court of appeals decision , nor recent briefs by the parties to the supreme court , do more than mention it in passing as part of the case's history .

also , lower courts have seldom had to resolve cases that require a choice between conflicting presidential and congressional interpretations .

presidents' routine use of signing statements to try to influence statutory interpretation by courts is a relatively recent development .

thus far , courts have not been particularly receptive , even while citing them on occasion .

judicial reluctance to consider signing statements would not appear to be contrary to judicial deference to agency action .

deference is premised on the conclusion that congress has , by statute , authorized the agency to "speak with the force of law" through a rulemaking or other formal process .

congress has not authorized the president ( or , indirectly , an agency ) to speak with the force of law through signing statements .

so , although signing statements may influence or even control agency implementation of statutes , it is the implementation , and not the signing statement itself , that would be measured against the statute's requirements .

at most , signing statements might be considered analogous to informal agency actions , entitled to respect only to the extent that they have the power to persuade .

