the "discharge rule" of the house of representatives ( rule xv , clause 2 ) provides a means for the house to bring to the floor for consideration a measure ( a bill or resolution ) that has not been reported from committee .

normally , each measure introduced in the house is routinely referred to a committee and cannot receive floor consideration until the committee reports .

because house committees are in general not required to report measures , they can normally prevent house action on any referred measure simply by taking no action thereon .

this "gatekeeping" function is a key reason for the central position of committees in shaping the congressional agenda .

the discharge rule provides one of the few procedures by which the house can circumvent this gatekeeping role .

more generally , the discharge rule offers the only means by which a majority of house members may secure consideration of any measure against the simultaneous opposition of the committee of jurisdiction , the leadership of the majority party , and the committee on rules .

other house procedures may permit bringing a measure to the floor over the opposition of some of these entities — but only through the concurrence of others .

for example , the motion to suspend the rules and pass a measure can bring to the floor even an unreported measure , because the motion can suspend the rule requiring it to be reported before it can be considered .

the speaker , however , has discretion in recognition for this motion and , for this purpose , normally recognizes the chair of the committee of jurisdiction ( or the chair's designee ) .

similar practices govern recognition for requests to consider a measure by unanimous consent .

finally , the house can adopt a "special rule" directing that a specified unreported measure be "extracted" from committee and taken up on the floor .

special rules , however , are normally privileged for consideration only when reported by the rules committee .

the discharge procedure is designed to be difficult to accomplish so as to discourage members from resorting routinely to a procedure that takes control of the floor agenda away from the rules committee and other leadership organs that are normally responsible for it .

a discharge motion may be offered on the floor only if a majority of the entire membership of the house , 218 members , first signs a petition in support of the action .

 ( delegates are not eligible to sign. ) .

a member may initiate such a petition only after the measure has remained in committee for at least 30 legislative days without being reported .

seldom is a petition filed this soon ; members generally refrain from initiating one until they consider it clear that the committee does not plan to act .

the discharge rule explicitly excludes private bills from being subject to discharge .

the chair once asserted that a resolution to establish an investigating committee also is immune from discharge .

apparently , discharge may be sought on any other measure pending before committees of the house .

a member obtains the petition form at the clerk's desk in the house chamber , where pending petitions are also maintained and made available for signature .

members may sign a petition only by going to the clerk's desk while the house is in session .

members may sign or remove their names until the total of 218 is obtained , at which point the signature list is frozen and printed in the record , and the motion is "entered" on the discharge calendar .

few petitions reach this point .

for those that do , the process usually takes some months , although on three occasions the petition garnered the necessary signatures in one day .

the motion to discharge may then be offered on the floor , but only at the beginning of a day's session that falls at least seven legislative days after the motion is entered ; only on a "discharge day" ( the second or fourth monday of each month ) ; and not during the last six days of a session of congress .

any member who signed the petition may offer the motion ; normally the one who initiated the petition is recognized .

the motion is debatable for 20 minutes , equally divided between supporters and opponents ( typically , controlled by the member calling it up and the chair of the committee to be discharged ) .

if a simple majority of members present and voting adopt the motion , the committee is discharged , and the house may proceed to consider the measure .

because the measure has not been reported , however , it comes to the floor in the form introduced , with no recommended committee amendments and no written committee report to guide members or establish legislative history .

once the house acts on a discharge motion on any measure , any further action under the discharge rule is precluded for any measure on the same subject during the same session of congress ( that is , roughly , for that calendar year ) .

at the final sine die adjournment of a congress , all legislative business terminates , including pending discharge petitions .

a discharge motion that never comes to the floor may still serve proponents' purposes , for a committee may sometimes respond to a discharge effort by reporting the measure on its own initiative .

this response may become increasingly likely as the petition approaches or obtains the required 218 signatures .

even counting such cases , nevertheless , usually no more than one measure on which discharge is attempted reaches the house floor in a single congress .

also , some such measures fail to pass the house , and only 30 have ever become law or otherwise received final approval .

within the structure of this general mechanism , the discharge rule incorporates two distinct approaches: the petition may be filed either directly on the unreported measure itself or on a special rule for its consideration .

the first approach permits the committee of referral to nullify the discharge attempt by reporting the measure , for once the committee no longer has the measure in its possession , it can no longer be discharged .

the committee may even wait until all 218 signatures are obtained and then report the measure before the next discharge day .

the motion to discharge then cannot be called up , because it is moot .

although the measure is then procedurally available to be considered , it remains unlikely to reach the floor unless the reporting committee takes action to bring it up .

if a measure is referred to more than one committee , all the committees may be discharged simultaneously by a single petition .

a measure referred to multiple committees remains eligible for action under the discharge rule until all committees of referral report it ( or otherwise lose possession of it ) .

in these circumstances a single committee cannot nullify the discharge attempt by reporting unless it is the last committee holding the measure .

if 218 signatures are obtained and the committee does not report the measure , the discharge motion may be called up , and the house may adopt it .

any member who signed the petition may then move for the house to take up the measure under the appropriate general rules .

 ( if this motion is defeated , the measure may later be taken up by any of the usual means , but these , again , are normally under the control of the leadership. ) .

if a measure reaching the floor by discharge is a "money bill" ( including an authorization , appropriation , or revenue bill ) house rules mandate that it initially be considered in the committee of the whole ; the proper motion is therefore that the house resolve into the committee of the whole for its consideration .

if the house agrees to this motion , the measure is considered under the equivalent of an "open rule": it is read by section for amendment , and any germane amendment is in order to each section .

this form of consideration offers no possibility of limiting or structuring the amendment process or , conversely , of providing any waivers that prospective amendments might need .

it also precludes limiting the time for general debate on the measure or placing it under the control of managers except by unanimous consent .

if the house agrees to discharge on a measure that is not a "money bill," then the motion in order is that the house consider it .

on agreement to this motion , the house considers the measure under the "one - hour rule," which permits the member calling up the measure to move the previous question after one hour of debate .

if the house orders the previous question , it then proceeds to vote on the measure in the form introduced before any member has any opportunity to offer an amendment .

even if the house defeats the previous question , a member who led the effort to do so then normally offers an amendment and is recognized for one hour for debate , at the end of which he or she moves the previous question on the amendment and the measure .

under these conditions , too , this first method of discharge provides no way to adapt the terms of consideration and amendment to the circumstances of the specific measure .

the second method of discharge was added to house rules in 1931 as a means of avoiding the difficulties just discussed , and it became more common in the mid - 1990s .

under this second approach , a member must first draft and submit a special rule ( which takes the form of a house resolution ) providing that a specified measure be considered even if it remains unreported .

the special rule may not permit the offering of any non - germane amendment nor provide for consideration of more than one measure .

if the rules committee has not reported this resolution after seven legislative days , the same ( or another ) member may file a petition to discharge that committee from considering it .

at that point , the measure the special rule makes in order either must have remained in committee for at least 30 legislative days or must have been reported .

if the petition obtains the requisite 218 signatures , the motion in order on a discharge day is to discharge the rules committee from the resolution .

if that motion is adopted , the house then automatically proceeds to consider the resolution under the one - hour rule , just as with any other special rule .

presumably , the member who offered the motion to discharge would likely be recognized to control the one - hour debate on the resolution .

the member would normally yield half the hour to an opponent , most likely a representative of the rules committee , and would move the previous question on the resolution at the end of the debate .

if the house orders the previous question and then agrees to the resolution itself , the terms of the resolution bring the desired measure out of committee and to the floor , just as with an "extraction rule" that the rules committee may report in the ordinary course of events .

this method permits supporters of a measure to propose whatever terms to regulate the consideration and amendment of the measure they find appropriate to the specific situation , just as the rules committee normally does .

a special rule for such purposes normally provides that consideration continue on subsequent days , if necessary , until a final vote .

such a provision guards against the possibility that the leadership will recover control of the floor agenda by turning to other business before the house completes action on the desired measure .

this second approach to discharge also prevents the committee of jurisdiction from nullifying the discharge effort by reporting the measure and then taking no steps to call it up .

if the special rule provides for considering a measure whether or not it has been reported , then even if the committee does report the measure , its action raises no obstacle to discharging the rules committee from consideration of the special rule .

house rules also protect against the possibility that the rules committee itself might attempt to vitiate a discharge effort by reporting the special rule and then declining to call it up .

if the committee reports any special rule and then fails to call it up within seven legislative days , house rule xiii , clause 6 ( d ) , requires the speaker to recognize any member of the committee for that purpose once he or she has given one day's notice of intent to do so .

this requirement protects any discharge effort that can rely on cooperation from at least one member of the rules committee .

finally , if the committee reports the special rule adversely , house rule xiii , clause 6 ( e ) , and house rule xv , clause 3 , require the speaker , on any discharge day , to recognize any member of the house for the purpose of calling up that special rule .

the chief potential difficulty with this second approach is that it requires members to draft the special rule at the beginning of the process even though , by the time the measure reaches the floor , judgments about appropriate terms for consideration may have changed .

care may be required to formulate terms for consideration that are flexible enough to accommodate unforeseen circumstances , such as permitting amendments to be offered that may remedy problems recognized subsequently or that may attract broader support .

when members seek to discharge the rules committee from a special rule for considering an unreported measure , the actual obstacle to action is presumably not the rules committee but rather the committee to which the measure is referred .

by contrast , if the rules committee declines to report a special rule for considering a measure that the committee of jurisdiction has reported , it can itself become the obstacle to consideration .

such action is not common today but was more frequent before the mid - 1960s , when the committee often did not work as an organ of the leadership in managing the agenda .

the second method of discharge offers recourse in these circumstances as well , for members may submit , and seek discharge on , a special rule for considering the already reported measure .

this approach was used , for example , by supporters of campaign finance legislation in the 107 th congress .

in such cases , the reporting committee might even support the attempt to discharge the rules committee .

although the rules committee cannot nullify a discharge attempt directed against a special rule by reporting the special rule , in recent years it has often taken another course of action by which it may recover control of the floor agenda .

often after a discharge petition has obtained the required 218 signatures , and sometimes when such a result has seemed imminent , the committee has reported not the special rule on which discharge was being sought but its own special rule for considering the same measure ( or , sometimes , for considering an alternative measure on the same subject ) .

the committee has then called up this special rule during the required layover period before the discharge motion can be brought to the floor .

the house has then often adopted this resolution , in which case it has then considered the measure under the schedule and terms that the committee ( and perhaps the leadership and the committee of jurisdiction ) has found appropriate rather than those preferred by the supporters of discharge .

these special rules have also provided that no further action take place pursuant to the original discharge petition .

as a result of these actions , supporters of the measure in question still succeed in securing house consideration of the subject , yet the leadership retains its normal control over the schedule and terms of action on the floor .

for consideration of campaign finance legislation in the 107 th congress , however , the rules committee reported a special rule that was identical in text to the one on which discharge had been sought .

under such conditions , the leadership's recovery of floor control might be viewed as merely nominal .

ultimately , however , this course of action does not leave discharge proponents without recourse .

if they dislike the terms for consideration that the rules committee proposes , they can attempt to defeat the committee's special rule , thereby retaining the capacity to call up their discharge motion on a subsequent discharge day .

on some occasions , the prospect of such action has led to a negotiated agreement on the terms of consideration and discharge of the committee by unanimous consent .

u.s. congress .

house committee on rules .

subcommittee on rules of the house .

discharge petition disclosure .

hearing on h.res .

134 .

103 rd cong. , 1 st sess .

washington: gpo , 1993 .

crs report 97-856 , the discharge rule in the house: recent use in historical context , by [author name scrubbed .

