azerbaijan enjoyed a brief period of independence in 1918-1920 , after the collapse of the tsarist russian empire .

however , it was re - conquered by red army forces and thereafter incorporated into the soviet union .

it re - gained independence when the soviet union collapsed at the end of 1991 .

upon independence , azerbaijan continued to be ruled for a while by its soviet - era leader , but in may 1992 he was overthrown and popular front head abulfaz elchibey was soon elected president .

military setbacks in suppressing separatism in the breakaway nagorno karabakh ( nk ) region contributed to elchibey's rise to power , and in turn contributed to his downfall .

in june 1993 , forces in ganja challenged elchibey's power , spurring elchibey to invite heydar aliyev — the leader of azerbaijan's nakhichevan region and a former communist party head of azerbaijan — to baku to mediate the crisis .

the ganja forces marched on baku , causing elchibey to flee the city .

heydar aliyev was elected chairman of the national assembly of azerbaijan , and was granted temporary presidential powers .

a national referendum held in august 1993 formally stripped elchibey of the presidency , and heydar aliyev was elected president of azerbaijan in october 1993 .

in july 1994 , a ceasefire agreement was signed in the nk conflict ( see below ) .

heydar aliyev served until october 2003 , when under worsening health he stepped down .

his son ilkham aliyev was elected president a few days later .

the azerbaijani constitution , approved by a popular referendum in november 1995 , strengthened presidential power and established an 125-member legislature ( milli mejlis ) with a five - year term for deputies .

the president appoints and removes cabinet ministers ( the milli mejlis consents to his choice of prime minister ) , submits budgetary and other legislation that cannot be amended but only approved or rejected within 56 days , and appoints local officials .

the u.s. state department viewed an august 2002 constitutional referendum as flawed and as doing "very little to advance democratization. .

after the october 2003 presidential election , protests alleging a rigged vote resulted in violence , and spurred reported government detentions of more than 700 opposition party "instigators. .

trials reportedly resulted in several dozen prison sentences .

in early 2005 , the osce issued a report that raised concerns about credible allegations of use in the trials of evidence derived through torture .

aliyev in march 2005 pardoned 114 prisoners , including many termed political prisoners by the osce .

a presidential election was held on october 15 , 2008 .

in early june 2008 , the legislature approved changes to the electoral code .

some of the changes had been recommended by the venice commission , an advisory body of the council of europe .

however , other recommendations of the venice commission were not considered , including those on eliminating the dominance of government representatives on election commissions .

the opposition azadliq ( freedom ) party bloc decided on july 20 that it would boycott the election on the grounds that the election laws were not fair , their parties faced harassment , and media were constrained .

incumbent president aliyev won a resounding victory , gaining nearly 89% of the vote against six other candidates .

according to a report by election monitors sponsored by the osce , the voting process was peaceful , well organized , and efficient , but there was a "lack of robust competition" and there appeared to be "significant procedural shortcomings [in vote counting] in many cases , and manipulation in some instances. .

the next presidential election is scheduled for october 2013 .

proposed amendments to the constitution were overwhelmingly approved by citizens in a referendum held on march 18 , 2009 .

according to a small delegation from pace , the voting "was transparent , well organized , and held in a peaceful atmosphere. .

they criticized the dearth of discussion in the media of the merits of the constitutional amendments and voiced regret that some changes to the amendments proposed by the venice commission were not made before they were voted on .

some opposition parties had in particular objected to an amendment lifting term limits on the presidency during a "state of war," and had called for a boycott of the referendum .

on december 23 , 2009 , municipal elections were held throughout the country .

opposition parties and local election monitors reported interference in the candidate registration process .

a council of europe delegation alleged that there were shortcomings in the counting of voters in the polling stations , the legibility of ballot papers , and the reliability of the vote count .

the collapse of the soviet union and the nk conflict in the early 1990s contributed to the decline of azerbaijan's gdp by over 60% by 1995 .

beginning in the late 1990s , rising oil and gas exports ( and rising world prices for oil ) fueled gdp growth in azerbaijan .

the global economic downturn and decline in oil prices contributed to lower , but still positive , gdp growth in 2008 through 2010 .

in 2011 , however , gdp growth slowed substantially to a scant 0.1% , mainly because maintenance work in the oilfields contributed to reduced oil exports , according to the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) .

this reduced economic activity was compensated somewhat by growth in the construction , agricultural , and service sectors , marking the growing impact of such non - energy sectors on economic growth .

in 2012 , the azerbaijani government reported that the economy grew 2.2% and that inflation was a modest 1.8% .

the eiu and other sources suggest that gdp growth rate may actually have been less and inflation may have been more , and that the economy remained sluggish because of lagging oil production , which was mitigated somewhat by growth in the manufacturing sector .

inflation may have eased in 2012 from 8.1% in 2011 partly due to an improved harvest and moderating food prices .

the eiu predicts that gdp growth will average about 2.3% per year for the next few years , due to the leveling - off of oil production until new oil and gas fields come on - line .

in january 2013 , british petroleum ( bp ) , the main foreign energy firm operating in azerbaijan , estimated that the shah deniz phase two offshore gas fields would come on stream in 2018 .

until then , the government may continue to draw on the assets of the state oil fund — a sovereign wealth fund containing profits from energy exports — to alleviate budget deficits .

in 2013 , the government plans its largest transfer to date from the wealth fund to support rising social expenditures in the run - up to the presidential election planned for october 2013 .

in its 2009 doing business report , the world bank commended azerbaijan as one of the top 10 global economic reformers because of business regulatory reforms it had undertaken over the previous two years that protected investors and simplified taxes .

azerbaijani authorities had hoped that the reforms would facilitate azerbaijan's admission to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

in its 2013 doing business report , however , the world bank raised concerns that reforms had stalled , as indicated by a fall in azerbaijan's rankings from 33 in 2009 to 67 in 2012 out of 185 countries surveyed .

positive developments included comparative ease in registering business property and resolving contract enforcement cases , but construction permits remained difficult to obtain , and substantial corruption and monopolies continued to constrain business development , according to the world bank .

on february 12 , 2013 , president aliyev insisted that local officials step up their support for entrepreneurs and not "interfere" with them by making "illegal demands," perhaps alluding to calls for bribes .

the government claims that the unemployment rate has decreased in recent years to about 5% and the poverty rate to about 8% .

about 38% of the population is employed in agriculture , although it contributes to under 10% of gdp .

it is reported that there are still substantial numbers of azerbaijanis who work in russia — by some estimates up to 1 million — although in recent years azerbaijan also has hosted varying numbers of legal and illegal migrant workers in the energy , construction , and trade sectors .

the u.s. commerce department reports that u.s. exports to azerbaijan were $514 million in 2012 and imports were $1.1 billion .

while exports had risen from the previous year , imports had declined by over one - half , mainly due to slowing demand for azerbaijani oil .

the united states exported mainly machinery and transport equipment and food to azerbaijan in 2012 .

president ilkham aliyev has emphasized good relations with the neighboring states of georgia and turkey , but relations with these and other countries have often been guided by their stance regarding the nk conflict .

azerbaijan has viewed turkey as a major ally to balance russian and iranian influence , and armenia's ties with russia .

relations with turkmenistan are strained by competing claims over offshore oil and gas fields ( see below ) .

azerbaijan is a member of the osce , black sea economic cooperation group , council of europe ( coe ) , economic cooperation organization , and organization of the islamic conference .

in may 2011 , azerbaijan joined the non - aligned movement , although it does not claim neutrality and its national security concept posits euro - atlantic integration as a "strategic goal. .

ethnic consciousness among some "southern azerbaijanis" in iran has grown , which iran has countered through increasingly repressive actions .

azerbaijani elites fear iranian - supported islamic fundamentalism and question the degree of iran's support for an independent azerbaijan .

azerbaijan's relations with iran were roiled in february 2012 when iran accused azerbaijan of harboring israeli intelligence agents who had crossed the azerbaijani - iran border to carry out operations , allegedly including assassinations of iranian nuclear scientists .

that same month , azerbaijan sentenced seven individuals it had arrested in 2008 that it claimed had been trained in iran to carry out terrorism , including plans to bomb the israeli embassy .

in late february , azerbaijan confirmed that it had reached a large arms deal with israel , but stated that the weapons purchase was aimed not against iran but to "liberate" occupied territories .

attempts to ease azerbaijani - iranian tensions included a meeting between the foreign ministers of iran , azerbaijan , and turkey in nakhichevan , azerbaijan , on march 7 , 2012 , and a trip by defense minister safar abiyev to tehran a week later .

abiyev stressed that azerbaijani territory would not be used to launch attacks on iran .

two days later , however , the azerbaijan national security ministry announced that nearly two dozen terrorists trained in iran had been arrested , who allegedly had been planning attacks on israeli and u.s. embassies and other western interests .

at the end of the month , the ministry reported that two other iranian spy networks had been uncovered in 2011 .

also in late march 2012 , iran increased its accusations that azerbaijan was providing israel with military access to launch attacks on iran after such allegations appeared in western media .

in early april , iran arrested some individuals it claimed were israeli agents being directed from an unnamed nearby country , presumably azerbaijan .

on april 12 , azerbaijani media reported that the government had arrested several iranians and azerbaijanis involved in weapons and drug smuggling from iran .

in early may 2012 , iran recalled its ambassador to azerbaijan for "consultations" following anti - iranian protests outside iran's embassy in baku against iranian criticism of the eurovision song contest to be held on may 22-26 , 2012 , in baku .

iran claimed that the recall occurred because the protesters had maligned its supreme leader , grand ayatollah sayyid ali khamenei , and had made other anti - islamic statements .

the azerbaijani foreign ministry reportedly responded to the recall by announcing that "some people are jealous about azerbaijan's development [and] the organization of a grand event such as eurovision," and requested that iran apologize for "insulting statements" about azerbaijan .

on may 8 , 2012 , iranians protested against azerbaijani "immorality" at the azerbaijani consulate in tabriz , iran .

in june 2012 , the azerbaijani foreign ministry warned citizens that travel to iran was not safe , pointing to the holding of two azerbaijani poets since may .

in late june 2012 , the iranian ambassador returned to baku .

the two poets were convicted on spy charges in august 2012 , but were released in early september 2012 , and azerbaijan also paroled an iranian reporter convicted on drug charges just before a visit by the iranian vice president to azerbaijan .

in october 2012 , president ahmadinezhad met with president aliyev on the sidelines of the economic cooperation organization summit in baku , and both leaders reportedly expressed satisfaction with the development of political , economic , and cultural cooperation between their two countries , and called for further expanding economic ties .

azerbaijani officials reportedly have pledged to iran that azerbaijan will not be used as a launching pad for third - party aggression against tehran , but also have vowed to support international sanctions against iran .

frictions in azerbaijani - russian relations have included azerbaijan's allegations of a russian "tilt" toward armenia in nk peace talks .

in 1997 , russia admitted that large amounts of russian weaponry had been quietly transferred to armenia , and in 2000 and 2005-2007 , russia transferred heavy weaponry from georgia to armenia , fueling azerbaijan's view that russia supports armenia in the nk conflict .

azerbaijani - russian relations appeared to improve in 2002 when the two states agreed on a 10-year russian lease for the soviet - era gabala ( qabala ) early warning radar station in azerbaijan and reached accord on delineating caspian sea borders .

perhaps seeking russian support for his new rule , ilkham aliyev in march 2004 reaffirmed the 1997 azerbaijani - russian friendship treaty .

after the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , azerbaijan appeared to move toward better relations with russia .

during russian president medvedev's late june 2009 visit to baku , azerbaijan agreed to send small amounts of gas to russia ( see below ) .

azerbaijan's relations with russia appeared even closer in 2010 as a reaction against the turkish initiative to improve relations with armenia and u.s. administration backing for this effort .

some strains have appeared in relations , however , since vladimir putin returned as russia's president in early 2012 .

these have included azerbaijan's demurral of putin's invitation for it to join the eurasian customs union and the breakdown of talks on renewing the russian lease on the gabala radar site ( see below ) .

according to former armenian foreign minister vartan oskanyan , article 4 of the commonwealth of independent states' collective security treaty ( signatories including russia , armenia , belarus , and all the central asian states except turkmenistan ) pertains to aggression from outside the commonwealth , and therefore does not pertain to the nk conflict ( since azerbaijan is a member of the commonwealth ) .

after the collective security treaty organization ( csto ) agreed to form large rapid response forces in february 2009 , however , some policymakers in armenia claimed the forces could be a deterrent to possible azerbaijani aggression .

some policymakers in azerbaijan likewise viewed the formation of the forces as a threat .

the secretary - general of the collective security treaty organization ( csto ) , nikolai bordyuzha , has proclaimed that the csto would never intervene in the nk conflict , but also has stressed that armenia and russia have close bilateral military ties .

in may 2011 , armenian defense minister seiran oganian reportedly asserted that armenia would expect csto members to support armenia in case of aggression against nk , which elicited a protest from the azerbaijani presidential office .

the agreement signed in august 2010 that extends the lease on russia's military facilities in armenia pledges russia to defend armenia's security , which appeared to be interpreted by armenian president serzh sargisyan to include defense against a possible azerbaijani attack on nk .

in december 2012 , president sargisyan stated that in case of war with azerbaijan , armenia was counting on the support of its allies in the csto , rhetorically asking "why else are we in the organization ? .

in january 2013 , president sargisyan stressed in a speech at the defense ministry that the strategic partnership between armenia and russia is "the nucleus of armenian security," and that membership in the csto also is the "real guarantee of armenia's security. .

the csto has refused to state what it would do in case of the escalation of conflict between armenia and azerbaijan .

in september 2012 , however , the csto rapid reaction forces held an exercise in armenia that simulated repulsing an invasion of armenia by "terrorists. .

one russian newspaper reported in january 2013 that russia recently had transformed its forces in armenia to primarily professional contract troops , in anticipation of possible azerbaijani military action against armenia or israeli action against iran .

the report depicted azerbaijan as making unfriendly moves against russia and quoted a russian lieutenant general as stating that whether russia will defend armenia from an azerbaijani action will be a "political decision," but that the russian forces should be ready .

in september 2008 , turkey's president abdullah gül visited armenia , ostensibly to see a soccer game , and this thaw contributed to the two countries reaching agreement in april 2009 on a "road map" for normalizing ties , including the establishment of full diplomatic relations and the opening of borders .

after further negotiations , turkish foreign minister ahmet davutoglu and armenian foreign minister edvard nalbandian initialed two protocols "on establishing diplomatic relations," and "on development of bilateral relations" on august 31 , 2009 , and formally signed them on october 10 , 2009 .

azerbaijan strongly criticized turkey for moving toward normalizing relations with armenia without formally linking such a move to a peace settlement of the nk conflict .

this criticism quickly elicited pledges by turkey's leaders that the turkish legislature would not approve the protocols until there was progress in settling the nk conflict .

on april 22 , 2010 , the ruling armenian party coalition issued a statement that "considering the turkish side's refusal to fulfill the requirement to ratify the accord without preconditions in a reasonable time , making the continuation of the ratification process in the national parliament pointless , we consider it necessary to suspend this process. .

the united states reportedly actively supported switzerland in mediating the talks that led to the signing of the protocols .

on april 14 , 2010 , president aliyev warned that the obama administration's backing of the protocols threatened u.s. interests in azerbaijan , stating that "how can we defend and support the interests of someone who is acting against our interests ? .

the next day , azerbaijani presidential administration official ali hasanov asserted that "if the united states continues to demonstrate a biased position on the nk issue , azerbaijan may reconsider its strategic partnership ties with the united states. .

the u.s. state department responded that the united states remained evenhanded in its mediation efforts .

a few days later , azerbaijan cancelled a military exercise scheduled with the united states for may 2010 .

azerbaijani armed forces consist of 66,940 army , air force , air defense , and navy troops .

there also are about 5,000 border guards and more than 10,000 interior ( police ) ministry troops .

the military budget has greatly increased in recent years , amounting to about $3.0 billion in 2012 and $3.7 billion in 2013 .

azerbaijan has agreements for military training with russia , turkey , and nato ( see below ) , and purchases arms from russia , turkey , ukraine , israel , and others .

a military doctrine approved by the legislature in mid - 2010 terms the continued occupation of azerbaijani land and external support for the occupation to be the major threats .

about 1,400-1,500 russian troops were deployed at the gabala radar site ( mentioned above ) under a lease agreement that expired at the end of 2012 , after which the troops were pulled out .

russia purportedly had rejected azerbaijani requests for an increase in lease payments from $7 million per year to $300 million .

azerbaijan reportedly received foreign - made weapons of uncertain origin and armed volunteers from various islamic nations to assist its early 1990s struggle to retain nk .

in 1994 , azerbaijan joined nato's partnership for peace ( pfp ) and began its first individual partnership action plan ( ipap ) in 2005 , but president aliyev has not stated that the country seeks to join nato .

some azerbaijani troops have participated in nato peacekeeping in kosovo since 1997 and operations in afghanistan since 2003 ( see below ) .

the bulk of azerbaijani weapons reportedly come from russia , ukraine , and belarus , although some nato - compatible communications and other equipment has been received .

in a june 2011 military parade , azerbaijan showed s - 300 air defense missiles supplied by russia ( following reports in mid - 2010 that russia would sell the s - 300s to baku , armenia announced that it already had them ) .

in accordance with recommendations by the ipap , a civilian agency to manage conscription was established in 2012 .

the united states has endeavored to reassure azerbaijan that it continues to be a "strategic partner" in counter - terrorism cooperation and energy security and has appeared to balance these u.s. interests against its concerns about democratization in azerbaijan .

according to some observers , relations between the united states and azerbaijan had cooled after the administration supported reconciliation efforts in 2009 between armenia and turkey which azerbaijan opposed , and after president ilkham aliyev was not invited to the u.s. nuclear security summit in early 2010 .

although relations may have cooled somewhat during this time , azerbaijan continued to supply troops for nato operations in afghanistan and played a significant role as part of the northern distribution network for the transit of u.s. and nato supplies to afghanistan ( see below ) .

to underline the significance of u.s. - azerbaijan relations , then - secretary of defense robert gates visited azerbaijan in june 2010 and secretary of state hillary clinton visited in july 2010 , and president obama met with president aliyev on the sidelines of the u.n. general assembly in september 2010 .

during her july 4 , 2010 , visit to azerbaijan , secretary clinton stressed that azerbaijan was an important bilateral partner of the united states .

she claimed that azerbaijan had made "tremendous progress" in democratization and respect for human rights since its independence , but that "there is a lot of room for improvement" on such problems as restrictions on the media and civil society .

she argued that such progress also has been a slow and incomplete process in the united states .

she stated that "speaking personally , for myself , i would like to see [section 907] repealed , but that's up to the [u.s. congress] .

and until the congress agrees , then we will continue to waive its effects on azerbaijan. .

president obama also stressed the importance of u.s. - azerbaijani relations when he met with president aliyev on september 24 , 2010 .

president obama expressed his appreciation for azerbaijan's contributions to supporting the nato mission in afghanistan , and the two presidents pledged to support closer bilateral ties .

u.s. - azerbaijani relations appeared to generally improve — with some fits and starts — in 2011 and thereafter with the recess appointment of ambassador to azerbaijan matthew bryza , after more than a year without an ambassador ( the appointment expired at the end of the year , however ) .

perhaps reflecting tensions associated with u.s. criticism of human rights developments , in april 2011 azerbaijan canceled participation in the u.s. - azerbaijani military exercise regional response , planned for may 2011 ( similarly , a 2010 military exercise was cancelled for reasons also subject to speculation of being linked to the status of bilateral ties ) .

however , azerbaijani deputy foreign minister araz azimov and assistant secretary of state andrew shapiro met in baku in june 2011 for the 12 th session of the u.s. - azerbaijan security dialogue .

also , azerbaijan participated in romania in early august 2011 with u.s. forces in black sea rotational force training activities , and then in san antonio , tx , in training for infantry officers .

in october 2011 , deputy secretary of state william burns visited the three south caucasian states .

in baku , he reportedly stated that "azerbaijan is an important u.s. ally," praised azerbaijan's troop support in afghanistan and its important role in the diversification of energy exports to europe , and stressed that resolving the nk conflict is a priority u.s. interest .

in late 2011 , the united states backed azerbaijan's successful bid for a two - year term on the u.n. security council ( unsc ) .

in early 2012 , azerbaijan's national security ministry and other sources reported that alleged iranian - backed terrorists had planned attacks against the u.s. and israeli embassies in baku and their personnel and other targets , but that azerbaijani security forces had carried out several arrests and operations that appeared to vitiate the threat .

in april 2012 , the obama administration "re - launched" meetings of the u.s. - azerbaijan intergovernmental commission on economic cooperation , which had last convened in 2008 .

at the session in washington , dc , azerbaijani co - head samir sharifov reported that president aliyev had instructed the delegation to "intensify efforts" to expand the current "strategic partnership" between the two countries .

in may 2012 , president aliyev twice visited the united states .

he presided at a u.n. security council meeting on counter - terrorism on may 4 and attended the nato summit in chicago on may 19-22 .

in a speech on may 4 , he stated that "azerbaijan is a reliable partner of the united states and these relations have turned into a strategic partnership. .

in a speech at the nato summit , he pledged that azerbaijan would continue to assist afghanistan after the pull - out of nato forces in 2014 .

an extended meeting with president obama was not reported .

during her june 6 , 2012 , visit to azerbaijan , secretary clinton stated that she discussed the key issues of security , energy , and democratization with president aliyev .

she thanked azerbaijan for its "essential" role in the transit of personnel and supplies to afghanistan , and its "central role" in europe's efforts to diversify sources of energy and transport routes .

she called for further democratization and for the release of individuals detained for expressing their views in print or on the streets .

she commended the government for releasing bakhtiyar hajiyev ( mentioned above ) and held a meeting with civil society leaders .

she also condemned violence along the line of contact between armenian and azerbaijani forces , and urged restraint .

at his june 2012 confirmation hearing to become ambassador to azerbaijan , richard morningstar testified that the "wide range of shared interests" between the united states and azerbaijan "intersects with many of the united states' highest foreign policy priorities. .

he outlined "three core areas of importance to the relationship: security , energy , and democratic and economic reform," and stressed that "the administration believes we must intensify our cooperation in these areas. .

he also warned that security and prosperity in the south caucasus could only be assured by the peaceful settlement of the nk conflict , and he pledged to , if confirmed , support the efforts of the minsk group .

he was confirmed by the senate at the end of june 2012 and presented his credentials to president aliyev in september 2012 .

u.s. cumulative budgeted assistance to azerbaijan from fy1992 through fy2010 was $975.75 million ( all agencies and programs ) .

budgeted aid to azerbaijan was $26.4 million in fy2011 and an estimated $20.9 million in fy2012 ( "function 150" foreign assistance programs , excluding defense department funding ) .

under the continuing appropriations resolution for fy2013 , signed into law on september 28 , 2012 ( p.l .

112-175 ) , regular foreign aid accounts are funded until late march 2013 at the same level as in fy2012 plus .612% , and most country allocations may be adjusted at agency discretion .

because of azerbaijan's substantial economic development , the united states in recent years has cooperated with azerbaijan to co - finance economic growth and other programs .

in fy2013 , the administration's budget request called for devoting the largest share of assistance to democratization , followed by peace and security and support for economic growth .

in the realm of democratization , the administration planned to ameliorate "a restrictive environment for democratic activists" by assisting in training journalists , increasing internet access , and providing legal assistance for citizens and activists .

peace and security assistance was planned to support azerbaijan's participation in u.s. and nato operations in afghanistan , developing maritime security , and modernizing the military .

other aid was planned to support counter - terrorism and counter - narcotics efforts , prevent trafficking in persons , bolster border security , improve arms stockpile security , and destroy landmines .

economic aid was planned to bolster agricultural income and exports ; share best practices on banking supervision ; and to increase competitiveness , the investment climate , foreign trade , and azerbaijan's efforts to join the wto .

since fy2004 , azerbaijan has been designated as a candidate country for enhanced u.s. development aid from the millennium challenge corporation , but it has not been selected as eligible for aid because of low scores on measures of political rights , civil liberties , control of corruption , government effectiveness , the rule of law , accountability , and various social indicators .

congressional concerns about the ongoing nk conflict led in 1992 to section 907 of the freedom support act ( p.l .

102-511 ) that prohibited most u.s. government - to - government assistance to azerbaijan until the president determined that azerbaijan had made "demonstrable steps to cease all blockades and other offensive uses of force against armenia and nagorno - karabakh. .

congress eased many section 907 restrictions on a year - by - year basis until the terrorist attacks on the united states in september 2001 , after which it approved an annually renewable presidential waiver ( p.l .

107-115 ) .

the conference managers stated that the waiver was conditional on azerbaijan's cooperation with the united states in combating terrorism and directed that aid provided under the waiver not undermine the peace process .

foreign military financing ( fmf ) , international military education and training ( imet ) , and other security programs were launched in azerbaijan .

congress has called for equal funding each year for fmf and imet for armenia and azerbaijan .

other congressional initiatives have included the creation of a south caucasus funding category in fy1998 to encourage an nk peace settlement , provide for reconstruction , and facilitate regional economic integration .

congress also has called for humanitarian aid to nk , which has amounted to over $36 million expended from fy1998 through fy2011 .

congress passed "the silk road strategy act" in fy2000 ( as part of consolidated appropriations , p.l .

106-113 ) calling for enhanced policy and aid to support conflict amelioration , humanitarian needs , democracy , economic development , transport and communications , and border controls in the south caucasus and central asia .

after the terrorist attacks on the united states on september 11 , 2001 , azerbaijan "granted blanket overflight clearance , engaged in information sharing and law - enforcement cooperation , and approved numerous landings and refueling operations at baku's civilian airport in support of u.s. and coalition military operations" in afghanistan .

azerbaijan has contributed troops to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan since 2003 .

it increased its contingent from 45 to 90 personnel in 2009 , and there are currently 94 personnel deployed , including medical and civil affairs specialists .

azerbaijan also has contributed to afghan demining and civil service training .

from 2003-2008 , about 150 azerbaijani troops participated in the coalition stabilization force for iraq .

azerbaijan and kyrgyzstan reportedly are the main overflight , refueling , and landing routes for u.s. and coalition troops bound for afghanistan , and azerbaijan also is a major land , air , and sea transport route for military fuel , food , and construction supplies .

the azerbaijani route is one of three main routes through russia , the south caucasus , and central asia to afghanistan , together termed the ndn , that have supplemented — and for several months in 2011-2012 , supplanted — supply routes through pakistan .

according to former ambassador to azerbaijan matthew bryza , in recent years , "virtually every u.s. soldier deployed to afghanistan has flown over azerbaijan. .

he also reported that over one - third of all non - lethal equipment , fuel , clothing , and food used by u.s. troops in afghanistan transited by ground and sea through the port of baku .

one media source reported in late 2012 that uscentcom was working out plans for shipping equipment and materials out of afghanistan and across the caspian sea to azerbaijan , where the goods would then be transported through turkey to europe .

according to this account , uscentcom envisaged using this route for about 5% of goods exiting afghanistan in 2013-2014 .

