internet gambling is gambling on , or by means of , the internet .

it encompasses placing a bet online with a bookie , betting shop , or other gambling enterprise .

it also includes wagering on a game played online .

a few states ban internet gambling per se .

most states , however , rely upon their generally applicable gambling laws .

gambling that is unlawful when conducted in person is ordinarily unlawful when conducted online .

there are many federal gambling laws , most enacted to prevent unwelcome intrusions of interstate or international gambling into states where the activity in question has been outlawed .

in very general terms , it is a federal crime to use wire communications to place or receive bets on , or to transmit gambling information relating to , sporting contests or events ; to conduct a large - scale gambling business in violation of state law ; to travel interstate or overseas , or to use any other facility of interstate or foreign commerce , to facilitate the operation of an illegal gambling business ; to conduct a gambling business and accept payment for illegal internet gambling participation ; to systematically commit these crimes in order to acquire or operate a commercial enterprise ; to launder the proceeds of an illegal gambling business or to plow them back into the business ; to spend or deposit more than $10,000 of the proceeds of illegal gambling in any manner ; or to conspire with others , or to aid and abet them , in their violation of any of these federal laws .

commentators most often mention the wire act when discussing federal criminal laws that outlaw internet gambling in one form or another .

early federal prosecutions of internet gambling generally charged violations of the wire act .

in fact , cohen , perhaps the most widely known of federal internet gambling prosecutions , involved the wire act conviction , upheld on appeal , of the operator of an offshore , online sports book .

in general terms , the wire act outlaws the use of interstate telephone facilities by those in the gambling business to transmit bets or gambling - related information .

offenders are subject to imprisonment for not more than two years and / or a fine of the greater of not more than twice the gain or loss associated with the offense or $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) .

they may have their telephone service canceled at law enforcement request , and conduct that violates the wire act may provide the basis for a prosecution under the money laundering statutes , the travel act , the illegal gambling business act , rico , or the unlawful internet gambling enforcement act .

wire act prohibitions apply to anyone who i. being engaged in the business of betting or wagering ii .

knowingly iii .

uses a wire communication facility iv .

a. for the transmission in interstate or foreign commerce 1. of bets or wagers or 2. information assisting in the placing of bets or wagers on any sporting event or contest , or b. for the transmission of a wire communication which entitles the recipient to receive money or credit as a result of bets or wagers , or c. for information assisting in the placing of bets or wagers.... 18 u.s.c .

1084 ( a ) .

as a general matter , the wire act has been more sparingly used than some of the other federal gambling statutes , and as a consequence it lacks some of interpretative benefits which a more extensive case law might bring .

the act is addressed to those "engaged in the business of betting or wagering" and therefore apparently cannot be used to prosecute simple bettors .

the government must prove that the defendant was aware of the fact he was using a wire facility to transmit a bet or gambling - related information ; it need not prove that he knew that such use was unlawful .

the courts have also rejected the contention that the prohibition applies only to those who transmit , concluding that "use for transmission" embraces both those who send and those who receive the transmission .

grammatically , interstate transmission appears as a feature of only half of the elements ( compare , "for the transmission in interstate or foreign commerce of bets or wagers or information assisting in the placing of bets or wagers on any sporting event or contest," ( iv.a.1 & 2. above ) , with , "for the transmission of a wire communication which entitles the recipient to receive money or credit as a result of bets or wagers , or for information assisting in the placing of bets or wagers," ( 4.b .

& c. above ) .

nevertheless , virtually every court to consider the question has concluded that a knowing , interstate or foreign transmission is an indispensable element of any wire act prosecution .

as a practical matter , the justice department appears to have resolved the question of whether the section applies only to cases involving gambling on sporting events ( compare iv.a.1 & 2. with iv.b .

& c. again ) .

the vast majority of prosecutions involve sports gambling , but cases involving other forms of gambling under the wire act are not unknown .

one federal appellate panel concluded that the wire act applies only to sports gambling ; while a subsequent district court concluded that it applies to non - sports gambling as well .

the justice department's office of legal counsel , however , ultimately opined that "interstate transmissions of wire communications that do not relate to a 'sporting event or contest,' 18 u.s.c .

§1084 ( a ) , fall outside the reach of the wire act. .

construction of the wire act is complicated by the defense available under subsection 1084 ( b ) for the transmission of gambling information .

read casually it might suggest a general defense , but the district court in the internet gambling case in the southern district of new york has highlighted its more restrictive scope , "the §1084 ( b ) exemption by its terms applies only to the transmission of information assisting in the placing of bets , not to the other acts prohibited in §1084 ( a ) , i.e .

 , transmission of ( 1 ) bets or wages or ( 2 ) wire communications entitling the recipient to money or credit as a result of bets or wagers .

with regard to transmissions of information assisting in the placing of bets , the exemption is further narrowed by its requirement that the betting at issue be legal in both jurisdictions in which the transmission occurs .

no exemption applies to the other wire communications proscribed in §1084 ( a ) even if the betting at issue is legal in both jurisdictions .

see united states v. mcdonough , 835 f.2d 1103 , 1105 ( 5 th cir .

1988 ) . .

the second circuit panel in cohen , endorsed the court's construction .

an accomplice who aids and abets another in the commission of a federal crime may be treated as if he had committed the crime himself .

the classic definition from nye & nissen explains that liability for aiding and abetting attaches when one "in some sort associates himself with the venture , participates in it as in something that he wishes to bring about , [and] seeks by his action to make it succeed. .

the department of justice advised the national association of broadcasters that its members risked prosecution for aiding and abetting when they provided advertising for the online gambling operations .

in addition to such accomplice liability , a conspirator who contrives with another for the commission of a federal crime is liable for conspiracy , any completed underlying crime , and for any additional , foreseeable offense committed by a confederate in furtherance of the common scheme .

there is some dispute over the application of the wire act to certain horse racing activities .

some contend that the wire act was amended sub silentio by an appropriations rider rewording a provision in the civil interstate horseracing act .

the justice department does not share this view .

the interstate horseracing act is the product of the emergence of state licensed off - track betting parlors .

the parlors accepted wagers on races conducted both within the state and without .

race tracks and those dependent upon their success objected that the tracks were losing customers who lived proximate to both an in state track and an off - track betting parlor in a neighboring state .

the horseracing act provides for compensation agreements .

more precisely , it prohibits acceptance of interstate off - track wagers except as it provides , but permits such acceptance with the consent of various horse racing associations , state horse racing commissions , state off - track racing commissions , and horse racing track operators .

it affords aggrieved states , horse racing associations and horsemen's groups a cause of action against violators of its provisions .

it neither provides criminal penalties nor explicitly addresses its relationship to other federal and state gambling laws .

although the act calls for the consent of the operators of any track located within 60 miles of an off - track betting office , it does not give track operators a cause of action for failure to comply with this or any of its other requirements .

one track operator attempted unsuccessfully to invoke the wire act and federal racketeer influenced and corrupt organization ( rico ) provisions to overcome this limitation .

suffolk claimed that the defendant , who operated an off - track betting site within 60 miles of suffolk , accepted wagers on interstate races without its consent and that these activities involved the patterned interstate transmission of gambling - assisting information ( race results ) from the track to the off - track betting parlor in violation of the wire act and consequently constituted a rico violation , id .

at 1272 .

the first circuit affirmed the lower court's rejection of the claim on the basis of the wire act exception found in 18 u.s.c .

1084 ( b ) that exempts the interstate transmission of sports gambling - assisting information to and from jurisdictions where gambling on such sporting events or contests is legal .

summarizing in general terms , the court declared: to recapitulate , we think it clear that congress , in adopting section 1084 , did not intend to criminalize acts that neither the affected states nor congress itself deemed criminal in nature .

[the defendant's] acts fall into this chiaroscuro category — perhaps not right , but certainly not felonious .

it follows that these acts , not indictable under section 1084 , cannot constitute a pattern of racketeering activity within rico's definitional parameters .

id .

at 1273 .

the operator of an off - shore internet gambling site subsequently seized upon this "congress - did - not - intend - to - criminalize" language when challenging his conviction under the wire act .

the second circuit in cohen rejected the challenge with the observation that unlike suffolk where the transmission of gambling - related information came within the safe harbor of section 1084 ( b ) , cohen's case involved the online ( i.e. , wire ) transmission of wagers themselves , a transmission that falls outside the safe harbor provision of the section 1084 ( b ) .

the facts that gave rise to suffolk and cohen , however , occurred prior to the 2000 amendments to the interstate horseracing act .

p.l .

106-553 , which made appropriations for the district of columbia as well as for the departments of commerce , justice and state , and which amended the definition of "interstate off - track wager" in the interstate horseracing act to read: "interstate off - track wager" means a legal wager placed or accepted in one state with respect to the outcome of a horserace taking place in another state and includes pari - mutuel wagers , where lawful in each state involved , placed or transmitted by an individual in one state via telephone or other electronic media and accepted by an off - track betting system in the same or another state , as well as the combination of any pari - mutuel wagering pools .

15 u.s.c .

3002 ( 3 ) ; sec .

629 , p.l .

106-533 , 114 stat .

2762-108 ( 2000 ) ( language of the amendment in italics ) .

the language in italics was added for the first time in conference with the simple accompanying explanation which in its entirety declares , "the conference agreement includes a new section 629 , to clarify the interstate horseracing act regarding certain pari - mutuel wagers. .

a critic objected to the amendment during floor debate .

otherwise the only reference was "inserted or appended , rather than spoken , by a member of the house on the floor. .

proponents claim the amendment permits tracks to accept online , out - of - state bets from states where pari - mutuel betting is legal ( although not necessarily where either off - track or online betting is legal ) ; the justice department disagrees .

uncertainty over the issue apparently led an appellate body of the world trade organization ( wto ) to conclude that the united states may permit domestic entities to offer internet gambling on horse racing , but denies offshore entities such an opportunity .

during hearings on the unlawful internet gambling enforcement act , the justice department indicated that to confirm its understanding of the law it was conducting "a civil investigation relating to a potential violation of law regarding this activity. .

section 1955 , which outlaws conducting an illegal gambling business , appears on its face to reach any illegal gambling business conducted using the internet .

commentators seem to concur .

however , early prosecutions under the wire act were more prevalent .

violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years and / or fines of the greater of not more than twice the gain or loss associated with the offense or $250,000 ( $500,000 for an organization ) .

moreover , the federal government may confiscate any money or other property used in violation of the section .

the offense may also provide the foundation for a prosecution under the travel act , the money laundering statutes , and rico .

the sanctions of the illegal gambling business act apply to anyone who i .

a. conducts , b. finances , c. manages , d. supervises , e. directs , or f. owns ii .

all or part of an illegal gambling business that iii .

a. is a violation of the law of a state or political subdivision in which it is conducted ; b. involves five or more persons who conduct , finance , manage , supervise , direct , or own all or part of such business ; and c. has been or remains in substantially continuous operation for a period in excess of thirty days or has a gross revenue of $2,000 in any single day .

"[n]umerous cases have recognized that 18 u.s.c .

1955 proscribes any degree of participation in an illegal gambling business except participation as a mere bettor. .

or as more recently described , "'[c]onductors' extends to those on lower echelons , but with a function at their level necessary to the illegal gambling operation. .

the section bars only those activities that involve illegal gambling under applicable state law and that meet the statutory definition of such a business .

illegal gambling is at the threshold of any prosecution under the section , and cannot to be pursued if the underlying state law is unenforceable under either the united states constitution , or the operative state constitution .

the business element can be satisfied ( for any endeavor involving five or more participants ) either by continuity ( "has been or remains in substantially continuous operation for period in excess of thirty days" ) or by volume ( "has a gross revenue of $2,000 in any single day" ) .

the volume prong is fairly self - explanatory and the courts have been fairly generous in their assessment of continuity .

they are divided , however , on the question of whether the jurisdictional five and continuity / volume features must coincide .

there is no such diversity of opinion on the question of whether section 1955 lies within the scope of congress's legislative authority under the commerce clause .

the supreme court's decision in united states v. lopez , finding the gun free school zone act ( 18 u.s.c .

922 ( q ) ) beyond the bounds of congress's commerce clause power , stimulated a host of appellate decisions here and elsewhere .

in the case of section 1955 , lopez challenges have been rejected with the observation that , unlike the statute in lopez , section 1955 ( a ) involves the regulation of a commercial activity ( a gambling business ) , ( b ) comes with jurisdictional elements selected to reserve prosecution to those endeavors likely to substantially affect interstate commerce ( five participants in a substantial gambling undertaking ) , and ( c ) was preceded by congressional findings evidencing the impact of substantial gambling operations upon interstate commerce .

the accomplice and conspiratorial provisions attend violations of section 1955 as they do violations of the wire act .

although frequently difficult to distinguish in a given case , the difference is essentially a matter of depth of involvement .

"[t]o be guilty of aiding and abetting a section 1955 illegal gambling business ... the defendant must have knowledge of the general scope and nature of the illegal gambling business and awareness of the general facts concerning the venture ... [and he] must take action which materially assists in 'conducting , financing , managing , supervising , directing or owning' the business for the purpose of making the business succeed. .

unlike conspiracy , one may only be prosecuted for aiding and abetting the commission of a completed crime ; "before a defendant can be found guilty of aiding and abetting a violation of section 1955 a violation of section 1955 must exist ... [and] aiders and abettors cannot be counted as one of the statutorily required five persons. .

as a general rule , a federal conspiracy exists when two or more individuals agree to commit a federal crime and one of them commits some overt act in furtherance of their common scheme .

"a conspiracy may exist even if a conspirator does not agree to commit or facilitate each and every part of the substantive offense .

the partners in the criminal plan must agree to pursue the same criminal objective and may divide up the work , yet each is responsible for acts of each other .

if the conspirators have a plan which calls for some conspirators to perpetrate the crime and others to provide support , the supporters are as guilty as the perpetrators. .

conspiracy is a separate crime and thus conspirators may be convicted of both substantive violations of section 1955 and conspiracy to commit those violations .

in fact , under the pinkerton doctrine , co - conspirators are liable for conspiracy , the crime which is the object of the conspiracy ( when it is committed ) , and any other reasonably foreseeable crimes of their confederates committed in furtherance of the conspiracy .

the application of the illegal gambling business act to offshore gambling operations that take wagers from bettors in the united states involves two questions .

first , does state law proscribing the gambling in question apply when some of the elements of the offense are committed outside its jurisdiction ? .

second , did congress intend the section to apply beyond the confines of the united states ? .

section 1955 can only apply overseas when based on an allegation that the gambling in question is illegal under a state law whose reach straddles jurisdictional lines .

for example , a statute that prohibits recording bets ( bookmaking ) in texas cannot be used against a gambling business which records bets only in jamaica or dominican republic , even if the bets are called in from texas .

on the other hand , an overseas gambling business may find itself in violation of section 1955 if it accepts wagers from bettors in new york , because new york law considers the gambling to have occurred where the bets are made , inter alia .

whether a federal criminal statute applies overseas is a matter of congressional intent .

the intent is most obvious where congress has expressly stated that a provision shall have extraterritorial application .

section 1955 has no such expression of intended overseas application .

in the absence of an explicit statement , the courts use various interpretive aids to divine congressional intent .

unless some clearer indication appears , congress is presumed to have intended its laws to apply only within the united states .

the courts have recognized contrary indications under several circumstances .

congress will be thought to have intended a criminal proscription to apply outside the united states where one of the elements of the offense , like the commission of an overt act in furtherance of a conspiracy , occurs in the united states .

similarly , congress will be thought to have intended to outlaw overseas crimes calculated to have an impact in the united states , for example , false statements made abroad in order to gain entry into the united states .

finally , congress will be thought to have intended extraterritorial application for a criminal statute where its purpose in enacting the statute would otherwise be frustrated , for instance , the theft of united states property overseas .

there is a countervailing presumption interwoven among these interpretive devices .

congress is presumed not to have intended any extraterritorial application that would be contrary to international law .

international law in the area is a matter of reasonableness , of minimal contacts , traditionally described as permitting geographical application of a nation's laws under five principles: a country's laws may be applied within its own territory ( territorial principle ) ; a country's laws may be applied against its own nationals wherever they are located ( nationality principle ) ; a country's laws may be applied to protect it from threats to its national security ( protective principle ) ; a country's laws may be applied to protect its citizens overseas ( passive personality principle ) ; and a country's laws may be applied against crimes repugnant to the law of nations such as piracy ( universal principle ) .

section 1955 does not say whether it applies overseas .

yet an offshore illegal gambling business whose customers where located in the united states seems within the section's domain because of the effect of the misconduct within the united states .

the operation of an illegal gambling business using the internet may easily involve violations of the travel act , as several writers have noted .

like the illegal gambling business act , travel act convictions result in imprisonment for not more than five years and / or fines of the greater of not more than twice the gain or loss associated with the offense or $250,000 ( $500,000 for an organization ) .

the act may serve as the foundation for a prosecution under the money laundering statutes and rico .

it has neither the service termination features of the wire act nor the forfeiture features of the illegal gambling business act .

the travel act's elements cover anyone who i.a .

travels in interstate or foreign commerce , or b. uses any facility in interstate or foreign commerce , or c. uses the mail ii .

with intent a. to distribute the proceeds of i. any business enterprise involving unlawful activities ( including gambling ) in violation of the laws in which it is conducted or of the laws of the united states ; or ii .

any act which is indictable as money laundering ; or b. to otherwise i. promote , ii .

manage , iii .

establish , iv .

carry on , or v. facilitate the promotion , management , establishment , or carrying on , of any business enterprise involving unlawful activities ( including gambling ) in violation of the laws in which it is conducted or of the laws of the united states , or any act which is indictable as money laundering ; and iii .

thereafter so a. distributes the proceeds from any business enterprise involving gambling or from any act indictable as money laundering , or b. promotes , manages , establishes , carries on , or facilitates the promotion , management , establishment , or carrying on of any business enterprise involving unlawful activities ( including unlawful gambling ) or any act indictable as money laundering .

the courts often abbreviate their statement of the elements: "the government must prove ( 1 ) interstate travel or use of an interstate facility ; ( 2 ) with the intent to ... promote ... an unlawful activity and ( 3 ) followed by performance or attempted performance of acts in furtherance of the unlawful activity. .

the supreme court determined some time ago that the travel act does not apply to the simple customers of an illegal gambling business , although interstate solicitation of those customers may certainly be covered .

when the act's jurisdictional element involves mail or facilities in interstate or foreign commerce , rather than interstate travel , evidence that a telephone was used , or an atm , or the facilities of an interstate banking chain will suffice .

the government is not required to show that the defendant used the facilities himself or that the use was critical to the success of the criminal venture .

it is enough that he caused them to be used and that their employment was useful for his purposes .

moreover , intrastate telephone communications constitute the use of "facilities in interstate or foreign commerce. .

thus in the case of internet gambling , the jurisdictional element of the travel act might be established at a minimum either by reference to the telecommunications component of the internet , to shipments in interstate or foreign commerce ( in or from the united states ) associated with establishing operations on the internet , to any interstate or foreign nexus to the payment of the debts resulting from the gambling , or to any interstate or foreign distribution of the proceeds of such gambling .

a criminal business enterprise , as understood in the travel act , "contemplates a continuous course of business — one that already exists at the time of the overt act or is intended thereafter .

evidence of an isolated criminal act , or even sporadic acts , will not suffice," and it must be shown to be involved in an unlawful activity outlawed by a specifically identified state or federal statute .

finally , the government must establish some overt act in furtherance of the illicit business committed after the interstate travel or the use of the interstate facility .

accomplice and co - conspirator liability , discussed earlier , apply with equal force to the travel act .

the act would only apply to "business enterprises" involved in illegal gaming , so that e - mail gambling between individuals would likely not be covered .

and rewis , supra , seems to bar prosecution of an internet gambling enterprise's customers as long as they remain mere customers .

but an internet gambling venture that constitutes an illegal gambling business for purposes of section 1955 , supra , and is engaged in some form of interstate or foreign commercial activity in furtherance of the business will almost inevitably have included a travel act violation .

the wire act , the illegal gambling business act , and the travel act implicitly outlaw internet gambling and related activity .

the unlawful internet gambling enforcement act ( uigea ) does so explicitly .

more exactly , it prohibits those who engage in a gambling business from accepting payments related to unlawful internet gambling .

violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years and / or a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for organizations ) .

offenders may be subject to civil and regulatory enforcement actions as well .

the unlawful internet gambling enforcement act declares that i .

no person ii .

engaged in the business of betting or wagering iii .

may knowingly accept iv .

in connection with participation of another person v. in unlawful internet gambling vi .

a. credit , or the proceeds of credit , extended to or on behalf of such other person ( including credit extended through the use of a credit card ; or b. an electronic fund transfer , or funds transmitted by or through a money transmitting business , or the proceeds of an electronic fund transfer or money transmitting service , from or on behalf of such other person ; or c. any check , draft , or similar instrument which is drawn by or on behalf of such other person and is drawn on or payable at or through any financial institution ; or d. the proceeds of any other form of financial transaction , as the secretary and the board of governors of the federal reserve system may jointly prescribe by regulation , which involves a financial institution as a payor or financial intermediary on behalf of or for the benefit of such other person .

uigea's proscription draws meaning from a host of definitions , exceptions , and exclusions — some stated , others implied .

it does not define "person. .

nevertheless , as elsewhere in the united states code , "persons" for purposes of uigea means individuals as well as "corporations , companies , associations , firms , partnerships , societies , and joint stock companies. .

it does not define the "business of betting or wagering," although it defines what it is not and defines the terms that provide the grist for such a business: bets or wagers .

the business of betting or wagering does not encompass the normal business activities of financial or communications service providers , unless they are participants in an unlawful internet gambling enterprise .

on the other hand , congress chose the term "business of betting or wagering" rather than the term "illegal gambling business," found in the illegal gambling business act .

this implies that uigea covers businesses regardless of whether they met the threshold requirements of illegal gambling business act , that is ( 1 ) five participants and ( 2 ) continuous operations for at least thirty days or gross revenues in excess of $2,000 a day .

to come within the statute's reach , a business must involve "bets or wagers" and must accept payment relating "unlawful internet gambling. .

to bet or wager is to stake something on the outcome of a game or event .

more exactly , "[t]he term 'bet or wager' — ( a ) means the staking or risking by any person of something of value upon the outcome of a contest of others , a sporting event , or a game subject to chance , upon an agreement or understanding that the person or another person will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome. .

earlier in uigea's legislative history , the definition of "bet or wager" used the phrase "a game predominantly subject to chance" rather than simply "a game subject to chance. .

the justice department questioned whether the original phrase was "sufficient to cover card games , such as poker. .

the change in language appears to accommodate that concern by extending coverage to games that have an element of chance , even if not necessarily a predominant element .

the definition also explicitly covers lotteries and information relating to the financial aspects of gambling .

the list of other common activities exempted from the definition includes securities and commodities exchange activities , insurance , internet games and promotions that do not involve betting , and certain fantasy sporting activities .

"unlawful internet gambling" refers to an internet bet or wager that is illegal in the place where it is placed , received , or transmitted .

the term does not encompass various forms of internet use by the horse racing industry , regardless of their legal status over other provisions of law .

if certain conditions are met , the definition also exempts from uigea's prohibitions certain intrastate and intratribal forms of gambling , like state lotteries and indian casinos that operate under state regulations or compacts .

to qualify for the intrastate exception , a bet must: ( 1 ) be made and received in the same state ; ( 2 ) comply with applicable state law that authorizes the gambling and the method of transmission including any age and location verification and security requirements ; and ( 3 ) be in accord with various federal gambling laws .

the intratribal exception is comparable , but a little different .

compliance with the various federal gambling laws remains a condition .

and there are comparable security as well as age and location verification demands .

the intratribal gambling , however , may involve transmissions between the lands of two or more tribes and need not be within the same state .

definitions aside , uigea's prohibitions can only be breached by one who acts "knowingly. .

as a general rule , "the word 'knowingly' means that the defendant realized what she was doing and was aware of the nature of her conduct and did not act through ignorance , mistake or accident. .

however , "the term 'knowingly' does not necessarily have any reference to a culpable state of mind or to knowledge of the law. .

there is nothing to shield uigea defendants from the same general accomplice and conspirator liability provisions that apply in the case of any other federal felony .

those who aid or abet a violation , that is , those who knowingly embrace the criminal activity and assist in its commission with an eye to its success , are liable to the same extent as those who commit the offense directly .

conspirators are liable for conspiracy , for any completed crime that is the object of the plot , and for any additional , foreseeable offense committed by a confederate in furtherance of the common scheme .

section 5362 ( 2 ) excludes the activities of financial institutions , as well as communications and internet service providers , from the definition of "business of betting or wagering. .

section 5367 declares that such entities may nonetheless incur liability under the act if they are directly engaged in the operation of an internet gambling site .

neither section precludes their incurring liability as accomplices or co - conspirators .

as noted earlier , whether a federal law applies to conduct committed entirely outside the united states is ordinarily a matter of congressional intent .

the most obvious indicia of congressional intent is a statement within a particular statute that its provisions are to have extraterritorial application .

uigea contains no such statement .

its legislative history of the act , however , leaves little doubt that congress was at least as concerned with offshore illegal internet gambling businesses as with those operated entirely within the united states .

offenders may also suffer civil constraints .

uigea creates a limited federal civil cause of action to prevent and restrain violations of the act .

it authorizes federal and state attorneys general to sue in federal court for injunctive relief to prevent and restrain violations of the act .

it does not foreclose other causes of action on other provisions of state or federal law , but it does preclude suits in state court to enforce the act .

it does not expressly authorize a private cause of action .

it does not expressly offer attorneys general or anyone else any prospect of relief other than the federal court orders necessary to prevent and restrain .

moreover , it expressly limits the instances when the attorneys general may institute proceedings against internet service providers and financial institutions .

they may only proceed civilly against financial institutions to block transactions involving unlawful internet gambling unless the institution is directly involved in an unlawful internet gambling business .

barring application of the same direct involvement exception , the attorneys general may sue internet service providers under the act only to block access to unlawful internet gambling sites or to hyperlinks to such sites under limited circumstances .

subject to an exception that mirrors the direct involvement exception , the act also removes providers from the coverage of the wire act provision under which law enforcement officials may insist that communications providers block the wire communications of wire act violators .

neither of the provisions restricting the civil liability of financial institutions and of internet service providers explicitly immunizes them from criminal prosecution for aiding or abetting or for conspiracy .

although uigea restricts the civil liability of financial institutions , it binds them under a regulatory enforcement scheme outlined in the act .

the act calls upon the secretary of the treasury and the governors of the federal reserve board in conjunction with the attorney general to create a regulatory mechanism that identifies and blocks financial transactions prohibited in the act .

among its other features , the mechanism must admit to practical exemptions and ensure that lawful internet gambling transactions are not blocked .

good faith compliance insulates regulated entities from both regulatory and civil liability .

regulatory enforcement falls to the federal trade commission and to the "federal functional regulators" within their areas of jurisdiction , that is , the governors of the federal reserve , the comptroller of the currency , the federal deposit insurance commission , the office of thrift supervision , the national credit union administration , the securities and exchange commission and the commodities exchange commission .

the third circuit has concluded that uigea is neither unconstitutionally vague nor unconstitutionally intrusive on any recognized right to privacy .

illegal gambling may trigger the application of federal racketeering ( rico ) provisions .

violations of the wire act , the illegal gambling business act , and the travel act , as well as any state gambling felony , are all rico predicate offenses .

rico violations are punishable by imprisonment for not more than twenty years and / or a fine of greater of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for an organization ) or twice the gain or loss associated with the offense .

an offender's crime - tainted property may be confiscated , and he may be liable to his victims for triple damages and subject to other sanctions upon the petition of the government .

rico makes it a federal crime for any person to i. conduct or participate , directly or indirectly , in the conduct of ii .

the affairs of an enterprise iii .

engaged in or the activities of which affect , interstate or foreign commerce iv .

a. through the collection of an unlawful debt , or b. through a pattern of racketeering activity , defined to include: 1. any act of gambling which is chargeable under state law and punishable by imprisonment or more than 1 year ; 2. any act which is indictable under 18 u.s.c .

1084 ( wire act ) ; 3. any act which is indictable under 18 u.s.c .

1952 ( travel act ) ; 4. any act which is indictable under 18 u.s.c .

1955 ( relating to conducting an illegal gambling business , 18 u.s.c .

1962 ( c ) .

"to establish the elements of a substantive rico offense , the government must prove ( 1 ) that an enterprise existed ; ( 2 ) that the enterprise affected interstate or foreign commerce ; ( 3 ) that the defendant associated with the enterprise ; ( 4 ) that the defendant participated , directly or indirectly , in the conduct of the affairs of the enterprise ; and ( 5 ) that the defendant participated in the enterprise through a pattern of racketeering activity by committing at least two racketeering ( predicate ) acts [ e.g . , 18 u.s.c .

1084 ( wire act ) , 18 u.s.c .

1952 ( travel act ) , 18 u.s.c .

1955 ( illegal gambling business ) ] .

to establish the charge of conspiracy to violate the rico statute , the government must prove , in addition to elements one , two and three described immediately above , that the defendant objectively manifested an agreement to participate ... in the affairs of the enterprise. .

the "person" who commits a rico offense need not be a human being , but may be "any individual or entity capable of holding a legal or beneficial interest in property," the "enterprise" element is defined with comparable breath , embracing "any individual , partnership , corporation , association , or other legal entity , and any union or group of individuals associated in fact although not a legal entity. .

in spite of their sweeping scope , the elements are distinct and a single defendant may not be simultaneously charged as both the "person" and the "enterprise" under 18 u.s.c .

1962 ( c ) .

subject to this limitation , however , a rico enterprise may be formal or informal , legal or illegal .

in order for a group associated in fact to constitute a rico enterprise , it "must have at least three structural features: a purpose , relationships among those associated with the enterprise , and longevity sufficient to permit these associates to pursue the enterprise's purpose. .

on the other hand , it "need not have a hierarchical structure or a 'chain of command' ; decisions may be made on an ad hoc basis and by any number methods.... members of the group need not have fixed roles. .

and , "nothing in rico exempts an enterprise whose associates engage in spurts of activity punctuated by periods of quiescence. .

the interstate commerce element of the rico offense may be established either by evidence that the enterprise has conducted its affairs in interstate commerce or foreign commerce or has engaged in activities that affect interstate commerce or foreign commerce .

the "pattern of racketeering activity" element demands the commission of at least two predicate offenses , which must be of sufficient relationship and continuity to be described as a "pattern. .

related crimes , for pattern purposes , are marked by "the same or similar purposes , results , participants , victims , or methods of commission , or otherwise are interrelated by distinguishing characteristics and are not isolated events. .

the "continuity" of predicate offenses may be shown in two ways , either by prove of the regular occurrences of related misconduct over a period of time in the past ( closed ended ) or by evidence of circumstances suggesting that if not stopped by authorities they would have continued in the future ( open ended ) .

the courts have been reluctant to find the continuity required for a rico pattern for closed ended enterprises ( those with no threat of future predicate offenses ) unless the enterprise's activities spanned a fairly long period of time .

open - ended continuity ( found where there is a threat of future predicate offenses ) is nowhere near as time sensitive and is often found where the predicates consist of murder , drug dealing or other serious crimes or are part of the enterprise's regular way of doing business .

the rico conspiracy and accomplice branches of the law are notable for at least two reasons .

rico conspiracies are outlawed in a subsection of section 1962 that imposes no overt act requirement .

the crime is complete upon the agreement to commit a rico offense .

second , at least in some circuits , rico accomplices are not subject to rico tort liability .

the criminal proscriptions of the uigea do not appear to qualify as a rico predicate offense .

certainly , p.l .

109-437 which created it did not explicitly amend rico to include uigea among the rico predicates .

uigea outlaws certain internet gambling related transactions , not internet gambling itself .

nevertheless , those engaged in the business receipt of revenue from unlawful internet gambling may also be guilty of any of the state or federal gambling felonies that are rico predicate offenses .

congress has enacted several statutes to deal with money laundering .

it would be difficult for an illegal internet gambling business to avoid either of two of the more prominent , 18 u.s.c .

1956 and 1957 , both of which involve financial disposition of the proceeds of various state and federal crimes , including violation of 18 u.s.c .

1084 ( wire act ) , 18 u.s.c .

1955 ( illegal gambling business ) , 18 u.s.c .

1952 ( travel act ) , or any state gambling law ( if punishable by imprisonment for more than one year ) .

in fact , santos , one of the landmark cases in the development of federal money laundering law , is a gambling case .

in other instances , the lower federal courts have frequently upheld money laundering convictions predicated upon various gambling offenses .

the crimes under section 1956 are punishable by imprisonment for not more than twenty years or a fine of the greater of not more than twice the value of the property involved in the transaction or not more than $500,000 ; those under section 1957 carry a prison term of not more than ten years or a fine of the greater of twice the amount involved in the offense or not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 for an organization ) .

any property involved in a violation of either section is subject to the civil and criminal forfeiture provisions of 18 u.s.c .

981 , 982 .

section 1956 creates several distinct crimes: ( 1 ) laundering with intent to promote an illicit activity such as an unlawful gambling business ; ( 2 ) laundering to evade taxes ; ( 3 ) laundering to conceal or disguise ; ( 4 ) structuring financial transactions ( smurfing ) to avoid reporting requirements ; ( 5 ) international laundering ; and ( 6 ) "laundering" conduct by those caught in a law enforcement sting .

constitutional objections initially greeted the prospect of prosecuting illegal internet gambling .

principal among these have been questions as to congress's legislative power under the commerce clause , restrictions imposed by the first amendment's guarantee of free speech , and due process concerns about the regulation of activities occurring at least in part overseas .

8 u.s.c .

1101 ( a ) ( 43 ) ( d ) , ( j ) ( definition of aggravated felony ( grounds for deportation of an alien ) includes violations of 18 u.s.c .

1956 & 1957 ( money laundering ) and 18 u.s.c .

1084 ( interstate transmission of gambling information ) , 1955 ( gambling business ) , 1962 ( rico ) ) 8 u.s.c .

1101 ( f ) ( 4 ) , ( 5 ) ( no one whose income is derived from gambling and no one with 2 or more gambling convictions can be consider of good moral character ) ( grounds to deny entry into the u.s. ) 8 u.s.c .

1182 ( a ) ( 2 ) ( d ) ( iii ) ( excludable aliens include those coming to the u.s. to engage in commercialized vice ) ( grounds for denying entry and for deportation of aliens who were excludable at the time of entry ) 12 u.s.c .

25a ( national banks may not participate in lotteries or related activities ) 12 u.s.c .

339 ( state member banks ( members of federal reserve ) may not participate in lotteries or related activities ) 12 u.s.c .

1463 ( federal savings associations may not participate in lotteries or related activities ) 12 u.s.c .

1829a ( state nonmember but federally insured banks may not participate in lotteries or related activities ) 15 u.s.c .

1171 to 1178 ( unlawful interstate or international transportation of gambling devices ) 15 u.s.c .

3001 to 3007 ( interstate horseracing act ) 18 u.s.c .

224 ( bribery with intent to influence the outcome of a sporting event ) 18 u.s.c .

1081 to 1083 ( gambling ships ) 18 u.s.c .

1084 ( interstate or international transmission of wagering information ) 18 u.s.c .

1301 ( interstate or international transportation of lottery tickets ) 18 u.s.c .

1302 ( mailing lottery tickets or related matter ) 18 u.s.c .

1303 ( postal officials acting as lottery agents ) 18 u.s.c .

1304 ( broadcasting lottery information ) 18 u.s.c .

1305 ( fishing contests exempted ) 18 u.s.c .

1306 ( penalties for violating 12 u.s.c .

25a , 339 , and 1829a ) 18 u.s.c .

1307 ( exemptions for state - run lotteries ) 18 u.s.c .

1511 ( obstructing state or local law enforcement officials to facilitate an illegal gambling business ) 18 u.s.c .

1952 ( interstate or foreign travel or use of the mails to facilitate illegal activities defined to include business enterprises involving gambling ) 18 u.s.c .

1953 ( interstate or foreign transportation of wagering paraphernalia ) 18 u.s.c .

1955 ( engaging in an illegal gambling business ) 18 u.s.c .

1956 ( money laundering of funds associated with any of a list of predicate offenses which includes ) , by way of 18 u.s.c .

1961 , 18 u.s.c .

1955 ) 18 u.s.c .

1957 ( engaging in financial transactions involving funds derived from any of the crimes in the money laundering predicate list , eg , 18 u.s.c .

1955 ) 18 u.s.c .

1959 ( violent crimes in aid of racketeering defined to include 18 u.s.c .

1955 , again by way of 18 u.s.c .

1961 ) 18 u.s.c .

1961-1965 ( racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations ( rico ) prohibits patterned use of predicate crimes to acquire or operate an enterprise affecting interstate or foreign commerce ; predicate crime list includes 18 u.s.c .

1955 ) 19 u.s.c .

1305 ( prohibits the importation of lottery tickets or advertisements for lotteries , inter alia ) 25 u.s.c .

2701 to 2721 ( regulation of indian gaming ) 26 u.s.c .

4401 to 4405 ( federal taxes on wagers ) 26 u.s.c .

4411 to 4424 ( gambling occupation tax ) 26 u.s.c .

5723 ( tobacco products manufactured in or imported into the u.s. may not include lottery tickets ) 28 u.s.c .

3701 to 3704 ( protection of professional and amateur sports from gambling ) 31 u.s.c .

5361 to 5367 ( unlawful internet gambling enforcement act ) 39 u.s.c .

3005 ( restrictions on mailing lottery - related ) .

