article i , section 2 , of the constitution states: "the house of representatives shall chuse their speaker and other officers. .

the position of speaker combines several roles: the institutional role of presiding officer and administrative head of the house , the partisan role of leader of the majority party in the house , and the representative role of an elected member of the house .

as the "elect of the elect," the speaker has perhaps the most visible job in congress .

by statute , the speaker is also second in line , behind the vice president , to succeed to the presidency .

the constitution does not describe the office of the speaker or its duties , nor was there any significant discussion of the office during the constitutional convention .

the use of the title "speaker" probably has its origins in the british house of commons , where the presiding officer acted as the chamber's spokesman to the crown , but any assumptions the authors of the constitution had for the office undoubtedly also drew upon their own experiences in colonial legislatures and the continental congress .

there does not seem to have been any grand plan or specific expectation as to how the founding fathers envisioned the speakership .

rather , the speakership has been shaped largely by the various individuals who have held the post , the circumstances in which they have operated , formal obligations that have been assigned to the office by house rules and by statute , the character of the house as a political and constitutional institution , and traditions and customs that have evolved over time .

when the house of representatives convenes at the beginning of a new congress , its first order of business is to elect a speaker .

because the house dissolves at the end of a congress and must start anew at the beginning of each new congress , the clerk of the house presides over the house under general parliamentary law until a speaker is elected .

for its first 50 years , the house elected the speaker by ballot .

in 1839 , this method was changed to election by vive voce , meaning that each member names aloud whom he or she favors for speaker .

tellers then record the result .

in modern practice , each party places the name of a single member in nomination for the position , but otherwise virtually the same vive voce method is used to elect the speaker .

because the election of the speaker typically takes place before the house adopts its rules of procedure , the election process is defined by precedent and practice rather than by any formal rule .

to be elected speaker , a candidate must receive an absolute majority of the votes cast , which may be less than a majority of the full membership of the house because of vacancies , absentees , or members voting "present. .

although the major parties nominate candidates for the position of speaker , there is no limitation on for whom members may vote .

in fact , there is no requirement that the speaker be a member of the house .

none of the other officers of the house is a member .

if no candidate receives the requisite majority , the roll call is repeated until a speaker is elected .

again , members may continue to vote for any individual , and no restrictions , such as eliminating minority candidates or prohibiting new candidates from being named , are imposed .

for example , at the beginning of the 34 th congress in 1855 , 133 ballots over a period of two months were necessary to elect nathaniel banks of massachusetts as speaker .

the last occasion on which multiple ballots were required to elect a speaker was in 1923 .

at the beginning of the 68 th congress , the nominees from both major parties initially failed to receive a majority of the votes because of votes cast for other candidates by members from the progressive party and from the "progressive wing" of the republican party .

after the republican leadership agreed to accept a number of procedural reforms , many of these members agreed to vote for the republican candidate on the ninth ballot , making frederick gillett of massachusetts the speaker .

if a speaker dies or resigns during a congress , the house immediately elects a new speaker .

although it was an earlier practice of the house to elect a new speaker under these conditions by adopting a resolution to that effect , the modern practice is to use the same practice as employed at the beginning of a congress .

the most recent example occurred during the 114 th congress when paul ryan of wisconsin was elected speaker following the resignation of john boehner of ohio .

after the ballots are tallied , the presiding officer announces the name of the newly elected speaker and then appoints a committee of members to escort the speaker - elect to the chair .

traditionally , the minority floor leader makes remarks and presents the speaker - elect to the house ; the speaker - elect then addresses the chamber before being sworn in by the longest continuously serving member ( the "dean of the house" ) .

the house , at that point , adopts two resolutions , one that informs the senate of the speaker's election and one that directs the clerk to inform the president .

in the 19 th century , longevity of house service was not as important a criterion in selecting the speaker as it is today .

it was not unusual for a member to be elected speaker with only a few years of service .

from 1789 to 1899 , the average length of house service before a member was elected speaker was 7.1 years .

in fact , henry clay of kentucky ( in 1811 ) and william pennington of new jersey ( in 1860 ) were each elected speaker as freshmen .

 ( the first speaker , frederick a. muhlenberg of pennsylvania , was obviously a third , albeit special , case. ) .

the 21 speakers elected between 1899 ( david b. henderson ) and october 2015 ( paul d. ryan ) served an average of 23.3 years in the house prior to their first election as speaker .

the longest pre speakership tenure in this period belonged to jim wright , who served for 17 terms before being elected as speaker .

sam rayburn of texas served longer as speaker than any other member: a tenure of 17 years ( interrupted twice by republican majorities ) .

thomas p. "tip" o'neill jr. of massachusetts holds the record for the longest continuous service as speaker: 10 years .

the record for the shortest tenure belongs to theodore m. pomeroy of new york , who served one day .

 ( appendix a lists all the speakers of the house as well as their party affiliations , home state , and dates of service in that office .

see http: / / history.house.gov / institution / firsts - milestones / speaker - fast - facts / for other "speaker of the house fast facts" [eg , youngest , oldest , etc.]. ) .

although the constitution mentions the office of the speaker , it is silent on duties of the office .

today , the speaker possesses substantial powers under house rules .

among the duties performed are the following: administering the oath of office to members ( the act of 1789 [2 u.s.c .

25] provides that , on the organization of the house , the oath shall be administered by any member — traditionally the member with the longest continuous service — to the speaker and by the speaker to the other members ) ; calling the house to order ( rule i , clause 1 ) ; preserving order and decorum within the chamber and in the galleries ( rule i , clause 2 ) ; recognizing members to speak and make motions ( rule xvii ) ; deciding points of order ( rule i , clause 5 ) ; counting a quorum ( rule xx , clause 7 ( c ) ) ; presenting the pending business to the house for a vote ( rule i , clause 6 ) ; appointing speakers pro tempore ( rule i , clause 8 ) and chairs of the committee of the whole ( rule xviii , clause 1 ) ; certifying various actions of the house , including signing all acts and joint resolutions , writs , warrants , and subpoenas of ( or issued to ) the house ( rule i , clause 4 ) ; appointing select and conference committees ( rule i , clause 11 ) ; appointing certain house officers ( such as the inspector general under rule ii , clause 6 ; the historian of the house under rule ii , clause 7 ; and the general counsel under rule ii , clause 8 ) ; referring measures to committee ( s ) ( rule xii , clause 2 ) ; and examining and approving the journal of the proceedings of the previous day's session ( rule i , clause 1 ) .

the speaker's powers offer him or her considerable latitude to exercise discretion .

under most circumstances , the speaker has the authority to ask members who seek recognition , "for what purpose does the gentleman ( or gentlelady ) rise ? .

the speaker may then decide whether or not to recognize that member for the specific reason given .

in this way the speaker is able to assert control over what motions may be made and therefore what measures will be considered and the general flow of house floor proceedings .

house rule xv , clause 1 , allows the speaker to entertain motions to suspend the rules on mondays , tuesdays , and wednesdays and during the last six days of a session .

discretion over who may be recognized to make such motions gives the speaker virtually complete control over the suspension process .

the institutional role of the speaker also extends beyond the duty to preside over the house .

the speaker also exercises general control over the hall of the house and the house side of the capitol ( rule i , clause 3 ) and serves as the chair of the house office building commission .

the speaker is frequently authorized in statute to appoint members to various boards and commissions , and it is typically the speaker who is the formal recipient of reports or other communications from the president , government agencies , boards , and commissions .

the role of the speaker also extends to the requirement in house rule v , clause 1 , that he or she administer a system for audio and video broadcasting of the proceedings of the house .

rule i , clause 9 , provides for the speaker , in consultation with the minority leader , to devise a system of drug testing in the house .

finally , although it is not prescribed in any formal way , the elevated profile of the office of the speaker often means he or she takes a leading role in negotiations with the senate or president .

under both republican and democratic majorities , speakers have played similar roles as leaders of their parties .

a speaker's role as leader of the majority party is manifested in two ways: within the party conference or caucus and on the house floor .

within the republican party conference , the speaker acts as the chair of the party's steering committee , has four votes on the committee , and also appoints another member of it .

the speaker thus plays a major part in the committee assignment process , because members are nominated to serve on or chair committees by the steering committee .

these nominations are subject to approval by the full party conference and subsequently by the house .

in addition , the speaker is empowered to make nominations directly for the republican conference's consideration for membership ( including chairs ) on the rules committee and the committee on house administration as well as one member ( to serve as the second - ranking republican ) on the budget committee .

the conference rules also authorize the speaker to recommend to the house all republican members of joint , select , and ad hoc committees .

house republican conference rules also provide for the speaker to serve on the national republican congressional committee .

he or she also serves on the party's committee on policy and can appoint additional members to it .

because the speaker's role as leader of the majority party in the house is sometimes at odds with the role as presiding officer of the chamber , house republican conference rule 2 ( c ) states: a member of the elected or designated republican leadership has an obligation , to the best of his or her ability , to support positions adopted by the conference , and the resources of the leadership shall be utilized to support that position .

under the rules of the house democratic caucus ( which are lengthier and more detailed than those of the republican conference ) , a speaker from that party would recommend ( to the caucus ) nominees for officers of the house .

a speaker's prominence within the caucus is reinforced because he or she would chair the steering and policy committee and appoint two vice - chairs , and up to 15 of the committee's members .

in addition , a speaker would appoint one member to the house budget committee .

he or she would nominate the democratic membership on the committee on rules and on the committee on house administration and recommend to the caucus a nominee for chair of these two committees .

a speaker of the democratic party also serves as a member of the democratic congressional campaign committee and appoints eight of its members .

the success of every person to hold the speaker's office since the late 20 th century has been judged , at least in part , on the basis of his or her ability to use personal prestige and the powers of persuasion and bargaining to enunciate and advance his or her party's vision and legislative agenda , as well as on success in maintaining majority control of the house .

to accomplish these objectives , modern speakers have used varying personal styles and engaged in a variety of activities not just in congress or their party conference but outside as well .

for example , they publicize their party's policies and achievements ( by giving speeches , appearing on radio and television , holding press conferences , etc .

 ) , assist party members who are seeking reelection , consult with presidents about both administration and congressional agendas and goals , and act as a spokesman for the opposition when the majority in the house is not the same party as the president .

in the words of one commentator: to an increasing degree , the way for a speaker to win support among colleagues is to influence public opinion.... [a] house leader now needs some credibility outside the institution in order to win on the inside .

bringing coherence and efficiency to a decentralized and individualistic legislative body requires a speaker to use the entire range of tangible and intangible rewards that can be bestowed or withheld .

in an interview , speaker o'neill once described how he wielded these various minor powers by saying: you know , you ask me what are my powers and my authorities around here ? .

the power to recognize on the floor ; little odds and ends — like men get pride out of the prestige of handling the committee of the whole , being named speaker for the day.... [t]here is a certain aura and respect that goes with the speaker's office .

he does have the power to pick up the telephone and call people .

and members oftentimes like to bring their local political leaders or a couple of mayors .

and oftentimes they have problems from their area and they need aid and assistance.... we're happy to try to open the door for them , having been in the town for so many years and knowing so many people .

we do know where a lot of bodies are and we do know how to advise people .

the power to schedule legislation for floor consideration can be used in ways that reflect both institutional and partisan considerations .

the speaker is charged with ensuring that the house processes its fundamental annual workload , but determining what , when , and in which order measures reach the floor can help determine their fate .

a week's delay in scheduling a controversial bill may work to enhance or minimize its chances for passage .

according to speaker o'neill , it was one of his most important powers , because "if [a speaker] doesn't want a certain bill to come up , it usually doesn't. .

similarly , the speaker's authority to appoint conferees can be a powerful tool for influencing the final provisions of a bill .

the members appointed represent a complex balance of support for house , committee , and party positions as determined by the speaker and are not subject to challenge .

modern speakers have also frequently had to act as mediators of conflicts within their parties .

as one leader put it , this involves [t]rying to mollify members who are angry with other members , trying to keep dangerous rifts from developing within the party .

sometimes getting people together of opposite viewpoints and letting them talk their problems out in a way that lets each understand that the other has a problem .

sometimes you can come to a compromise .

balancing parliamentary and partisan roles is not always easily accomplished .

at the start of the 20 th century , historian mary follett assessed this conundrum: the speaker ... is not only allowed , but expected to use his position to advance party interests .

it must not be supposed , however , that this implies gross partisanship on the part of our speakers .

they neither attempt to use every inch of power to be conjured out of the rules , nor guide the house entirely from party motives .

their office has on the whole been administered with justness and fairness .

another assessment states: tradition and unwritten law require that the speaker apply the rules of the house consistently , yet in the twilight zone a large area exists where he may exercise great discrimination and where he has many opportunities to apply the rules to his party's advantage .

although elected as an officer of the house , the speaker continues to be a member of the house as well .

accordingly , the speaker continues to have the same rights , responsibilities , and privileges as all members .

however , because of the speaker's position as leader , it may be notable or even controversial when he or she exercises the powers granted to other members , such as debating , voting , and sitting as a member of a standing committee of the house .

under the principles articulated in jefferson ' s manual , the speaker is typically heard only on matters of order , and it is highly irregular to speak on any other matter while presiding .

the speaker may speak from the floor ( as would any other member ) , and the precedents of the house include examples of the speaker leaving the chair to speak from the well , make motions , or debate points of order .

however , in most periods in the history of the house , these privileges were infrequently exercised .

jonathan dayton of new jersey was the first speaker to speak out on a matter in committee of the whole ( during the fourth congress ) , and it was not until henry clay of kentucky became speaker that this practice became generally accepted .

as late as 1850 , chauncy cleveland of connecticut , then a member of the house , questioned whether it would be right or just by the power of party to place a man in the speaker's chair , and then compel him to use the influence of the chair when he had defined his position... .

it was utterly impossible that the speaker , after having taken his side upon the floor , could go back to the chair , and award the floor with the same impartiality as if he had never spoken .

even today the speaker does not typically participate in debate on the floor , although the speaker may do so when he or she feels it necessary to highlight or rally support for the majority party's agenda .

the right of the speaker to vote has also evolved over time .

the first rules of the house provided: in all cases of ballot by the house , the speaker shall vote ; in other cases he shall not vote , unless the house be equally divided , or unless his vote , if given to the minority , will make the division equal , and in case of such equal division , the question shall be lost .

the speaker was thus prevented from voting on legislative matters , although the precedents of the house record several examples of speakers voting contrary to this rule .

the speaker was allowed to vote in committee of the whole , but most early speakers apparently refrained from this practice as well .

at least twice ( in 1833 and 1837 ) the house debated proposals to compel the speaker to vote on all questions , but these proposals were defeated .

it was not until 1850 that the rule was amended to allow the speaker to vote at his discretion , and the modern form of the rule was not adopted until 1880 .

rule i , clause 7 , currently reads: the speaker is not required to vote in ordinary legislative proceedings , except when his vote would be decisive or when the house is engaged in voting by ballot .

unlike other representatives , the speaker does not sit on any standing committees of the house .

this was not always the case .

the rules committee was for many years a select committee authorized to report a system of rules at the beginning of a congress and later also to report from "time to time. .

beginning in 1858 , and continuing after the rules committee was made a standing committee of the house in 1880 , the speaker served as chairman .

this practice continued through 1910 , when the house adopted a rule prohibiting the speaker from sitting on the rules committee .

the formal prohibition was removed from house rules by the legislative reorganization act of 1946 , but the tradition has continued .

today , the speaker does not sit on the rules committee but does nominate the majority members in the party conference , effectively making the rules committee an integral part of the leadership structure .

appendix a .

speakers of the house of representatives , 1789-2017 appendix b .

select bibliography albert , carl bert .

little giant: the life and times of speaker carl albert .

norman: university of oklahoma press , 1990 .

bentley , judith .

speakers of the house .

new york: franklin watts inc. , 1994 .

biggs , jeffrey r. honor in the house: speaker tom foley .

pullman: university of washington press , 1999 .

clancy , paul r. tip , a biography of thomas p. o ' neill , speaker of the house .

new york: macmillan , 1980 .

cheney , richard b. and lynne v. cheney .

kings of the hill: power and personality in the house of representatives .

new york: continuum , 1983 .

chiu , chang - wei .

the speaker of the house of representatives since 1896 .

new york: columbia university press , 1928 ; reprint edition new york: ams press , 1968. cooper , joseph and david w. brady .

"institutional context and leadership style: the house from cannon to rayburn," american political science review , vol .

75 ( june 1981 ) .

davidson , roger h. , susan webb hammond , and raymond smock .

masters of the house: congressional leadership over two centuries .

boulder , co: west press , 1998 .

follett , mary p. the speaker of the house of representatives .

new york: longmans green , 1902 ; reprint edition new york: burt franklin , 1974 .

fuller , hubert bruce .

the speaker of the house .

boston: little brown , 1909 ; reprint edition new york: arno press , 1974 .

green , matthew n. the speaker of the house: a study of leadership .

new haven: yale university press , 2010 .

harris , douglas b .

"the rise of the public speakership," political science quarterly , vol .

113 ( summer 1998 ) .

hinds , asher c. "the speaker of the house of representatives: origin of the office , its duties and powers," american political science review , vol .

3 ( may 1909 ) .

hitchner , dell g. "the speaker of the house of representatives," parliamentary affairs , vol .

13 ( spring 1960 ) .

kennon , donald r. , ed .

the speakers of the u.s. house of representatives: a bibliography , 1789-1984 .

baltimore: johns hopkins university press , 1986 .

moser , charles a .

the speaker and the house: coalitions and power in the united states house of representatives .

washington: free congress research and education foundation , 1979 .

o'neill , thomas p. jr. man of the house .

new york: random house , 1987 .

peters , ronald m. the american speakership: the office in historical perspective ( 2 nd ed. ) .

 .

baltimore: johns hopkins university press , 1997 .

 — — , ed .

the speaker: leadership in the u.s. house of representatives .

washington: congressional quarterly , 1995 .

peabody , robert l. leadership in congress: stability , succession , and change .

boston: little brown , 1976 .

ripley , randall b .

party leaders in the house of representatives .

washington: brookings institution , 1967 .

rohde , david w. parties and leaders in the postreform house .

chicago: university of chicago press , 1991 .

sinclair , barbara .

majority leadership in the u.s. house .

baltimore: johns hopkins university press , 1983 .

 — — .

legislators , leaders , and lawmaking: the u.s. house of representatives in the postreform era .

baltimore: johns hopkins university press , 1995 .

smith , steven s. "o'neill's legacy for the house," brookings review , vol .

5 ( winter 1987 ) .

smith , william henry .

speakers of the house of representatives of the united states .

new york: ams press , 1971 .

