decisions in july 1997 by the administrator of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) to revise the national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) for ozone and particulate matter ( pm ) refocused attention on the criteria and the process by which these decisions are made .

the new standards have been attacked both as overly stringent and as inadequately protective of health ; as ignoring costs and as giving costs too much deference ; as going beyond what is scientifically conclusive ; and as failing to be sufficiently precautionary .

these issues were the subject of numerous oversight hearings as well as litigation , which culminated in a supreme court ruling february 27 , 2001 .

the court upheld those naaqs setting procedures at question , in particular definitively rejecting the consideration of costs in setting naaqs .

however , the court's ruling also raised questions concerning the implementation of the epa's new ozone standard .

with the court's decision , continuing controversy over the pm and ozone standards , along with other concerns about the clean air act ( caa ) , the expiration in 1998 of the authorizations for appropriations in the statute , and the bush administration's air quality initiative that would amend the act , it is possible that the congress may take up amendments to the caa .

if so , the naaqs decisionmaking process may command attention , especially with respect to how scientific evidence is used – and possibly reopening the question of whether costs should be considered in setting naaqs .

because of discrepancies in views on what transpired — or should have transpired — in epa's development of the 1997 ozone and pm standards , this report provides background on the processes and procedures for setting and revising naaqs .

it lays out the steps of the decision process and identifies the statutory criteria established by the act for naaqs , to aid the reader's understanding of the act's policy for naaqs .

it does not evaluate the decisionmaking process nor assess epa's decisions on the ozone and pm naaqs ; nor does it address the several other categories of pollutants ( eg , hazardous air pollutants ) or other standards - setting activities under the act .

the process by which epa sets and revises naaqs evolved over many years .

initially , federal air quality law focused on supporting state programs , through the conduct of research ( a central , federal research program was more efficient than 50 state research efforts ) and through technical and financial support ( regulation was seen as a state and local matter ) .

by the late 1960s , the federal research effort , located in the national center for air pollution control , public health service , department of health , education , and welfare ( hew ) , included the preparation of "criteria" — a summary of scientific knowledge concerning selected air pollutants — and "guidelines" — a summary of control technologies .

these criteria and guidelines were to support state programs to control air pollution .

as environmental awareness heightened in the late 1960s , the federal role enlarged .

with the clean air act amendments of 1970 , the federal clean air program was moved to the newly created epa and reconstituted , with the federal government becoming responsible for establishing "national ambient air quality standards" for air pollutants endangering public health or welfare and resulting from numerous or diverse mobile or stationary sources .

the states remained primarily responsible for developing implementation plans to attain and maintain compliance with those national standards .

major amendments in 1977 and 1990 refined the naaqs setting and implementation process .

the 1977 amendments formally established the clean air scientific advisory committee ( casac ) and the 5-year review process .

the 1990 amendments increased federal guidance to states in implementing existing naaqs .

thus the present process for setting and revising naaqs consists of the statutory steps incorporated in the caa over a series of amendments .

in addition , several other steps of varying degrees of import have been added by the epa , by executive orders , and by subsequent regulatory reform enactments by the congress .

the steps are depicted in appendix a ; for an example chronology of the steps , see appendix b .

the documentary language spelling out those steps , along with explanatory notes , follows .

the pollutants for which naaqs are set are often called "criteria pollutants. .

this term reflects the evolution of the process .

before there were naaqs , the air quality act of 1967 ( a predecessor of the caa ) required the federal government to list air pollutants and to prepare "criteria" — a report summarizing scientific evidence concerning their health effects .

the states then set standards .

thus the air pollutants for which naaqs were later set were originally air pollutants for which the office of air quality in hew prepared "criteria. .

the current language specifying the listing of "criteria" air pollutants , as modified by the 1970 and 1977 amendments to the caa , is as follows: the administrator shall ... publish , and shall from time to time thereafter revise , a list which includes each air pollutant — ( a ) emissions of which , in his judgment , cause or contribute to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare ; [and] ( b ) the presence of which in the ambient air results from numerous or diverse mobile or stationary sources .... [caa §108 ( a ) ( 1 ) ] with the clean air act amendments of 1970 , the epa became responsible for determining national ambient air quality standards for the "criteria pollutants" — those of such national scope in release or effect that national standards are appropriate .

also , epa was to assist states in attaining these standards through grants and technical assistance , and could impose sanctions on states for failures to fulfill their obligations .

at present , six pollutants are designated "criteria pollutants" for which naaqs have been set: particulate matter ( pm ) , ozone ( o 3 , a key measure of smog ) , nitrogen dioxide ( no 2 , , or , inclusively , nitrogen oxides , nox ) , sulfur oxides ( sox , or , specifically , so 2 ) , carbon monoxide ( co ) , and lead ( pb ) .

the administrator ... shall publish ... regulations prescribing a national primary ambient air quality standard and a national secondary ambient air quality standard for each air pollutant for which air quality criteria have been issued .... [caa §109 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) ] a naaqs is a uniform , national standard establishing the maximum permissible concentration of an air pollutant in the ambient air — the "portion of the atmosphere , external to buildings , to which the general public has access. .

the caa directs the administrator to set a naaqs at a level that provides protection from adverse effects on the public health and welfare .

the act provides for "primary standards" to protect health with a margin of safety and for "secondary standards" to protect welfare .

the procedural steps for promulgating or revising naaqs are set forth in the caa itself — not , as is usual elsewhere , in the administrative procedure act .

affecting this process to varying degrees are several other statutory requirements affecting regulations , notably the regulatory flexibility act , the unfunded mandates reform act , and the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act .

also affecting the process are executive mandates , notably executive order 12866 , regulatory planning and review , and executive order 12848 , federal actions to address environmental justice in minority populations and low - income populations .

for numerous caa rulemakings , including the process for promulgating or revising caa rules , §307 of the caa modifies the procedures of the administrative procedure act governing rulemaking .

the process is codified at 42 u.s.c .

7607 ( d ) .

in general , the procedures require epa to establish a "docket" that contains all the crucial elements of the rulemaking , that is open to public inspection , and that represents all the information available for the administrator's decision .

 ( an additional provision allows evidence not in the docket to be considered in certain cases when the omission was "reasonable." ) .

the key steps of the rulemaking include: ( 1 ) notice of the proposed rulemaking , ( 2 ) a period available for public comment , ( 3 ) promulgation of the rule , which shall include responses to significant comments on the proposal , and ( 4 ) an opportunity for judicial review and challenges to the procedural determinations .

... [t]he administrator shall publish , simultaneously with the issuance of such criteria [document] and information , proposed national primary and secondary ambient air quality standards .... [caa , §109 ( a ) ( 2 ) ] ... [n]otice of proposed rulemaking shall be published in the federal register , ... shall be accompanied by a statement of its basis and purpose and shall specify the period available for public comment ... .

the notice of proposed rulemaking shall also state the docket number , the location ... of the docket , and the times it will be open to public inspection .

[caa §307 ( d ) ( 3 ) ] as an illustration of the process , on june 12 , 1996 epa published an "advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) for national ambient air quality standards for ozone and particulate matter" ( 61 federal register 29719-2925 ) .

this anpr outlined the basis for epa having to make the decision , identified the key documents , and indicated the major options under consideration .

the proposed rules on ozone and pm were released november 27 , 1996 , and published december 13 ( 61 federal register 65638-65872 ) .

each laid out the proposed decision , requested public comment generally and on specific options , told where and how to access the docket , and provided for a 60-day public comment period ( later extended 21 days , until march 12 , 1997 ) .

... [a]fter a reasonable time for interested persons to submit written comments thereon .... [caa , §109 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ] in promulgating a [naaqs] , ... ( i ) the administrator shall allow any person to submit written comments , data , or documentary information ; ( ii ) the administrator shall give interested persons an opportunity for the oral presentation of data , views , or arguments .... [caa , §307 ( d ) ( 5 ) ] in the case of the ozone and particulate matter naaqs proposed by epa in december 1996 , the agency received over 25,000 comments during the public comment period .

also , epa held 4 public hearings .

...[a]fter a reasonable time for interested persons to submit written comments thereon ( but no later than 90 days after the initial publication of such proposed standards ) [the administrator] shall by regulation promulgate such proposed national ambient air quality standards with such modifications as he deems appropriate .

[caa , §109 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ] ( a ) the promulgated rule shall be accompanied by ( i ) a statement of basis and purpose ... and ( ii ) an explanation of the reasons for any major changes in the promulgated rule from the proposed rule .

 ( b ) the promulgated rule shall also be accompanied by a response to each of the significant comments , criticisms , and new data submitted in written or oral presentations during the comment period .

[caa , §307 ( d ) ( 6 ) ] the ozone and particulate matter final decisions were signed by the administrator on july 16 , 1997 and published on july 18 , 1997 ( 62 federal register 38652-38896 ) .

each final rule contained lengthy discussions of issues raised by commentators and the epa's final disposition of them .

each agency shall assess both the costs and the benefits of the intended regulation .... for ... a significant regulatory action ... the agency shall ... provide ... ( i ) an assessment , including the underlying analysis , of benefits anticipated from the regulatory action ( such as , but not limited to , the promotion of the efficient functioning of the economy and private markets , the enhancement of health and safety , the protection of the natural environment , and the elimination or reduction of discrimination or bias ) together with , to the extent feasible , a quantification of those benefits ; ( ii ) an assessment , including the underlying analysis , of costs anticipated from the regulatory action ( such as , but not limited to , the direct cost both to the government in administering the regulation and to businesses and others in complying with the regulation , and any adverse effects on the efficient functioning of the economy , private markets ( including productivity , employment , and competitiveness ) , health , safety , and the natural environment , together with , to the extent feasible , a quantification of those costs ; and ( iii ) an assessment , including the underlying analysis , of costs and benefits of potentially effective and reasonably feasible alternatives to the planned regulation.... [executive order 12866 , 58 fr 51735 ( 4 october 1993 ) ] epa has concluded that naaqs reviews are "significant" regulatory actions requiring preparation of a regulatory impact analysis ( ria ) .

however , epa also explicitly states that "because judicial decisions make clear that cost cannot be considered in setting naaqs , the results of the draft ria have not been considered in developing this proposal" [national ambient air quality standard for ozone: proposed decision , pp .

157-158] .

the 1996 ozone and pm naaqs proposals are the first naaqs rulemakings undertaken since enactment of the unfunded mandates reform act ( umra ) and the regulatory flexibility act ( rfa ) .

while epa concluded that the proposals were "significant regulatory actions" as defined by e.o .

12866 , epa concluded that the proposals do not trigger the regulatory analysis provisions of umra or rfa .

unless otherwise prohibited by law , before promulgating any general notice of proposed rulemaking that is likely to result in promulgation of any rule that includes any federal mandate that may result in the expenditure by state , local , and tribal governments , in the aggregate , or by the private sector , of $100,000,000 or more ( adjusted annually for inflation ) in any 1 year , and before promulgating any final rule for which a general notice of proposed rulemaking was published , the agency shall prepare a written statement containing — ... a qualitative and quantitative assessment of the anticipated costs and benefits of the federal mandate , including the costs and benefits to state , local , and tribal governments or the private sector , as well as the effect of the federal mandate on health , safety , and the natural environment and ... a description of the extent of the agency ' s prior consultation with elected representatives ... of the affected state , local , and tribal governments .... [unfunded mandates reform act of 1995 , §202 ( a ) ] on the issue of unfunded mandates , epa concluded: as indicated previously , epa cannot consider in setting a naaqs the economic or technological feasibility of attaining ambient air quality standards , although such factors may be considered to a degree in the development of state plans to implement the standards .

accordingly , epa has determined that the provision of sections 202 , 203 , and 205 of the umra do not apply to this proposed [naaqs] decision .

the epa acknowledges , however , that any corresponding revisions to associated state implementation plan requirements and air quality surveillance requirements , 40 cfr part 51 and 40 cfr part 58 , respectively , might result in such effects .

accordingly , epa will address unfunded mandates as appropriate when it proposes any revisions to 40 cfr parts 51 and 58 .

[ proposed decision: particulate matter , 61 fr 65670 ( december 13 , 1996 ) ] however , in its pm ria , epa does prepare a governmental entities analysis .

according to epa , "this ... is not an unfunded mandates analysis , but provides estimates of the potential budgetary impact of the control measures used in the control strategy - cost analysis affecting state and local government agencies. .

epa notes that it "will be useful in guiding future implementation activities...." [pm ria , p. 8-20] epa's denial that it had to prepare an unfunded mandates analysis ( regulatory impact statement ) was challenged in court as part of american trucking associations v. u.s. e.p.a .

the d.c .

circuit court noted , however , that the unfunded mandates reform act explicitly states that a failure to prepare an impact analysis "shall not be used as a basis for staying , enjoining , invalidating or otherwise affecting [an] agency rule" [umra , § 1571] .

further , the court held that "the failure to prepare a regulatory impact statement does not render the naaqs arbitrary and capricious. .

[ american trucking associations v. u.s. e.p.a . , 175 f.3d 1027 ( d.c. cir .

1999 ) , modified on other grounds , 195 f.3d 4 ( d.c. cir .

1999 ) .

this issue was not addressed in the appeal to the supreme court , see 531 u.s. 457 ( 2001 ) . .

whenever an agency is required ... to publish general notice of proposed rulemaking for any proposed rule , the agency shall prepare and make available for public comment an initial regulatory flexibility analysis .

such analysis shall describe the impact of the proposed rule on small entities.... [5 u.s.c .

§603 ( a ) ] when an agency promulgates a final rule ... , after being required ... to publish a general notice of proposed rulemaking , the agency shall prepare a final regulatory flexibility analysis.... [5 u.s.c .

§604 ( a ) ] sections 603 and 604 of this title shall not apply to any proposed or final rule if the head of the agency certifies that the rule will not , if promulgated , have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities .

[5 u.s.c .

§605 ( b ) ] on the issue of assessing the impact of regulations on small businesses , epa said the ozone and pm proposed naaqs — will not have a significant economic impact on small entities within the meaning of the rfa .

instead , it will establish a standard of air quality that other act provisions will call on states ( or in case of state default , the federal government ) , to achieve by adopting implementation plans containing specific control measures for that purpose .

in other words , state ( or federal ) regulations implementing the naaqs might establish requirements applicable to small entities , but the naaqs itself would not .

for these reasons , the administrator certifies that this proposed rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. .

[national ambient air quality standard for ozone: proposed decision , pp .

163-164] .

epa nevertheless concedes interest in the "potential impact" of the naaqs and notes that discussion of those impacts are included in the ria .

in the rias , epa performs a "screening analysis" to "evaluate small entity impacts. .

this identifies impacts on industries classified by sic codes .

prior to publication of an initial regulatory flexibility analysis which a covered agency is required to conduct by this chapter — ( 1 ) a covered agency shall notify the chief counsel for advocacy of the small business administration and provide the chief counsel with information on the potential impacts of the proposed rule on small entities and the type of small entities that might be affected ; ( 2 ) not later than 15 days after the date of receipt of the materials described in paragraph ( 1 ) , the chief counsel shall identify individuals representative of affected small entities for the purpose of obtaining advice and recommendations from those individuals about the potential impacts of the proposed rule ; ( 3 ) the agency shall convene a review panel for such rule consisting wholly of full time federal employees of the office within the agency responsible for carrying out the proposed rule , the office of information and regulatory affairs within the office of management and budget , and the chief counsel ; ( 4 ) the panel shall review any material the agency has prepared in connection with this chapter , including any draft proposed rule , collect advice and recommendations of each individual small entity representative identified by the agency after consultation with the chief counsel.... ( 5 ) not later than 60 days after the date a covered agency convenes a review panel pursuant to paragraph ( 3 ) , the review panel shall report on the comments of the small entity representatives and its findings ... ; and ( 6 ) where appropriate , the agency shall modify the proposed rule , the initial regulatory flexibility analysis or the decision on whether an initial regulatory flexibility analysis is required .

[small business regulatory enforcement fairness act of 1996 , §244] on the same basis that it decided the unfunded mandates and the regulatory flexibility act requirements did not apply when setting naaqs , epa concludes "that the small - entity provisions in section 244 of the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act ( sbrefa ) do not apply. .

[national ambient air quality standard for ozone: proposed decision , p. 164] and similarly , epa says it "intends to fulfill the spirit of sbrefa on a voluntary basis" by working with the small business administration to hold panel exercises to solicit comments and advice from representatives of small entities .

as part of american trucking associations v. u.s. e.p.a . , this certification that sbrefa did not apply was challenged .

however , the d.c .

circuit court found "incontestable" epa's argument that setting a naaqs has no direct impact on small businesses because the states , through the sip plan process , determine what sources will be affected .

thus the court concluded that "epa properly certified that its naaqs would not have a significant impact on a substantial number of small entities. .

[ american trucking associations v. u.s. e.p.a . , 175 f.3d 1027 ( d.c. cir .

1999 ) , modified on other grounds , 195 f.3d 4 ( d.c. cir .

1999 ) .

this issue was not addressed in the appeal to the supreme court , see 531 u.s. 457 ( 2001 ) . .

besides the regulatory impact assessments required by the statutes discussed above , provisions of the paperwork reduction act may be triggered by reporting requirements .

in the ozone and pm proposed rules , epa said that this issue would arise only in implementation .

also , executive order 12848 , federal actions to address environmental justice in minority populations and low - income populations , requires each federal agency to identify and address , as appropriate , disproportionate adverse health and environmental impacts of programs , policies , and activities on minorities and low - income populations .

again , epa indicates that analysis of effects on minorities and low - income populations would be appropriately examined in preparation of rias in the implementation process .

the drafts of ... rules submitted by the administrator to the office of management and budget for any interagency review process ... , all documents accompanying such drafts , and all written comments thereon by other agencies and all written responses to such written comments by the administrator shall be placed in the docket .... [caa , §307 ( d ) ( 4 ) ( b ) ( ii ) ] to the extent permitted by law , omb ... shall be the entity that reviews individual regulations ....[executive order 12866] epa's naaqs decisions are subject to this omb review: "in view of its important policy implications , this proposal has been judged to be a 'significant regulatory action' within the meaning of the executive order , and epa has submitted it to omb for review .

changes made in response to omb suggestions or recommendations will be documented in the public docket and made available for public inspection...." [national ambient air quality standard for ozone: proposed decision , p. 157] .

apparently no changes were made on this basis , however .

likewise , drafts of the proposed and final rule are circulated for review to other departments and agencies .

in cases of substantive controversy , as with the ozone and pm 2.5 naaqs , the issue may go to the white house for final adjudication .

a petition for review of action of the administrator in promulgating any national primary or secondary ambient air quality standard , ... may be filed only in the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia .

... any petition for review ... shall be filed within sixty days from the date notice of such promulgation ... appears in the federal register .... [caa , §307 ( b ) ( 1 ) ] epa's naaqs rulemaking is subject to several statutory procedural requirements , compliance with which is subject to judicial review .

the basic framework is spelled out in the caa , §307 ( d ) , [42 u.s.c .

§7607 ( d ) ] and details the requirements for public notice and participation in the process .

the final rule cannot be based , in whole or part , on any information or data which have not been placed in the rulemaking docket as of the date of its final promulgation .

the final rule must be accompanied by a statement of basis and purpose which includes a summary of the factual data upon which the rule is based , the methodology used in obtaining and analyzing the data , the major legal interpretations , and policy considerations underlying the remaking decision .

the statement must also contain the agency's response to each of the significant comments , criticisms , and new data submitted in written and oral presentations during the comment period .

courts have also indicated that they will look at the alternatives the agency considered ( or believes it should have considered ) in assessing necessary compliance .

on appeal the court may reverse the rulemaking action if it finds it to be "arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion or otherwise not in accordance with law," a standard by which the courts assess the rule's reasonableness and rationality based on review of the rulemaking record taken as a whole .

the first suits challenging the ozone and pm naaqs were filed in the d.c .

circuit court of appeals on july 18 , 1997 , the day the final rules appeared in the federal register .

during 1997 a total of 38 suits were filed for judicial review of various aspects of the ozone and pm naaqs .

these suits were consolidated in american trucking associations v. u.s. e.p.a . , argued december 17 , 1998 , and decided may 14 , 1999 [175 f.3d 1027 ( d.c. cir .

1999 ) ] .

various parts of that decision were then appealed to the u.s. supreme court , argued november 7 , 2000 , and decided february 27 , 2001 [ whitman , administrator of environmental protection agency , et al .

v. american trucking associations , inc. , et al .

 , 531 u.s. _______ ( 2001 ) ] .

while the supreme court decided several aspects of the case – including that the caa constitutionally delegated authority to epa and that costs could not be taken into account in setting naaqs , it remanded the question of the validity of the standards to the d.c .

circuit court .

the circuit court issued its ruling on march 26 , 2002 , upholding epa's particulate and ozone standards .

for any rule subject to this chapter , a small entity that is adversely affected or aggrieved by final agency action is entitled to judicial review of agency compliance with the requirements of sections 601 , 604 , 605 ( b ) [... if the head of the agency certifies that the rule will not , if promulgated , have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities] , 608 ( b ) , and 610 in accordance with chapter 7 .

[5 u.s.c .

§611 ( a ) ( 1 ) ] epa's decisions that requirements of the small business regulatory enforcement fairness act , the regulatory flexibility act , and the unfunded mandates act do not apply to the ozone and pm naaqs were challenged .

these were among the suits consolidated in american trucking associations v. u.s. e.p.a .

as previously noted , the d.c .

circuit court of appeals upheld epa's position .

before a rule can take effect , the federal agency promulgating such rule shall submit to each house of the congress ... a report .... a rule shall not take effect ... , if the congress enacts a joint resolution of disapproval .... [5 u.s.c .

§801 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) , ( b ) ( 1 ) ] epa's publication of its final decisions on the ozone and pm naaqs on july 18 , 1997 , triggered the congressional review of agency rulemaking provision of sbrefa .

under this provision , congress could consider a joint resolution of disapproval , with special procedures in the senate to ensure floor consideration within 60 legislative days .

while the procedure was not invoked , bills to delay the new standards were introduced , including h.r .

1984 and s. 1084 , with a hearing held on the latter .

no bill to rescind the new naaqs was reported from committee , however .

appendix a .

the naaqs - setting process appendix b .

setting naaqs — a typical chronology ( ozone ) .

