georgia gained its independence at the end of 1991 with the dissolution of the former soviet union .

its elected president , zviad gamsakhurdia , faced insurrection and fled the country in january 1992 .

coup leaders invited former soviet foreign minister eduard shevardnadze to head a ruling state council , and he was elected the speaker of the legislature in late 1992 and president under a new constitution in 1995 .

the country was roiled by secessionist conflict by south ossetia and abkhazia that resulted in cease - fires in 1992 and 1994 , respectively .

shevardnadze was ousted in the wake of a suspect legislative election in late 2003 , and coup co - leader mikheil saakashvili was elected president in january 2004 .

a november 2007 government crackdown on political oppositionists led saakashvili to step down as president in the face of domestic and international criticism to seek a mandate on his continued rule .

he was reelected president in january 2008 with 53% of the vote .

electoral observers hosted by the organization for security and cooperation in europe ( osce ) stated that the election broadly met its standards , but that irregularities needed to be addressed .

he is constitutionally limited to two terms in office , and has stated that in accordance with the constitution , he will not run in a planned 2013 presidential election , although he does not plan to leave politics entirely .

in an address at the u.n. general assembly on september 23 , 2008 , president saakashvili announced new democratization initiatives as a means to strengthen georgia's sovereignty and independence and thereby prevent russia from subverting georgia's statehood .

after lengthy attempts , president saakashvili met with a few opposition leaders in april - may 2009 to discuss setting up a constitutional commission to work out changes to the political system , and such a commission was established in june 2009 .

in his march 2010 and february 2011 state of the nation addresses , saakashvili pledged further democratization efforts .

in his 2011 speech , he outlined his goals for the creation of a "modern" georgia that would be "a democratic european nation with the fastest growing economy in europe," where georgian citizens would be more confident , "more educated" and "more competitive," and not subject to subjugation by russia .

he outlined a series of goals to be achieved by 2015 in agriculture , trade , employment , infrastructure development , and tourism .

in his february 2012 state of the nation address , president saakashvili discussed progress in meeting the 2015 goals .

in the democracy realm , he did not announce new initiatives , but pledged that the upcoming october 2012 legislative election would be the "freest , most transparent and most democratic ... ever held in georgia," and asserted that georgia has a political system open to parties that play by the rules .

local elections to 64 city councils , as well as the first popular election of tbilisi's mayor , were held at the end of may 2010 .

the ruling united national movement ( unm ) — headed by president saakashvili — won over 65% of the vote in the city council races , followed by the moderate opposition christian democratic alliance party bloc with about 12% of the vote .

in the tbisili mayoral race , the unm incumbent — gigi ugulava — was reelected with about 55% of the vote .

the elections were widely viewed as a rehearsal for the planned october 2012 legislative and 2013 presidential elections , and as such appeared to be a mandate for the unm and a legitimization of the moderate opposition , according to some observers .

some observers suggest that ugulava may be the likely candidate backed by unm in the 2013 presidential election .

the boycott of the elections by much of the radical opposition — including nino burjanadze's democratic movement - united georgia , levan gachechiladze's defend georgia , and irakli okruashvili's for a united georgia parties — appeared to further marginalize them in the public's eyes , according to some observers .

monitors from the osce reported that the local elections "marked evident progress towards meeting osce and council of europe [democratization] commitments," but that "significant shortcomings" remained , including apparent ballot - box stuffing and multiple voting , vote - counting and tabulation problems , the use of administrative resources for favored candidates , and deficiencies in the legal framework and its implementation .

assistant secretary of state philip crowley repeated the findings of the osce that the local elections showed progress in democratization , but that "significant shortcomings need to be addressed. .

in may 2010 , the constitutional commission ( mentioned above ) agreed on amendments to slightly reduce the power of the president and increase the powers of the legislature and prime minister .

in october 2010 , the georgian legislature approved the constitutional changes .

most of the changes will not come into effect until after the next presidential election , scheduled for early 2013 .

under the changes , the party that has the largest number of seats in the legislature will nominate the candidate for prime minister .

this nominee will select ministers and draft a program , and upon approval by the legislature , the president will appoint the prime minister .

the changes also call for regional governors to be appointed by the prime minister rather than the president , as is currently the case .

some suggestions by the venice commission , an advisory body of the council of europe , were not enacted .

the commission had raised concerns that the proposed presidential powers were still substantial relative to those of the prime minister and legislature , and that clashes between the president and prime minister might emerge on foreign policy and other matters .

the venice commission suggested that a more powerful legislature might appoint the prime minister , be able to remove the prime minister with a simple majority vote ( rather than 60% of the vote ) , and approve changes to the cabinet .

a citizen's group likewise complained that the legislature's powers remained weak and criticized the retention of gubernatorial appointments .

some opposition parties allege that the constitutional changes are designed to permit saakashvili to serve as prime minister after his term as president ends , and have called for a new constitutional amendment to ban a former president from subsequently serving as prime minister .

the people's assembly civic organization — formed in may 2009 by parties and groups comprising the radical opposition , and led by former legislative speaker nino burjanadze and former border guards' chief badri bitsadze ) launched large - scale demonstrations in tbilisi beginning on may 22 , 2011 .

their parade permit was due to expire on the evening of may 25 , and the government planned to hold an independence day parade the next day .

immediately upon the expiration of the permit , georgian security forces moved to forcibly disperse the demonstrators , reportedly resulting in four deaths , dozens of injuries , and scores of detentions .

the georgian government alleged that the russia - backed protesters had planned to launch an armed overthrow of the government .

the prosecutor issued a warrant for the arrest of badri bitsadze , the husband of nino burjanadze , leader of the opposition democratic movement - united georgia party , on the grounds that he was involved in planning the putsch .

u.s .

ambassador john bass , the u.n. high commissioner for human rights , the eu , and various non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) such as amnesty international and human rights watch called on the government to launch an inquiry into whether security forces used excessive force against the protesters .

in july 2011 , the interior ministry announced that an internal probe had resulted in 16 police being fired or disciplined .

in august 2011 , bitsadze was sentenced in absentia to 5.5 years in prison on charges of organizing attacks on police and disturbing the public order .

he returned to georgia in january 2013 after a tbilisi court annulled his sentence .

usaid has argued that georgia has significant economic resources that could spur growth if it can overcome various impediments to development .

among georgia's potentialities are its strategic location as an east - west and north - south trade and transit corridor , its climate and agricultural endowments , ample water resources that could be used for hydropower , and inexpensive and eager labor .

economic problems include rising unemployment and lagging educational achievement , a dearth of skilled labor , persistently high poverty rates , and high income and gender inequality .

oligopolistic market conditions hamper private enterprise development .

georgia's role in the global economy is precarious , since it has not bolstered export markets , remains dependent on energy imports , has faltered in attracting foreign direct investment , and imports food in part because agricultural productivity is below the global average .

to address these problems , the georgian government released an economic plan in 2011 to bolster job growth .

georgia's economy suffered in 2008-2009 from the after - effects of the world economic downturn and the russia - georgia conflict , but began to recover in 2010 .

the economist intelligence unit ( eiu ) estimates that georgia's gross domestic product ( gdp ) contracted in 2009 , but resumed growth in 2010 .

the eiu estimates that gdp grew by 7% in 2011 , but slowed slightly to 6.1% in 2012 , mainly due to a fall - off in economic activity during the fourth quarter related to a poor harvest and post - election uncertainties .

consumer price inflation was 8.5% in 2011 but a slight deflation of - 0.9% was reported for 2012 , attributable to lower prices for imports and to lower consumer demand .

the eiu projects that economic growth might slow to 4.5% in 2013 , related to slowed government spending early in the year and to a fall - off in foreign direct investment .

economic activities include agriculture , mining , and a small industrial sector .

civil conflict and poverty have spurred the emigration of about one - fifth ( 1 million ) of the population since 1991 .

a large percentage of the working population has migrated for work in russia or elsewhere .

after being reduced in 2009 as a result of the world economic downturn , the contribution of migrant worker remittances abroad to gdp increased thereafter , as economic growth returned to russia and other host countries .

despite russia's expected poor economic growth in 2013 , worker remittances to georgia are not anticipated to greatly decline .

georgia is a member of the world trade organization ( see below ) .

in 2012 , georgia exported $3.5 billion in goods and imported $7.7 billion .

turkey , azerbaijan , and ukraine were among georgia's main trade partners .

georgia's main exports during 2012 were automobiles ( through reselling rather than production ) , ferrous metals , and fertilizer .

u.s. exports to georgia were $540.6 million during 2012 ( a decrease from $579.3 million the previous year ) and u.s. imports from georgia were $226.2 million ( an increase from $176.1 million the previous year ) .

georgia's state statistics department reported that total foreign direct investment ( fdi ) in georgia was $1.1 billion in 2012 , somewhat less than in 2011 and well below that of the pre - 2008 conflict period .

besides fdi , the state - owned georgian railways and georgian oil and gas corporation issued $750 million in eurobonds in 2012 to finance railway and hydropower projects .

the lack of adequate growth in private - sector jobs and saakashvili's downsizing of the public sector contributed to gradually rising unemployment in recent years ( about 15% in 2011 ) .

almost one - half of the working population engages in agriculture , which accounts for a decreasing portion of gdp and an increasing portion of those in poverty .

in june 2013 , the international monetary fund ( imf ) commended the ivanaishvili government for increasing social expenditures and agricultural support to address these problems , but also called for boosting the level of government spending , lowering the interest rate , reforming the tax code , and enacting other policies to increase business confidence and investment .

the ivanishvili government launched trade negotiations with russia in december 2012 aimed at getting russia to lift its de facto trade restrictions in place since 2006 , particularly those involving mineral water , wine , and agricultural produce .

such trade restrictions are incompatible with russia's wto membership ( see below ) , but russia has appeared to extract maximal concessions and leverage in return for permitting some trade to resume , according to some observers .

in late february 2012 , representatives from russia's federal service for control in the sphere of consumers' rights protection and the well - being of humans ( rospotrebnadzor ) visited georgia to inspect wine and mineral water production facilities .

in may 2013 , rospotrebnadzor announced that it had deemed georgian wines from seven producers and mineral waters from two producers as safe to import into russia , and some borzhomi water and wine began to be imported .

seemingly indicative of ongoing tensions , however , rospotrebnadzor alleged that the central public health reference laboratory near tbilisi — which opened in 2011 as a collaboration between the u.s. army medical research and materiel command and the georgian defense ministry — was involved in research on pathogens that endangered russia , and stated that the laboratory should be closed in order for russia - georgia cooperation on sanitary and epidemic issues to proceed .

rospotrebnadzor's head gennadiy onishchenko also reiterated in early june 2013 that the persistence of african swine fever that caused some loss of animals in southern russia was economic subversion carried out from georgia , possibly alluding that the laboratory was involved .

russian sources have alleged that georgia has agreed to sever u.s. collaboration with the laboratory .

georgia is a transit state for a pipeline completed in mid - 2006 carrying 1 million barrels per day of azerbaijani oil to the turkish port of ceyhan ( the baku - tbilisi - ceyhan or btc pipeline ) .

another pipeline completed in early 2007 initially carries 2.2 billion cubic meters of azerbaijani natural gas to georgia and turkey , lessening their dependence on russia as a supplier .

in addition , a pipeline transits georgia to armenia that carries russian gas .

georgia receives some gas through this pipeline , including some gas in lieu of transit fees .

the united states has backed georgian ownership of this pipeline and mcc has provided funds for upgrading the pipeline .

azerbaijan provides an increasing portion of the gas needed by georgia , largely easing tbilisi's dependence on russia .

georgia has built and refurbished hydroelectric power plants and plans to increase its export of electricity .

among its neighbors , georgia has developed close ties with azerbaijan and maintains good relations with armenia .

georgia has an ongoing interest in ties with about 1 million georgians residing in turkey and about 50,000 georgians in iran .

georgia is a member of the european union's ( eu's ) eastern partnership program of enhanced economic ties , and hopes to negotiate a free - trade agreement with the eu .

president saakashvili and prime minister ivanishvili have set a goal for georgia to eventually become an eu member .

ties with russia have sharply deteriorated during saakashvili's presidency .

after the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , georgia broke off diplomatic relations with russia and withdrew as a member of the russia - dominated commonwealth of independent states ( cis ) .

during the 2012 legislative election campaign , gd called for improving relations with russia while maintaining a western orientation .

new prime minister ivanishvili appointed zurab abashidze to the post of special representative for relations with russia to work toward better ties .

talks between abashidze and russian deputy foreign minister grigoriy karasin have been held to normalize trade , transport , and cultural relations between the two countries .

foreign minister panjikidze has stressed , however , that diplomatic relations cannot be restored as long as russia occupies georgian territory .

as one gesture , georgia's olympic committee announced in early may that georgian athletes would compete in the sochi 2014 winter olympics .

georgia's military is the smallest among those of the south caucasus states .

its ground forces , air force , and national guard reportedly numbered 20,650 at the beginning of 2013 .

there were also 5,400 border and coast guards and 6,300 interior ( police ) ministry troops .

most of the ground forces and air force personnel are on contracts , with the remainder conscripted .

in 2009 , remaining elements of the coast guard — largely decimated during the russia - georgia conflict — became part of the border guards , organizationally under the interior ministry .

according to the georgian defense ministry , 160 military personnel were killed during the russia - georgia conflict .

a national security concept approved in late 2011 states that russia's military "occupation of georgia's territories ... and terrorist acts organized by russia from the occupied territories," and "the risk of new military aggression from russia" are the top national security threats faced by georgia .

the concept warns that russia "aims to turn georgia into a failed state , to hinder the realization of georgia's european and euro - atlantic choice , and to forcibly return georgia to the russian political orbit. .

the concept avers that "international support for georgia , as well as the presence of the european union monitoring mission on the ground , are important deterrents to possible aggression" by russia .

signed in january 2009 , the u.s. - georgia charter on strategic partnership reflects strong u.s. support for georgia's continued sovereignty and independence .

in the security realm , "the united states and georgia intend to expand the scope of their ongoing defense and security cooperation programs to defeat [threats to global peace and stability] and to promote peace and stability. .

such cooperation will "increase georgian capabilities and ... strengthen georgia's candidacy for nato membership. .

in the economic realm , the two countries "intend to pursue an enhanced bilateral investment treaty , to expand georgian access to the general system of preferences , and to explore the possibility of a free - trade agreement. .

energy security goals include "increasing georgia's energy production , enhanc[ing] energy efficiency , and increas[ing] the physical security of energy transit through georgia to european markets. .

in the realm of democratization , the two countries "pledge cooperation to bolster independent media , freedom of expression , and access to objective news and information," and to further strengthen the rule of law .

the united states pledged to train judges , prosecutors , defense lawyers , and police officers .

three annual meetings have been held: the first meeting of the u.s. - georgia strategic partnership commission was held on june 22 , 2009 , in washington , dc , led by deputy secretary of state james steinberg and georgian foreign minister grigol vashadze .

the security working group also met , co - headed on the u.s. side by assistant secretary of state philip gordon and assistant secretary of defense alexander vershbow , and headed on the georgian side by deputy foreign minister giga bokeria .

other working groups on the economy , democracy , and people - to - people exchanges held initial meetings over the next few months .

the second plenary meeting of the u.s. - georgia strategic partnership commission was held on october 6 , 2010 , in washington , dc .

meeting with then - prime minister nikoloz gilauri , then - secretary clinton stated that "the united states will not waver in its support for georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity .

that support is a core principle of our charter on strategic partnership , and it is fundamental to our bilateral relationship .

the united states remains committed to georgia's aspirations for membership in nato… .

we continue to call on russia to end its occupation of georgian territory… .

as part of our commitment to enhancing georgia's future as a prosperous and secure member of the western family of nations , we will continue to work with you to strengthen georgian democracy. .

gilauri indicated that georgia was requesting more educational , security , and economic assistance , including to bolster energy infrastructure .

the third plenary meeting of the strategic partnership commission was held on june 5 , 2012 , in batumi , georgia .

then - secretary clinton and then - prime minister gilauri apparently mainly held discussions with the four working groups , according to the state department .

the defense and security working group discussed options to assist georgia to improve air surveillance and air and coastal defense , combat engineer capabilities , and non - combatant officer training , and to upgrade the utility helicopter fleet .

the state department reported that the united states planned to move to implement such programs in coming months , and would also consider requests for "defensive articles. .

in the democracy working group , the u.s. participants stressed the importance of holding free and fair elections in order to further euro - atlantic integration , and called for reforms to the criminal justice system and the administrative code .

the economic , energy , and trade working group discussed the talks on a possible free trade agreement and measures to improve georgia's business climate .

the people - to - people working group discussed then - secretary clinton's announcement that the united states would accept the status neutral travel document from residents of south ossetia and abkhazia for travel to the united states .

at a press conference after meeting with russian president dmitriy medvedev on july 6 , 2009 — part of the u.s. "reset" of relations with russia — president obama reported that he had "reiterated my firm belief that georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity must be respected. .

in georgia , many officials and others viewed the meeting positively as lessening the chances of renewed russia - georgia conflict and as a reaffirmation of the u.s. commitment to georgia .

perhaps to further reassure georgians , vice president joseph biden visited georgia in late july 2009 to emphasize the continued u.s. commitment to its sovereignty and independence .

president obama reaffirmed the u.s. commitment to uphold georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity when he met with president saakashvili at the nuclear summit in washington , dc , in april 2010 and on january 14 , 2011 ( with vice president biden ) , but president obama reportedly did not meet with president saakashvili during the latter's week - long mid - march 2011 u.s. visit ( president saakashvili did meet with members of congress ; see below ) .

then - secretary of state hillary clinton paid a six - hour visit to georgia on july 5 , 2010 , during her regional tour .

she urged georgians not to focus on the past , possibly referring to the russia - georgia conflict , but to be "focused on what you can do today and tomorrow to improve your lives and the lives of your family and the lives of your fellow citizens by building your democracy and opening your economy and providing more justice and social inclusion , that , to me , is the great mission of georgia. .

while stating that the united states continued to call for russia to pull back its troops to their positions on august 6 , 2008 ( in line with the 6-point cease - fire agreement ) , she also "strongly urged" georgia to "not be baited or provoked into any action that would give any excuse to the russians to take any further aggressive movements. .

vice president biden revisited georgia on july 23 , 2010 — as in 2009 , just after a u.s. - russia summit — to reassure georgia of u.s. interest in its fate .

he urged georgia to continue to develop democratic institutions and free markets , including as the best means to attract the people of the breakaway areas to reintegrate with the rest of georgia .

he called for further democratization , including constitutional changes to create a balance of power between the legislative and executive branches of government .

in 2011-2012 , there were further high - level u.s. - georgia bilateral visits .

in january 2011 , president saakashvili met with president obama during a u.s. visit , and reportedly gave the u.s. president a report detailing georgia's defense needs .

in august 2011 , the u.s .

commander of the european command and nato's supreme allied commander , admiral james stavridis , visited georgia to discuss georgia - nato cooperation and georgia's participation in the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in afghanistan .

according to some reports , presidents obama and saakashvili briefly met on the sidelines of the opening of the u.n. general assembly in new york in september 2011 .

some congressional delegations also visited .

during his state visit to the united states in january 2012 , president saakashvili met with president obama , who praised efforts in georgia to increase the honesty of police , the rule of law , and free market reforms , and called for free elections in the future .

he stated that these democratic and free market reforms could serve as examples for other eurasian countries .

he reiterated the call in the charter for exploring a free trade agreement , and thanked saakashvili for georgia's troop contributions in afghanistan .

he mentioned in a press conference that the two presidents had discussed "strengthen[ing] our defense cooperation," and he voiced continuing support for georgia's nato aspirations .

in response at the press conference , president saakashvili stated that "we are grateful for elevating our defense cooperation further and talking about georgia's self - defense capabilities and developing it. .

russia's then - prime minister putin and others in russia denounced what they inferred was a change in u.s. - georgia defense ties , although the administration claimed that its defense cooperation policy toward georgia had not changed .

at his confirmation hearing in march 2012 , ambassador - designate to georgia richard norland stated that the united states would continue to call for the pull - back and reduction of russian troops in the occupied regions to pre - conflict numbers .

u.s. priorities in georgia included support for its democratization , and he acknowledged that there were "deep concerns" about the harassment of prospective opposition candidates and parties in the run - up to the autumn legislative election .

he also stressed that the conduct of the elections would be a "litmus test" of georgia's readiness for nato membership .

he stated that at the january 2012 u.s. - georgia summit , the two presidents had agreed to enhance [defense cooperation] programs , to advance georgian military modernization reform and self - defense capabilities... .

sustaining robust bilateral security and defense cooperation with georgia will also remain a high priority.... our plans for security assistance and military engagement with georgia are to support georgia's defense reforms , to train and equip georgian troops for participation in the isaf mission and to advance georgia's nato interoperability .

then - secretary clinton announced at her meeting with saakashvili on june 5 , 2012 , that u.s. consular officials would recognize so - called status - neutral travel documents issued by the georgian government to residents of abkhazia and south ossetia who wished to visit the united states .

she stated that by recognizing such travel documents , the united states was facilitating reconciliation in georgia .

she called for georgia to hold a democratic legislative election in october 2012 , and met with some opposition party officials ( she declined to meet separately with ivanishvili , but some of his representatives attended the meeting ) .

she stated that the two sides had agreed on new areas of defense cooperation , including training and support for monitoring the seacoast and skies , upgrades for the utility helicopter fleet , and enhanced officer training .

she reported that an inaugural high - level trade and investment dialogue meeting had been held the previous week in washington , d.c. , which had included discussion of a prospective free trade agreement .

in his annual worldwide threat assessment , director of national intelligence james clapper testified in march 2013 that the administration hoped that the victory of georgia dream in georgia's legislative election would contribute to improved georgia - russia relations .

he also raised concerns that georgia faces a "challenging political transition and an increased risk of domestic political instability," presumably referring to the run - up and aftermath of the prospective october 2013 georgian presidential election .

meeting with visiting georgian president mikheil saakashvili on april 25 , 2013 , vice president joe biden stressed the united states' enduring and strong commitment to partnership with georgia , and called on the country's president , government , and legislature to cooperate to maintain democratic and economic reforms .

saakashvili met with secretary of state john kerry on may 1 .

kerry urged continued democratization in georgia , and the two sides indicated that they would discuss georgia's progress in meeting requirements for membership in nato .

some observers have called for a reevaluation of some aspects of u.s. support for georgia .

these critics have argued that many u.s. policymakers had been captivated by saakashvili's charismatic personality and pledges to democratize and tended to overlook his bellicosity .

they have warned that u.s. acceptance of georgian troops for coalition operations in afghanistan must not lead to u.s. defense commitments to georgia , and a few have suggested that the united states should not unquestionably back georgia's territorial integrity , but should rather encourage reconciliation and the consideration of options short of the near - term reintegration of the regions into georgia .

at the same time , most observers advise against extending diplomatic recognition to breakaway regions without an international consensus .

other observers have called for a more robust u.s. and nato effort to resupply georgia with defensive weaponry so that it might deter or resist russian aggression .

however , recent arrests of former government officials and other problematic human rights developments in georgia have led some to re - evaluate such stepped - up defense cooperation .

the united states has been georgia's largest bilateral aid donor , budgeting cumulative aid of $3.37 billion in fy1992-fy2010 ( all agencies and programs ) .

see table 1 and table 2 .

georgia has regularly ranked among the top world states in terms of per capita u.s. aid .

u.s. - budgeted aid for georgia in fy2012 was $85.5 million .

requested foreign assistance for fy2014 is $62.0 million ( data for fy2012 and fy2014 include "function 150" programs and exclude defense and energy department funds ; estimates for fy2013 are not yet available ) .

the administration budget request for fy2014 calls for slightly over one - third of funding to be spent on security programs , about one - third on democratization , and about one - third on economic growth programs .

the millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) closed out a 2006-2011 $395 million agreement ( termed a "compact" ) with georgia that the mcc regarded as highly successful in resurfacing roads , rehabilitating the north - south gas pipeline , rebuilding water supplies , and providing agricultural assistance ( much of the mcc spending was in addition to above - mentioned aid ) .

in january 2011 , mcc announced that georgia was eligible for a second compact .

georgia suggested efforts to bolster education , and mcc notified congress in 2012 that it planned to provide some preliminary funding to assist georgia in working out details of such a program .

on april 9 , 2013 , mcc notified congress that it intended to open negotiations with georgia on a compact worth $140 million for projects in general education , technical and vocational education and training , and higher education , with an emphasis on science , technology , engineering , and math education .

to address georgia's urgent humanitarian needs in the wake of the august 2008 russia - georgia conflict , the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and the defense and state departments provided georgia with urgent humanitarian assistance , with the defense department quickly beginning naval and air deliveries .

reportedly , the bush administration had authorized these defense department deliveries to demonstrate u.s. backing for georgia's continued independence .

on september 3 , 2008 , then - secretary of state rice announced a multi - year $1 billion aid plan for georgia .

the administration envisaged that the proposed $1 billion aid package would be in addition to existing aid and requests for georgia , such as freedom support act assistance .

the added aid was planned for humanitarian needs , particularly for internally displaced persons , for the reconstruction of infrastructure and facilities that were damaged or destroyed during the russian invasion , and for safeguarding georgia's continued economic growth .

congress acted quickly to flesh out the administration's aid proposals for georgia .

the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( h.r .

2638 / p.l .

110-329 ) , signed into law on september 30 , 2008 , appropriated an additional $365 million in aid for georgia and the region ( beyond that provided under continuing appropriations based on fy2008 funding ) for humanitarian and economic relief , reconstruction , energy - related programs , and democracy activities .

of that amount , $315 million was actually budgeted for georgia .

the supplemental appropriations act for fy2009 ( p.l .

111-32 ; signed into law on june 24 , 2009 ) provided an additional $242 million in freedom support act assistance to georgia , "the final portion of the $1 billion pledge. .

a state department contractor later concluded that the $1 billion had greatly assisted georgia in easing economic distress and in recovering from the conflict .

see table 3 .

among u.s. security programs in georgia , a $64 million georgia train and equip program ( gtep ) began in 2002 .

u.s. troops provided training to 200 officers , some 2,000 soldiers , and a small number of interior ( police ) ministry troops and border guards .

according to the u.s. defense department , the gtep aimed to help georgia "to resist pressure to allow the russian military to pursue chechen rebels" into georgia , help it combat terrorists inside the country , and block those trying to infiltrate georgia .

small arms , communications and medical gear , and uniforms were provided .

the program ended in 2004 but a follow - on sustainment and stability operations program ( ssop ) was launched in fy2006 .

ssop provided training for 7,800 troops , in part to support u.s. - led coalition operations in iraq , along with advisory assistance for defense reforms and maintenance for previously supplied helicopters .

georgia pulled most of its troops out of iraq in the wake of the russia - georgia conflict and the rest by the end of 2008 .

about $124.2 million in coalition support funds were used for ssop .

congress provided $50 million in fy2008 and $50 million in fy2009 under the ( now expired ) authority of section 1207 of the national defense authorization act for fy2006 ( p.l .

109-163 ) for reconstruction and stabilization activities in georgia , of which only a small portion was defense - related ( the restoration of coast guard infrastructure ; none was weapons - related , see below ) .

under section 1206 of the act , congress provided $8.8 million to georgia in fy2008 for special forces training .

the georgia deployment program - isaf , begun in late 2009 , is supported by marine forces europe to deploy georgian forces alongside u.s. marines to afghanistan .

as capabilities improve , the georgian forces will operate independently , and a georgian training group will be created that can largely take over from the marine trainers .

coalition readiness support program funds are used to train and equip the georgian troops , amounting to $23.6 million in fy2010 , $23.5 million in fy2011 , and $81.8 million in fy2012 .

under section 1206 , 40 highly mobile multi - wheeled vehicles ( hmmwv ) , night vision devices , radios , rifle scopes , and other equipment amounting to $19.07 million were provided in fy2010 .

in fy 2011 , $21.7 million in section 1206 funds were used to provide vehicles , communication equipment , and night vision devices , and in fy2012 , $3.7 million is being used for communications and electronics equipment , weapons sights , and other equipment .

also in fy2012 , 48 mine resistant ambush protected ( mrap ) vehicles are being loaned for training in georgia , under the authority of section 1202 of the national defense authorization act for fy2007 ( p.l .

109-364 ) .

assistant secretary vershbow testified in august 2009 that the obama administration was "focusing on building defense institutions , assisting defense sector reform , and building the strategic and educational foundations that will facilitate necessary training , education , and rational force structure design and procurement .

we are assisting georgia to move along the path to having modern , western - oriented , nato - interoperable armed forces capable of territorial defense and coalition contributions. .

he stressed , however , that "the united states has not 'rearmed' georgia as some have claimed .

there has been no lethal military assistance to georgia since the august [2008] conflict. .

although president saakashvili seemed to indicate during then - secretary clinton's july 2010 visit that u.s. security cooperation with georgia was adequate , he stated in september 2010 that "leaving georgia defenseless doesn't help the situation .

georgia cannot attack russia , while a defenseless georgia is a big temptation for russia to change our government through military means… .

as part of ongoing security cooperation , we hope that the u.s. will help us with defense - weapons capabilities. .

some in congress and elsewhere have criticized this dearth of lethal security assistance to bolster georgia's territorial defense capabilities .

although president saakashvili seemed to indicate during then - secretary clinton's july 2010 visit that u.s. security cooperation with georgia was adequate , he stated in september 2010 that "leaving georgia defenseless doesn't help the situation .

georgia cannot attack russia , while a defenseless georgia is a big temptation for russia to change our government through military means… .

as part of ongoing security cooperation , we hope that the u.s. will help us with defense - weapons capabilities. .

on december 12 , 2010 , u.s .

senator john mccain called for the obama administration to resume some defensive arms transfers to georgia , including early warning radars .

three days later , giorgiy baramidze , georgia's then - deputy prime minister and state minister for euro - atlantic integration , also called for the united states to resume the transfer of defensive weapons to georgia .

during his march 10-17 , 2011 , visit to the united states , president saakashvili reportedly requested u.s. transfers of defensive weapons .

in late march 2011 , he reportedly stated that while some u.s. small arms transfers were "in the pipeline," georgia needed anti - air and anti - tank weapons from the united states .

during a hearing of the senate armed services committee on march 29 , 2011 , senator mccain asked whether the united states was providing defensive weapons to georgia , and eucom commander stavridis stated that "at this moment we are not providing them [with] what i would term high - end military defensive weapons. .

senator mccain responded that "it is hard for me to understand , since the russians still occupy territory that is clearly georgian territory and continue to threaten georgia , and yet we're not even giving them weapons with which to defend themselves .

it is not comprehensible. .

after a meeting between u.s. members of congress and georgian legislators on the sidelines of the annual meeting of the nato parliamentary assembly in bucharest , romania , in mid - october 2011 , the u.s. delegation head , representative mike turner , released a statement of support for georgia .

according to the statement , "the united states recently approved a commercial arms sale to georgia ; all nato states should look to arms sales with georgia that can add to the collective defense… .

a stronger georgia is clearly in the interest of all nato members. .

a report issued in october 2011 by a team led by senators jeanne shaheen and lindsey graham urged that u.s. policy be changed to "normalize ... defense relations with georgia , including allowing sales of defensive military equipment [which] will encourage other allies to follow suit , enabling georgia to resume purchasing armaments from central european allies. .

on december 31 , 2011 , president obama signed into law the national defense authorization act ( ndaa ) for fy2012 ( p.l .

112-81 ) .

section 1242 calls for the defense secretary to submit a plan to congress for the normalization of u.s. defense cooperation with georgia , including the sale of defensive weapons .

in a signing statement , the president stated that if the provisions of the section conflict with his constitutional authority to conduct foreign relations ( presumably , in this case , including his "reset" policy with russia ) , they would be considered non - binding .

at a press conference after he met with president obama in late january 2012 , president saakashvili stated that "we are very grateful for elevating our defense cooperation further , and talking about [developing] georgia's self - defense capabilities," while president obama appeared more reticent in stating only that "we will continue to strengthen our defense cooperation. .

russian then - prime minister ( and current president ) vladimir putin denounced the reported closer u.s. - georgia defense cooperation as encouraging georgia to carry out aggressive military actions .

the report required by the ndaa for fy2012 was transmitted to congress on april 30 , 2012 .

the report states that results of bilateral security collaboration since the 2008 conflict have included the revision of georgia's national security strategy and defense plan , institutionalizing afghan training and deployment methods , implementing a military personnel management system , reorganizing the armed forces .

the latter has included the creation of a national defense academy to train officers who can operate with u.s. and nato forces and who share western values .

the report stressed that there were two pillars of u.s. - georgia defense cooperation: u.s. support for modernizing georgia's armed forces ; and u.s. support for georgia's contributions to isaf .

for the first pillar , there were 63 cooperative training , education , and operational contacts in fy2011 , and 23 in fy 2012 through april 2012 .

according to the report , all of georgia's 19 requests since may 2010 for foreign military sales equipment and services have resulted in transfers or are in the process of being fulfilled .

six of these requests were to support isaf deployments , but the rest were to support defense modernization , mostly involving training .

only two transfers seemed to involve military equipment for defense capabilities , in order to enhance communications ( the report did not list the sale of carbines , mentioned above ) .

the report stated that presidents obama and saakashvili had agreed in january 2012 on enhanced defense cooperation in the areas of air and coastal surveillance and defense training , train - the - trainer instruction for non - commissioned officers , brigade command and staff training , combat engineer training , and utility helicopter training .

the report stated that discussions are underway for georgia to purchase air and coastal surveillance radar and acoustic systems and small arms ammunition .

the report announced that the "enhanced defense cooperation" program would begin in fy2013 .

during her june 5-6 , 2012 , visit to georgia , former secretary clinton hailed this planned enhanced defense cooperation .

while there , she also highlighted other security cooperation .

she helped formally commission a patrol boat that had been modernized with funds from the export control and related border security ( exbs ) account of the state department .

she stated that since the 2008 conflict , the united states had supplied $10 million to rebuild georgia's coast guard , including three patrol boats , construction of a ship repair facility , installation of new communications and observation equipment , and a maritime information center .

she also hailed other exbs assistance to georgia in recent years .

in his march 2013 testimony to congress , eucom commander stavridis stated that eucom had expanded the georgia deployment program to train and deploy two battalions every six months to isaf's regional command southwest , had supported armenian - georgian training on cross - border humanitarian assistance and disaster response , had led an assessment of junior officer and non - commissioned officer professional development programs as well as combat engineer training and education , and had coordinated brigade command and staff development .

he stated that georgian troops had taken advantage of training at u.s. army europe's joint multinational training center for mission rehearsal exercises prior to isaf deployment , and had participated in agile spirit , a training workup for troops in the georgia deployment program .

he also reported that u.s .

naval forces europe continued to lead eurasia partnership capstone , which included training with georgian naval forces , and provided training for non - commissioned officer development , maritime interdiction operations , visit / board / search / seizure , search and rescue , maritime law enforcement , and environmental protection .

u.s .

naval forces europe also co - hosted the annual sea breeze naval exercise in the black sea , which included participation by georgian forces .

admiral stavridis did not report on any weapons transfers to georgia .

in his april 11 , 2013 , nomination hearing to be eucom commander , general philip breedlove stated that the united states "has a vigorous defense cooperation program with georgia," involving hundreds of events annually , including cyber defense , border security , professional military education development , and counterinsurgency operations training .

he stated that fmf funding is "robust," amounting to approximately $14 million ( presumably referring to fy2012 ; see below ) .

he reiterated the areas of engagement that president obama had offered to president saakashvili in january 2012 , and stated that eucom "has already conducted or has planned initial engagements with georgia in all these areas," including through the use of imet funds .

he repeated the language of the april 2012 ndaa report ( discussed above ) that the obama administration would look favorably on the sale of air surveillance radars , coastal surveillance acoustic systems , and small arms ammunition to georgia .

the executive budget summary: function 150 and other international programs for fy2014 , released on april 10 , 2013 , calls for $1.8 million in imet and $12 million in fmf for georgia , about a $2.5 million reduction from such aid in fy2012 .

on june 13 , 2013 , amendment number 130 ( turner ) to the ndaa for fy2014 ( h.r .

1960 ) to section 1244 was approved that stated that it is the sense of congress that the united states should enhance defense cooperation with georgia .

the amendment added findings that the new georgian government elected in october 2012 charged over 100 former government officials and unm members with crimes that appear to be motivated by political considerations .

the amendment stated that the arrest of the unm party leader vano merabishvili was "especially troubling," because of its "chilling effect" on political contestation in the run - up to the presidential election , and that such actions call into question the georgian government's continued democratization .

the amendment declares that these actions may have a negative impact on u.s. - georgia relations and on integrating georgia into international organizations .

the house approved h.r .

1960 on june 14 , 2014 , for further action in the senate .

the former president of georgia , eduard shevardnadze , immediately condemned the attacks on the united states on september 11 , 2001 , and offered "airspace and territory" for u.s. coalition operations in afghanistan .

georgia was among the countries in 2003 that openly pledged to support the u.s. - led operation iraqi freedom .

in august 2003 , georgia dispatched 69 troops to iraq , boosted them to over 850 in march 2005 , and increased them to 2,000 by september 2007 , making it among the top contributors of troops .

georgian troops served under u.s. command .

many provided security in the "green zone" in baghdad , the town of baqubah northeast of baghdad , and in wasit governorate , along the iranian border .

most of the troops pulled out in august 2008 in connection with the russia - georgia conflict , and the rest pulled out by the end of november 2008 .

on november 16 , 2009 , georgia sent 173 troops for training in germany before their scheduled deployment at the end of march 2010 to support isaf .

these troops were boosted to 925 in mid - 2010 .

on december 20 , 2011 , the georgian legislature approved sending an added georgian battalion of up to 749 troops to afghanistan .

the troops were deployed in october 2012 , boosting the size of the georgian contingent , reportedly to 1,561 troops as of june 2013 .

the added deployment made georgia the largest contributor to the international security assistance force ( isaf ) among non - nato member countries ( surpassing australia with 1,550 troops ) .

the u.s. european command's georgia deployment program supports georgian troop training and rotations .

defense minister alasania has stated that the georgian troops will remain beyond 2014 to assist the afghan national security forces .

the labor party in georgia is one of the few parties that opposes troop deployments to afghanistan and calls for the troops to be recalled .

on may 13 , 2013 , a truck bomb was set off near a georgian base in helmand province , afghanistan , followed by a terrorist attack .

three georgian troops were killed and 27 wounded .

the taliban claimed responsibility for the attack .

on june 6 , 2013 , another truck bomb was set off near another georgian base in helmand province , killing seven soldiers and wounding nine .

the troop contingent reportedly had just been deployed in helmand in april 2013 .

an internet video posted that same day and subsequent statements by the taliban warned georgia that its troops in afghanistan and even its homeland would suffer if all troops were not withdrawn .

the new casualties brought the georgian death toll in afghanistan to 29 troops .

the georgian president and prime minister stated that georgia would "not retreat" in the face of such threats and actions .

