throughout the first 150 years of the federal government , access to government information does not appear to have been a major issue for the federal branches or the public .

there were a few instances during this period when the president , arguing the need to maintain the constitutional independence and equality of his branch , vigorously resisted attempts by congress and the courts to obtain executive records .

during this same era , an active federal public printing program was established and effectively developed , making government documents more accessible .

following world war ii , some information was available from certain federal departments and agencies .

the public availability of records held by the executive branch was limited by narrow interpretation of the "housekeeping" statute of 1789 ( now codified at 5 u.s.c .

§301 ) , which authorized the heads of departments to prescribe regulations regarding the custody , use , and preservation of their agencies' records , papers , and property .

prevailing law tolerated this state of affairs , offering citizens no clear avenue of access to agency information .

section 3 ( b ) of the administrative procedure act of 1946 ( 5 u.s.c .

§551 ) indicated that matters of official record should be available to the public , but added that an agency could restrict access to its documents "for good cause found" or "in the public interest. .

these discretionary authorities were relied upon to restrict the accessibility of unpublished agency records and documents .

some congressional panels began examining information access issues and seeking responsive legislative solutions .

among these legislative responses were the enactments of four statutes .

two provide access to federal records: the freedom of information act ( 1966 ) and the privacy act ( 1974 ) .

two provide access to federal meetings: the federal advisory committee act ( 1972 ) ; and the government in the sunshine act ( 1976 ) .

this report offers an overview of each of these statutes , including the boundaries of their authority .

this report then provides citations to additional resources on each of the laws .

congress routinely requests nonpublic information from executive branch agencies .

when agencies resist these requests , congress has formal and informal methods of encouraging or requiring agencies to comply .

language within foia explicitly states that the statute does not permit agencies to withhold information from congress .

in general , an agency's dispute with the legislature over access to information is often resolved through negotiation — reduction of the quantity of records initially sought , substitution of other information , alternative delivery mechanisms , or limitation of the number of individuals who will examine materials provided by another branch .

congress could use its "power of the purse" and the senate could use its advice and consent power to leverage its information access demands .

federal courts rely upon a spirit of justice and fair play to sustain their orders for the production of information by another branch .

in view of the american separation of powers model of government , such conflicts among the three branches are neither unexpected nor necessarily destructive — and probably will continue to occur .

both congress and the judiciary have subpoena powers that can compel the production of materials by another branch .

subpoenas , however , are usually only issued after other methods of securing requested information have been unsuccessful .

even subpoenas , however , have sometimes been resisted .

in 2012 , for example , the attorney general refused to turn over certain documents subpoenaed by the house committee on oversight and government reform , citing the president's determination that the information was protected by a form of executive privilege .

a federal district court , in committee on oversight and government reform v. lynch , rejected the claim of privilege over the items sought , and ordered the attorney general to produce the responsive documents .

foia requires each federal agency to submit a report on or before february 1 each year to the attorney general describing the agency's freedom of information workload .

annual reports from all of the departments and agencies are posted online by the u.s. department of justice .

in march 2011 , doj launched foia.gov , a government portal that allows users to explore various metrics on the administration of foia in executive branch agencies .

the portal uses the data agencies provide in their annual foia reports to allow users to compare among agencies the number of requests they receive , answer , deny , have appealed , and the average number of days it takes to respond to a request — among other metrics .

according to foia.gov , in fy2014 , the federal government received 714,231 foia requests — 9,837 more than in fy2013 .

in fy2014 , the federal government had 159,741 "backlogged " foia requests , more than 64,000 additional backlogged requests than in fy2013 .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) received 291,242 requests in fy2014 , more than any other agency .

dhs also had the greatest number of backlogged requests with 103,480 in fy2014 , more than 64% of all backlogged foia requests govermentwide .

according to the faca database , which is hosted by the general services administration , 1,050 active advisory committees operated in fy2014 , costing more than $339 million .

a certain number of requests for information under the various access to information acts result in judicial action .

the administrative office of the u.s. courts provides statistical information on the number of foia cases filed in u.s. district courts in its compendium , judicial business of the united states courts .

according to that report , 446 cases related to foia commenced in u.s. district courts in fy2014 ( 16.8% more than the 382 cases reported in fy2013 ) .

the transitional access web clearinghouse ( trac ) , a "data gathering , data research and data distribution organization at syracuse university," maintains a website called foiaproject.org that tracks federal foia - related lawsuits around the country .

according to trac's research , in fy2014 , 401 foia lawsuits were filed in u.s. district court .

also in fy2014 , trac found that 504 foia cases were pending in u.s. district court .

other transparency watchdog organizations also track litigation related to federal access laws .

judicial watch , a public interest group that seeks to promote transparency in government , has posted information about its own lawsuits under "the docket. .

citizens for responsibility and ethics in washington , a nonprofit organization that seeks to promote government accountability , has a webpage devoted to lawsuits in which it is involved .

epic , a public interest nonprofit that focuses on civil liberties and privacy issues , also has a webpage devoted to foia - related litigation .

individuals , groups , and organizations all possess a right to access some government information .

both government and private groups publish guides to the information acts in paper and on the internet as well .

the u.s. house of representatives committee on government reform has published several editions of its report , a citizen's guide on using the freedom of information act and the privacy act of 1974 to request government records — most recently in september 2012 .

in addition to the text of the acts , the citizen's guide contains descriptions and explanations , sample document request forms , and bibliographies of related congressional and non - congressional material .

the office of government information services ( ogis ) , which began operations in 2009 , hosts a webpage that provides "tips and tools" to agencies and requesters .

the website includes best practices for making foia requests , information on foia training for agency administrators , information on how agencies can work with ogis , and foia contacts at agencies for requesters .

the general services administration's federal citizen information center publishes your right to federal records: questions and answers on the freedom of information act and privacy act .

like the citizen's guide , this publication contains explanations , samples , and texts , although in less detail than found in the citizen's guide .

the department of justice ( doj ) is responsible for overseeing and coordinating administration of the freedom of information act .

doj's office of information policy maintains online extensive material about foia , statistics on its usage , guidelines for making requests , and freedom of information contacts at other federal agencies .

among many nongovernmental groups that publish information about freedom of information are public citizen and the national security archive .

public citizen , a nonprofit organization that represents a variety of citizen interests , maintains a website that provides foia resources and information .

the national security archive , a collective of journalists and scholars who "check rising government secrecy," maintains a website that contains a number of foia guides , including "effective foia requesting for everyone: a national security archive guide," which was published in january 2008 .

records on each of the active federal advisory committees are available on the general services administration's faca database .

the website includes each committee's charter , information on the members of each committee and their contact information , and cumulative data on the cost of federal advisory bodies .

crs report r41933 , the freedom of information act ( foia ) : background , legislation , and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] crs legal sidebar wslg93 , the freedom of information act ( foia ) and the drone strikes program , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r43924 , freedom of information act legislation in the 114th congress: issue summary and side - by - side analysis , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r44253 , federal advisory committees: an introduction and overview , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44232 , creating a federal advisory committee in the executive branch , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r44248 , the federal advisory committee act: analysis of operations and costs , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl30240 , congressional oversight manual , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs legal sidebar wslg288 , the privacy act: nearing middle age and needs improvement ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed .

u.s. congress , house , committee on government reform , a citizen' s guide on using the freedom of information act and the privacy act of 1974 to request government records , h.rept , 112-698 , september 2012 , at https: / / oversight.house.gov / wp - content / uploads / 2012 / 09 / citizens - guide - on - using - foia.2012.pdf .

u.s. congress .

senate , committee on governmental affairs , federal advisory committee act ( public law 92-463 ) — source book: legislative his tory , texts , and other documents , committee print , 95 th congress , second session , washington: gpo , 1978 .

u.s. department of justice , 2014 litigation and compliance report , at http: / / www.justice.gov / oip / 2014-foia - litigation - and - compliance - report .

u.s. department of justice , the department of justice guide to the freedom of information act ( online edition ) , at http: / / www.justice.gov / oip / doj - guide - freedom - information - act - 0 .

u.s. department of justice and u.s. general services administration , your right to federal records: questions and answers on the freedom of information act and privacy act , 2011 , http: / / publications.usa.gov / usapubs.php ? pubid=6080 .

u.s. general services administration , faca database case digest , at http: / / casedigest.faca.gov / case / showcasetablepage.aspx .

david m. pritzker , reducing foia litigation through targeted adr strategies , administrative conference of the united states , washington , dc , june 2014 , https: / / www.acus.gov / research - projects / reducing - foia - litigation - through - targeted - adr - strategies .

the george washington university , effective foia requesting for everyone: a national security archive guide , 2009 , at http: / / nsarchive.gwu.edu / nsa / foia / foia_guide.html .

richard k. berg , stephen h. klitzman , and gary j. edles , an interpetive guide to the government in the sunshine act , 2 nd ed .

 ( chicago: american bar association , 2005 ) .

