97-86 - - indian tribes and welfare reform updated september 28 , 200 .

before enactment of tanf , american indians or alaska natives ( indians , inuit [eskimos] , or aleuts ) received family cash welfare on the same terms as other families in their state , with benefits and income eligibility rules ofthe program of aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) set by the state and costs shared by the state .

the law had no provision for administration of cash aid by tribes .

however , some wisconsin tribessubcontracted with the state to provide afdc independently on their reservations .

in fy1994 , 1.3% of thenational afdc caseload ( about 68,000 families ) were american indians and alaska natives .

in addition , morethan 65,000 needy indians who were not in categories eligible for afdc received cash aid based on their state'safdc benefit standards , but paid by the bureau of indian affairs ( bia ) .

under pre - tanf law , more than 80tribes and tribal organizations exercised an option to run their own work and training programs , called jobopportunities and basic skills training ( jobs ) programs , with 100% federal funds .

under tanf , which provides fixed annual state grants through fy2002 , numerous indian tribes and alaska native villages in 16 states ( see table 1 ) are operating their own tribal family assistanceprograms .

tribes thatoperated their own jobs program also receive annual appropriations under tanf law of $7.6 million ( theirfy1984 funding for jobs ) for work and training activities ( renamed native employment works - - new ) .

finally , $28.6 million in welfare - to - work ( wtw ) grants was awarded for fy1998 and 1999 by the labordepartment to indian and native american tribal governments ( 86 grantees in fy1998 , 91 in fy1999 ) .

standard tanf work participation rates and time limit rules do not apply to tribal assistance programs .

theirrules are set by the health and human services ( hhs ) secretary with tribal participation .

eligible for tribal assistance grants are the more than 330 federally recognized tribes in the contiguous 48 states and 13 alaska entities .

as of september 15 , 2004 , 45 tribal tanf grants were approved for 230 tribes plussome non - reservation indians in alaska , arizona , california , idaho , minnesota , montana , nebraska , nevada,new mexico , oklahoma , oregon , south dakota , utah , washington , wisconsin , and wyoming .

annual federalfunding , deducted from the basic tanf grant of their state ( s ) , totals $134.2 million ( for funding by tribal plan,see table 1 ) .

grantees estimated their monthly caseload at 33,510 families .

according to thefifth annual tanfreport , the average number of indian families served by state governments under regular tanf programs wasabout 35,000 in fy2000 , down 50% from the corresponding fy1996 figure ( a part of the decline representedpersons who moved from the regular state program to a tribal program ) .

some features of tribal programsfollow .

recognized tribes and tribal organizations may operate family assistance programs in their service areas .

a tribe's tanf grant equals federal afdc payments to the state for fy1994 attributable toindians in its service area ; the tribal grant is subtracted from the state's tanf grant .

tribal tanf plans are for three years ( rather than 2 , as for states ) and contain many fewerrequired elements than state plans .

however , regular tanf data collection and reporting rules apply to tribalplans .

the hhs secretary , with participation of the tribe , establishes work participation rules,time limits for benefits , and penalties for each tribal family assistance program .

in general , indian tribes inalaska must operate plans in accordance with rules adopted by the state for tanf .

 ( the national congress ofamerican indians has asked for removal of this provision , and for the restrictive definition immediately below,saying that it wants alaskan tribes to be treated like other tribes. ) .

tanf law generally defines an indian tribe as in section 4 of the indianself - determination and education assistance act , but it specifies that an "eligible indian tribe" in alaska means one of 12 specified regional nonprofit corporations plus a reservation .

tribal tanf regulations permit 35% of a tribal grant to be used for administrative costs inthe first year , 30% in the second year , and 25% thereafter .

state tanf programs , however , generally may spentno more than 15% of their grants on administration .

the state governor must certify equitable access from the tanf program to indians noteligible for help from a tribal family assistance plan .

the law gives explicit permission for state tanf programs to use money from the tanfloan fund for aid to indian families that have moved out of the service area of a tribe with a tribal familyassistance plan .

a special rule exempts from the 60-month tanf benefit time limit any month in which therecipient lives in indian country or an alaskan native village with an adult unemployment rate of at least50% .

the law makes tribes eligible for tanf loans , but not for bonuses offered to states for highperformance or for cutting non - marital births .

hhs has ruled that state funds contributed to an approved tribal assistance plan may becounted toward the spending level ( maintenance - of - effort ) that a state must achieve to qualify for a full tanfgrant .

a 1999 amendment permits tribes , like states , to reserve tanf grants for assistance ( ongoing needs and supportive services for the unemployed ) in any future year .

since july 1 , 2001 , tribes alsohave been allowed to reserve unobligated new funds for assistance in any future year .

the house - passed tanf reauthorization bill ( h.r .

4 ) and the senate finance committee substitute version of h.r .

4 ( pride ) renew tribal grants at their current level and make indian tribalorganizations eligible for proposed marriage promotion grants and the proposed employment achievementbonus .

both bills require tribal family assistance plans to provide assurance that tribes have consulted with theirstate ( s ) regarding the plan's design .

the senate committee bill also authorizes appropriation of $100 millionannually for five years for a tribal tanf improvement fund , which could be used to provide technical assistanceto tribes , fund competitive grants , and conduct research .

the american indian welfare reform act ( s. 751 / h.r .

2770 ) proposes many changes .

they include federal payments to statesthat contribute ( with tanf moe funds ) to costs of indian tribal assistance programs , increased tribal fundingfrom the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) , authority for tribes to receive federal funds forfoster care and adoption assistance , and ( on a demonstration basis ) to determine eligibility for food stamps,medicaid , and schip .

the 1996 law reserves between 1% and 2% of its child care funds for payments to indian tribes and tribal organizations , to be subtracted from national totals .

previously no afdc - related child care funds wereearmarked for indians .

in fy2002 , $96 million was allocated to tribes , 2% each of mandatory and discretionaryfunds .

 ( discretionary funds are provided under the child care and development block grant [ccdbg]. ) .

thelaw also allows indian tribes , subject to hhs approval , to use ccdbg funds for construction .

the 1996 welfarelaw authorizes direct federal funding for child support operations to indian tribes ( and , again , alaska nativeorganizations ) with approved child support plans .

by regulation , tribes receive 90% federal funding for the firstthree years , 80% for later years .

as of march , 2004 , 9 tribes received direct federal funding and handled morethan 21,000 cases .

final regulations replaced interim rules in march .

data compiled by the division of tribal services show that most tribal tanf plans have adopted the 60-month lifetime time limit for federally funded tanf to an adult .

the two oregon tribes ( klamath tribes andconfederated tribes of siletz indians ) adopted a limit of 24 months within an 84-month period ( similar tooregon state plan limit ) .

work activities shown in most tribal plans are the same as those specified in tanflaw , but several tribes make additions .

thus , two washington tribes list as additional work activities: "teachingcultural activities" and "barrier removal , including counseling , and chemical dependency treatment. .

thetanana chiefs conference , in alaska , includes as work activities "approved subsistence hunting , fishing,gathering. .

most two tribal plans limit the "service population" to indians .

however , the red cliff band oflake superior chippewa indians in wisconsin says it will serve all families , including non - indians , on thereservation ( and tribal member families in bayfield county ) ; and the white mountain apache tribe in arizonaalso says it will serve all families on the reservation .

the sisseton - wahpeton sioux tribe serves only one - parentfamilies with its tribal plan ; its 2-parent families are aided by bia's general assistance program .

table 1 shows that most of the tribal tanf plans have set work participation rates below the all - family rate of50% and the 2-parent family rate of 90% specified for state tanf programs in fy2002 .

the table also showsthat 36 of the 45 tribal grantees ( including the navajo nation in arizona and utah ) receive state funds - - claimed as tanf moe amounts - - to help pay for their programs .

the tribes that do not receive state fundingare located in wisconsin ( 8 tribes ) , south dakota ( 1 tribe ) and new mexico ( part of the navajo nation ) .

table 1 .

tanf grants for tribal family assistance programs ( as of september 15 , 2004 ) and their work rules a .

these tribes also receive federal funds for the native employment works ( new ) employment and training program .

b .

for fy2000 c. for fy2001 d. increased progressively over the three years 2005-07 .

