the internet is often described as a "network of networks" because it is not a single physical entity but , in fact , hundreds of thousands of interconnected networks linking hundreds of millions of computers around the world .

computers connected to the internet are identified by a unique internet protocol ( ip ) number that designates their specific location , thereby making it possible to send and receive messages and to access information from computers anywhere on the internet .

domain names were created to provide users with a simple location name , rather than requiring them to use a long list of numbers .

top level domains ( tlds ) appear at the end of an address and are either a given country code , such as .jp or .uk , or are generic designations ( gtlds ) , such as .com , .org , .net , .edu , or .gov .

the domain name system ( dns ) is the distributed set of databases residing in computers around the world that contain the address numbers , mapped to corresponding domain names .

those computers , called root servers , must be coordinated to ensure connectivity across the internet .

the internet originated with research funding provided by the department of defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) to establish a military network .

as its use expanded , a civilian segment evolved with support from the national science foundation ( nsf ) and other science agencies .

while there were ( and are ) no formal statutory authorities or international agreements governing the management and operation of the internet and the dns , several entities played key roles in the dns .

for example , the internet assigned numbers authority ( iana ) , which was operated at the information sciences institute / university of southern california under contract with the department of defense , made technical decisions concerning root servers , determined qualifications for applicants to manage country code tlds , assigned unique protocol parameters , and managed the ip address space , including delegating blocks of addresses to registries around the world to assign to users in their geographic area .

nsf was responsible for registration of nonmilitary domain names , and in 1992 put out a solicitation for managing network services , including domain name registration .

in 1993 , nsf signed a five - year cooperative agreement with a consortium of companies called internic .

under this agreement , network solutions inc. ( nsi ) , a herndon , va , engineering and management consulting firm , became the sole internet domain name registration service for registering the .com , .net. , and .org .

gtlds .

after the imposition of registration fees in 1995 , criticism of nsi's sole control over registration of the gtlds grew .

in addition , there was an increase in trademark disputes arising out of the enormous growth of registrations in the .com domain .

there also was concern that the role played by iana lacked a legal foundation and required more permanence to ensure the stability of the internet and the domain name system .

these concerns prompted actions both in the united states and internationally .

an international ad hoc committee ( iahc ) , a coalition of individuals representing various constituencies , released a proposal for the administration and management of gtlds on february 4 , 1997 .

the proposal recommended that seven new gtlds be created and that additional registrars be selected to compete with each other in the granting of registration services for all new second level domain names .

to assess whether the iahc proposal should be supported by the u.s. government , the executive branch created an interagency group to address the domain name issue and assigned lead responsibility to the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) of the department of commerce ( doc ) .

on june 5 , 1998 , doc issued a final statement of policy , "management of internet names and addresses. .

called the white paper , the statement indicated that the u.s. government was prepared to recognize and enter into agreement with "a new not - for - profit corporation formed by private sector internet stakeholders to administer policy for the internet name and address system. .

in deciding upon an entity with which to enter such an agreement , the u.s. government would assess whether the new system ensured stability , competition , private and bottom - up coordination , and fair representation of the internet community as a whole .

the white paper endorsed a process whereby the divergent interests of the internet community would come together and decide how internet names and addresses would be managed and administered .

accordingly , internet constituencies from around the world held a series of meetings during the summer of 1998 to discuss how the new corporation might be constituted and structured .

meanwhile , iana , in collaboration with nsi , released a proposed set of bylaws and articles of incorporation .

the proposed new corporation was called the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers ( icann ) .

after five iterations , the final version of icann's bylaws and articles of incorporation were submitted to the department of commerce on october 2 , 1998 .

on november 25 , 1998 , doc and icann signed an official memorandum of understanding ( mou ) , whereby doc and icann agreed to jointly design , develop , and test the mechanisms , methods , and procedures necessary to transition management responsibility for dns functions — including iana — to a private - sector not - for - profit entity .

on september 17 , 2003 , icann and the department of commerce agreed to extend their mou until september 30 , 2006 .

the mou specified transition tasks which icann agreed to address .

on june 30 , 2005 , michael gallagher , then - assistant secretary of commerce for communications and information and administrator of ntia , stated the u.s. government's principles on the internet's domain name system .

specifically , ntia stated that the u.s. government intends to preserve the security and stability of the dns , that the united states would continue to authorize changes or modifications to the root zone , that governments have legitimate interests in the management of their country code top level domains , that icann is the appropriate technical manager of the dns , and that dialogue related to internet governance should continue in relevant multiple fora .

on september 29 , 2006 , doc announced a new joint project agreement ( jpa ) with icann which was intended to continue the transition to the private sector of the coordination of technical functions relating to management of the dns .

the jpa extended through september 30 , 2009 , and focused on institutionalizing transparency and accountability mechanisms within icann .

on september 30 , 2009 , doc and icann announced agreement on an affirmation of commitments ( aoc ) to "institutionalize and memorialize" the technical coordination of the dns globally and by a private - sector - led organization .

the aoc affirms commitments made by doc and icann to ensure accountability and transparency ; preserve the security , stability , and resiliency of the dns ; promote competition , consumer trust , and consumer choice ; and promote international participation .

icann is a not - for - profit public benefit corporation headquartered in los angeles , ca , and incorporated under the laws of the state of california .

icann is organized under the california nonprofit public benefit law for charitable and public purposes , and as such , is subject to legal oversight by the california attorney general .

icann has been granted tax - exempt status by the federal government and the state of california .

icann's organizational structure consists of a board of directors ( bod ) advised by a network of supporting organizations and advisory committees that represent various internet constituencies and interests ( see figure 1 ) .

policies are developed and issues are researched by these subgroups , who in turn advise the board of directors , which is responsible for making all final policy and operational decisions .

the board of directors consists of 16 international and geographically diverse members , composed of one president , eight members selected by a nominating committee , two selected by the generic names supporting organization , two selected by the address supporting organization , two selected by the country - code names supporting organization , and one selected by the at - large advisory committee .

additionally , there are five non - voting liaisons representing other advisory committees .

the explosive growth of the internet and domain name registration , increasing responsibilities in managing and operating the dns , and the rollout of the new gtld program has led to marked growth of the icann budget , from revenues of about $6 million and a staff of 14 in 2000 , to total support and revenue of $159 million and a head count of 373 budgeted for 2015 .

icann has been traditionally funded primarily through fees paid to icann by registrars and registry operators .

registrars are companies ( eg , godaddy , google , network solutions ) with which consumers register domain names .

registry operators are companies and organizations that operate and administer the master database of all domain names registered in each top level domain ( for example verisign , inc. operates .com and .net , public interest registry operates .org , and neustar , inc. operates .biz ) .

congressional committees ( primarily the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation and the house committee on energy and commerce ) maintain oversight on how the department of commerce manages and oversees icann's activities and policies .

other committees , such as the house and senate judiciary committees , maintain an interest in other issues affected by icann , such as intellectual property and privacy .

the appendix shows a listing of congressional committee hearings related to icann and the domain name system dating back to 1997 .

many of the technical , operational , and management decisions regarding the dns can have significant impacts on internet - related policy issues such as intellectual property , privacy , internet freedom , e - commerce , and cybersecurity .

as such , decisions made by icann affect internet stakeholders around the world .

in transferring management of the dns to the private sector , the key policy question has always been how to best ensure achievement of the white paper principles: internet stability and security , competition , private and bottom - up policymaking and coordination , and fair representation of the global internet community .

what is the best process to ensure these goals , and how should various stakeholders — companies , institutions , individuals , governments — fit into this process ? .

controversies such as the new gtlds and .xxx have led some governments to criticize the icann policymaking process , and to suggest various ways to increase governmental influence over that process , whether it be an enhanced role for the gac or a greater role for a u.n. - based or multilateral entity .

with the increasing impact of the internet on virtually all aspects of modern society , some governments argue that they should have an enhanced role in developing internet policies that will affect their citizens .

on the other hand , defenders of the multistakeholder model argue that the phenomenal growth of the internet has been and will continue to be fostered by a bottom - up , consensus approach , which serves to protect policy decisions from the political and bureaucratic control of national governments and international and multilateral institutions .

the 114 th congress is likely to closely examine ntia's march 14 , 2014 , proposed transitioning of its authority over icann and the dns to a wholly multistakeholder - driven entity .

congress will likely consider whether the proposed transition is in the best interest of the united states and in the best interest of the internet .

as a transition plan is developed by icann and the internet community , congress will likely monitor and evaluate that plan , and seek assurances that a dns free of u.s. government stewardship will remain stable , secure , resilient , and open .

as part of its examination , congress will likely continue assessing to what extent ongoing and future intergovernmental telecommunications conferences constitute an opportunity for some nations to increase intergovernmental control over the internet , and how effectively ntia and other government agencies ( such as the state department ) are working to counteract that threat .

ultimately , how these issues are addressed could have profound impacts on the continuing evolution of icann , the dns , and the internet .

