before the house amended the discharge rule in the 103 rd congress ( 1993-1994 ) , the names of members signing a discharge petition were treated as confidential unless the full required number of members signed , in which case the names were printed in the congressional record .

pursuant to the 1993 amendment , the names of those signing discharge petitions each week are now also printed in the last issue of the record for that week .

in addition , the names of signers of discharge petitions are available through the office of the clerk .

the listings in the record identify discharge petitions only by the numbers of the measures against which they are filed ; their subjects are set forth in the index entry for "discharge" in the house calendar .

these listings make it possible , from the 103 rd congress forward , to ascertain the number of members signing each discharge petition filed .

table 2 lists all the discharge petitions filed in each congress from the 103 rd through 107 th ( 1993-2002 ) .

for each congress , petitions are listed in order of the numbers of members who signed .

this table offers a sense of the range of support that discharge petitions may attract .

table 2 identifies each petition by ( 1 ) its number , ( 2 ) the special rule , if any , that it proposes to bring to the floor , and ( 3 ) the number and subject of the underlying measure that it proposes ultimately to bring to the floor .

the notations of bill subjects enable identification of what issues have been addressed by recent discharge attempts .

also shown is the date on which each petition was filed , for the number of signatures obtained may be affected by how late in the congress the discharge process was initiated .

if any members withdrew their signatures from a discharge petition , the number of withdrawals is noted in a footnote .

the figures in the table do not include these members as signers .

examination of table 2 shows that the levels of support discharge petitions obtain fall into groupings fairly clearly separated in size .

although no assurance can be given that future congresses may display similar groupings , the consistency with which these have continued to appear may suggest the presence of a general pattern .

a first grouping includes only four petitions ( all but one in the 103 rd congress ) that gained more signatures than the strength of the minority party .

three of these attained the full 218 signatures ; the fourth fell short of this level after an active counter - campaign by the leadership .

petitions that reach this level of support evidently must draw at least some support from the majority party , and therefore presumably will appear on legislation supported either by a bipartisan coalition or by the rank and file of the majority party in opposition to its own leadership .

a second grouping of 36 petitions was signed by fewer members than the strength of the minority party , but more than half this number ( usually , by more than 100 ) .

in some congresses , petitions with this level of support have been the predominant form ; in the 106 th and 107 th congresses ( 1999-2002 ) , especially , almost all petitions have fallen into this grouping .

house records do not identify the party of signers , but this level of support may often indicate a discharge effort favored principally by the minority , sometimes by an essentially united party and at least by a majority thereof .

during the five congresses covered , only two petitions received between 60 and 95 signatures .

thirteen , by contrast , received between 30 and 60 signatures .

whether or not the signers drew principally from a single party in the house , petitions in this third grouping cannot be associated with a party in the same sense as can those in the previous one , inasmuch as their level of support could not constitute a majority of either party .

this level of support nevertheless represents a potentially significant segment of the house , so that it may often be appropriate to view these petitions as representing factional discharge efforts .

a fourth grouping includes the nine petitions that obtained three signatures or fewer .

these appear to be understandable essentially as individualistic discharge efforts .

the remaining eight petitions obtained between seven and 30 signatures , arrayed more loosely between the third and fourth groups .

some of these might also be considered factional discharge efforts .

the success of a discharge effort can be assessed in various ways .

the simplest measure is whether the petition attains the 218 signatures requisite to permit supporters to offer the discharge motion ( known as "entering the motion on the discharge calendar" ) .

in a more basic sense , however , the ultimate goal of a discharge petition is presumably not the offering of a discharge motion in itself , but securing floor consideration for the measure in question .

in a more extended sense , the objective is presumably to see the measure not only considered , but also passed by the house , and ultimately enacted into law .

the data in tables 3 through 5 permit assessing the success of discharge efforts in all three senses .

in particular , the objective of securing floor consideration can be accomplished either ( 1 ) if the discharge motion , once offered , is agreed to by the house ; or ( 2 ) if the prospect of discharge impels the house to take up the measure under some other procedures .

table 3 shows the extent to which discharge efforts have been successful at bringing about action through the discharge process itself ; table 4 addresses the success of discharge efforts at bringing about action through other procedures .

table 5 aggregates both classes of data .

 table 8 provides specific information on individual measures on which discharge was attempted and action beyond the committee stage occurred .

the data in table 8 do not cover the entire period since 1931 , but only from 1967 through 2002 ( 90 th - 107 th congresses ) , roughly the time since the committee on rules has operated consistently as an organ of the leadership , and during which use of the discharge procedure has generally remained stable at moderate levels .

this period includes 221 discharge efforts , 24 of which were followed by house floor consideration of the measure involved ( or an alternative on the same subject ) .

in relation to two of these measures , however , two petitions each were filed , so that these 24 petitions relate to a total of only 22 measures .

an additional 11 measures on which discharge was sought were reported , but not taken up for consideration .

table 8 lists all 33 of these measures , thereby including all cases , during the period covered , for which either ( 1 ) use of the discharge rule could have helped to promote further action , or ( 2 ) the leadership or committee on rules , rather than the committee of jurisdiction , might have formed the chief obstacle to consideration .

although house action on these 33 measures took a wide variety of forms , some patterns are discernible .

first , each of the three methods of discharge provided by the rule was represented in similar numbers .

relative to how often each method was attempted , however , the frequency with which further action occurred varied markedly: nine measures were reported after petitions were filed on the measures themselves .

eight of these received floor consideration ( 6% of the 138 unreported measures on which petitions were filed ) .

thirteen measures were reported after petitions were filed on special rules for their consideration .

nine of these received floor consideration ( 13% of the 72 unreported measures for which petitions on special rules were filed ) .

eleven measures had already been reported before petitions were filed on special rules for their consideration .

only four of these received floor consideration , but these made up 36% of the 11 reported measures for which petitions on special rules were filed .

the 33 measures also were distributed roughly equally among the various courses of events through which they might or might not reach the floor: petitions on 12 of the measures were entered on the discharge calendar .

just six of these measures , however , reached the floor through the discharge procedure itself ; the other six were called up through other procedures .

ten other measures reached the floor , by procedures other than discharge , even though the petitions remained pending .

in the remaining 11 cases , the discharge petitions remained pending , and the measures were reported , but never actually considered .

as table 6 shows , however , the different courses of subsequent action were not evenly distributed among the three forms of discharge attempt .

overall , measures on which discharge was sought reached the floor more often under other procedures than under the discharge rule itself .

this pattern , however , did not appear among petitions that were filed directly on measures , but only among those filed on special rules for considering measures , and especially on rules for measures already reported .

among measures that were subjected to discharge attempts and reached the floor , the proportions that did so under procedures other than discharge itself were 50% when the petitions were filed directly on unreported measures , 80% when they were filed on special rules for unreported measures , and 100% when they were was filed on special rules for reported measures .

among the same measures , the proportions that reached the floor even though the discharge petitions remained pending were 25% when the petitions were filed directly on unreported measures ; 50% when they were filed on special rules for unreported measures , and 75% when they were filed on special rules for reported measures .

these figures indicate that measures became increasingly likely to reach the floor under alternative procedures , rather than pursuant to the discharge rule itself , the more directly the form of the discharge effort represented a challenge to the normal control of the floor agenda by the leadership and the committee on rules .

in other words , the relationships shown in table 6 suggest that the committee on rules has tended to respond vigorously to potential direct infringements of its special role in regulating the floor agenda , but has not always found it necessary to forestall potential infringements only of the general gatekeeping role common to all committees .

finally , the 11 measures that were only reported , and not considered on the floor , are also unequally distributed among the forms of discharge .

seven of the 11 had been reported before the petitions were filed , and so presumably represent situations in which the committee on rules found no preemptive action necessary to maintain its usual control of the floor agenda .

the remaining four , however , were reported after the discharge petitions were filed , and in these cases the reports may have been intended to counter the discharge attempt .

one of these petitions was filed directly on the measure , so that reporting the measure rendered the discharge attempt moot .

two others were filed on special rules for considering measures , so that reporting the measures did not preclude subsequent discharge and adoption of the rules , but such events did not occur .

the fourth was also filed on a special rule , and the committee on rules then reported the rule , but no member of the committee invoked the rule permitting him or her to call up a reported special rule not considered within seven legislative days .

 table 7 shows how many of the 22 measures on which discharge was sought , and that ultimately reached the floor under various procedures , received favorable action from the house .

presumably , a measure on which a discharge petition obtains the full 218 signatures required is supported by a majority of the house .

of the 12 measures on which a petition was entered , nevertheless , the house passed only six .

all six of the rejected measures were constitutional amendments , which require a two - thirds vote for passage .

of these 12 measures , only six were considered under the discharge procedure itself , mostly during the earlier years of the period covered .

five of the six were constitutional amendments , and four of the five were defeated .

the only other measure the house adopted pursuant to the discharge procedure itself was an amendment of its rules – changing the discharge rule itself to make signatures public .

correspondingly , of the 16 measures considered under other procedures , whether or not the petitions were entered , three ( all of them constitutional amendments ) were defeated .

the house passed the other 13 , none of which was a constitutional amendment .

ten of these 13 became law , including all four that reached the floor after the petitions were entered .

in summary , table 7 shows that during the period covered , when a discharge effort has succeeded in bringing to the floor a measure that required the support only of an ordinary voting majority , the likelihood that the house would pass the measure has been excellent .

each entry in table 8 identifies the measure on which discharge was attempted by number and notes its subject ( proposed constitutional amendments include the notation "amendment" ) .

the table also notes the committee ( s ) to which the measure was referred , or from which it was reported .

it next shows which of the forms of discharge petition was filed , how many signatures it obtained , and whether it resulted in a discharge motion being offered on the floor .

the following two columns note key events in floor action on the measure , under the discharge rule itself or under other procedures , respectively .

these events include actions taken on related special rules and alternative measures .

the last column notes the final status of the measure .

throughout , the table provides the numbers of any related measures and the dates of key actions .

the following paragraphs detail the significance and use of each of these items .

 table 8 indicates whether a discharge petition was filed ( 1 ) directly on an unreported measure , ( 2 ) on a special rule for considering an unreported measure , or ( 3 ) on a special rule for considering a reported measure .

it also gives the date the petition was filed , and , where applicable , the resolution number of the special rule .

 table 8 notes which petitions obtained the full 218 signatures required before a motion to discharge may be offered on the house floor .

also , from the 103 rd congress forward , it notes the number of signatures obtained by each other petition .

before the house amended the rule in that congress to make signatures to pending discharge petitions publicly available , they were treated as confidential except when the full 218 were obtained .

once the 218 signatures are obtained , a motion to discharge is entered on a special discharge calendar .

beginning seven legislative days thereafter , the motion may be offered on the second or fourth monday of each month , except during the last six days of a session .

table 8 notes whether and when this motion was offered .

on several occasions during the period examined , after a discharge motion was entered , the house instead accepted a unanimous consent request that the committee be discharged and the measure be considered at a specific time .

table 8 treats the acceptance of such a request as equivalent to the adoption of a discharge motion .

when a petition does not obtain 218 signatures , of course , no discharge motion can be offered on the floor , and no discharge vote can occur .

 table 8 reports action pursuant to the discharge rule itself in one column , and that pursuant to other procedures in a separate column .

in either case , the pertinent column notes whether the measure was ( 1 ) reported from committee after the petition was filed , ( 2 ) taken up on the floor , and ( 3 ) passed or rejected .

if the measure was considered under the terms of a special rule , the table also records floor action on the rule .

for measures not considered in committee of the whole , the table identifies the procedure under which consideration took place .

sometimes , although floor action does not take place on the measure that is the subject of the discharge procedure , it does occur on some other measure on the same subject .

this action may occur because the committee of referral reports the other measure ; the leadership schedules it for floor consideration ; or the committee on rules reports a special rule for considering it .

if discharge is sought on a special rule , another possibility is that the committee on rules may report a different special rule , providing for consideration of the same measure or an alternative measure .

actions of these kinds may represent attempts to forestall or preempt consideration of the measure on which the petition was filed , or at least to forestall its consideration under the terms of the original special rule .

table 8 identifies cases in which such actions occurred , noting the numbers of the alternative measures and special rules .

occasionally , a discharge petition is filed on a special rule for considering a measure after it has already received some floor consideration .

 ( the campaign finance legislation of the 107 th congress is an example , as already mentioned. ) .

in the column on alternative floor action , table 8 notes any floor consideration that occurred on a measure before a discharge petition was filed , but distinguishes this action with an asterisk ( * ) .

similarly , when a measure was reported from committee after a petition was filed , although the measure then received no actual floor consideration , table 8 also notes this event in the column for alternative floor action , but in italics .

a discharge attempt may succeed in bringing the measure in question ( or an alternative ) to the floor under either the discharge procedure itself or some other procedure , yet the measure considered may still fail to achieve enactment .

the house may consider the measure and reject it , or the measure may fail at a later stage of the legislative process .

table 8 notes whether each measure listed became law or ( for concurrent or simple resolutions , and for joint resolutions proposing constitutional amendments ) otherwise attained final congressional approval .

for measures that did not reach final approval , the table notes the last point in the legislative process the measure reached .

this information indicates whether a measure failed or succeeded through the discharge effort itself , or because of conditions occurring at other some point in the process .

 table 8 does not supply a date for every legislative action it lists .

it does , however , identify dates on which measures were referred or , where pertinent , reported ; discharge petitions were filed ; the required number of signatures was obtained ; and key floor actions took place .

the rule requires a petition to be filed at least 30 legislative days after the date of referral .

the interval between referral and filing may suggest how urgent the measure's supporters felt the matter to be , or how much confidence they had in the committee of referral .

similarly , the interval from filing to obtaining 218 signatures , as well as the number of signatures obtained , may indicate the breadth and intensity of support for a measure .

finally , the interval between the filing or entering of the discharge petition and floor action on the measure may suggest whether the committee of jurisdiction , the house leadership , or the committee on rules was attempting to supersede or forestall action pursuant to the discharge procedure .

this information accordingly helps to suggest the effectiveness of the discharge procedure in eliciting responsive action by these organs .

such an effect might be inferred , for example , if , after a discharge petition is entered but before the discharge motion can be offered on the floor , the committee reports the measure or the committee on rules reports a special rule .

