congressional oversight refers to the review , monitoring , and supervision of federal agencies , programs , activities , and policy implementation .

congress exercises this power largely through its standing committee system .

however , oversight , which dates to the earliest days of the republic , also occurs in a wide variety of congressional activities and contexts .

these include authorization , appropriations , investigative , and legislative hearings by standing committees ; specialized investigations by select committees ; and reviews and studies by congressional support agencies and staff .

congress's oversight authority derives from its "implied" powers in the constitution , public laws , and house and senate rules .

it is an integral part of the american system of checks and balances .

underlying the legislature's ability to oversee the executive branch are democratic principles as well as practical purposes .

john stuart mill , the british utilitarian philosopher , insisted that oversight was the key feature of a meaningful representative body: "the proper office of a representative assembly is to watch and control the government. .

as a young scholar and future president , woodrow wilson — in his 1885 treatise , congressional government — equated oversight with lawmaking , which was usually seen as the supreme function of a legislature .

he wrote , "quite as important as legislation is vigilant oversight of administration. .

the philosophical underpinning for oversight is the constitution's system of checks and balances among the legislative , executive , and judicial branches .

james madison , known as the "father of the constitution," described the system in federalist no .

51 as establishing "subordinate distributions of power , where the constant aim is to divide and arrange the several offices in such a manner that each may be a check on the other. .

oversight , as an outgrowth of this principle , ideally serves a number of overlapping objectives and purposes: improve the efficiency , economy , and effectiveness of governmental operations ; evaluate programs and performance ; detect and prevent poor administration , waste , abuse , arbitrary and capricious behavior , or illegal and unconstitutional conduct ; protect civil liberties and constitutional rights ; inform the general public and ensure that executive policies reflect the public interest ; gather information to develop new legislative proposals or to amend existing statutes ; ensure administrative compliance with legislative intent ; and prevent executive encroachment on legislative authority and prerogatives .

in sum , oversight is a way for congress to check on , and check , the executive branch .

oversight occurs through a wide variety of congressional activities and avenues .

some of the most publicized are the comparatively rare investigations by select committees into major scandals or into executive branch operations gone awry .

cases in point are temporary select committee inquiries into: homeland security matters following the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 ; china's acquisition of u.s. nuclear weapons information , in 1999 ; the iran - contra affair , in 1987 ; intelligence agency abuses , in 1975-1976 , and "watergate," in 1973-1974 .

the precedent for this kind of oversight actually goes back two centuries: in 1792 , a special house committee investigated the ignominious defeat of an army force by confederated indian tribes .

by comparison to these select panel investigations , other congressional inquiries in recent congresses — into intelligence information and its sharing among federal agencies prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , u.s. intelligence about weapons of mass destruction before the invasion of iraq , whitewater , access to federal bureau of investigation files , and campaign financing — have relied for the most part on standing committees .

the impeachment proceedings against president clinton in 1998 in the house and in 1999 in the senate also generated considerable oversight .

it not only encompassed the president and the white house staff , but also extended to the office of independent counsel , prompted by concerns about its authority , jurisdiction , and expenditures .

although such highly visible endeavors are significant , they usually reflect only a small portion of congress's total oversight effort .

more routine and regular review , monitoring , and supervision occur in other congressional activities and contexts .

especially important are appropriations hearings on agency budgets as well as authorization hearings for existing programs .

separately , examinations of executive operations and the implementation of programs — by congressional staff , support agencies , and specially created commissions and task forces — provide additional oversight .

senate rule xxii , paragraph 2 .

u.s. senate , committee on rules and administration , senate manual , containing the standing rules , orders , laws , and resolutions affecting the business of the united states senate , s.doc .

110-1 , 110 th congress , 2 nd session , prepared by matthew mcgowan under the direction of howard gantman , staff director ( washington: gpo , 2008 ) , sec .

22.2 .

joel d. aberbach , keeping watchful eye: the politics of congressional oversight ( washington: brookings institution , 1990 ) .

[author name scrubbed] , "congressional oversight of the presidency," annals , vol .

499 , sept. 1988 , pp .

75-89 .

david r. mayhew , divided we govern: party control , lawmaking , and investigations , 1946-1990 ( new haven: yale university press , 1991 ) .

[author name scrubbed] , "legislative oversight," congressional procedure and the policy process ( washington: congressional quarterly press , 2005 ) , pp .

274-297 .

arthur m. schlesinger and roger bruns , eds. , congress investigates: a documented history , 1792-1974 , 5 vols .

 ( new york: chelsea house publishers , 1975 ) .

charles tiefer , "congressional oversight of the clinton administration and congressional procedure," administrative law review , vol .

50 , winter 1998 , pp .

199-216 .

u.s. congress , house committee on house administration , "oversight," history of the house of representatives , 1789-1994 , h.doc .

103-324 , 103 rd congress , 2 nd session ( washington: gpo , 1994 ) , pp .

233-266 .

u.s. general accounting office , investigators' guide to sources of information , gao report osi - 97-2 ( washington: 1997 ) .

crs report rl30240 , congressional oversight manual , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r41079 , congressional oversight: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl32525 , congressional oversight of intelligence: current structure and alternatives , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs video series , congressional oversight ( 2004 ) , dealing with tools and techniques , avenues and approaches , and authorities and assistance ; on seven videos ( mm70003-mm70009 ) , available by calling [phone number scrubbed] .

