the 1970s stand out in the post - world war ii era as the inflation decade .

this is evident from the data in table 1 for the leading industrial countries .

inflation served to motivate public policy in a number of countries .

a major impetus of these initiatives was to focus central banks on one major policy goal: the achievement of price stability .

in some cases this has taken the form of legislation specifying this goal to the exclusion of all others .

in other cases , the central bank was granted greater autonomy in the expectation that this would lead to the desired outcome .

during recent years , canada , the united kingdom , new zealand , sweden , australia , and israel , among others have adopted inflation targeting as the major goal of monetary policy .

and since the european central bank's inception , price stability has been its main objective .

these developments have not gone unnoticed in the united states .

the ultimate objectives of federal reserve ( fed ) policy are currently specified in the federal reserve reform act of 1977 as maintaining the "long run growth of monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy's long run potential production , so as to promote the goals of maximum employment , stable prices , and moderate long - term interest rates. .

both democratic and republican members of congress have introduced legislation that would replace the current multigoal mandate of "maximum employment , stable prices , and moderate long - term interest rates" with a single goal to maintain "stable prices. .

in some proposals , "stable prices" is defined as a low inflation rate .

in others , the overall price level would remain constant .

an early example of democratic efforts along these lines was the "zero inflation resolution" introduced by representative stephen neal of north carolina in 1989 .

in the 109 th congress , representative jim saxton , republican of new jersey , introduced the price stability act of 2005 , h.r .

498 , "to mandate price stability as the primary goal of ... monetary policy.... " two bills were introduced in the 110 th congress .

the first , the price stability and inflation targeting act of 2008 , h.r .

6042 , was introduced by representative jim saxton , republican of new jersey .

the second , h.r .

6053 , the price stability act of 2008 , was introduced by representative paul ryan , republican of wisconsin .

both would commit the fed to inflation targeting .

the federal reserve takes no official position on inflation targeting .

governors and regional bank presidents of the federal reserve are perceived to have mixed views on making inflation the sole goal of monetary policy , with recently retired chairman alan greenspan perceived to be opposed to a congressionally mandated inflation target .

his successor , ben bernanke , is a long - time advocate of inflation targeting .

william j. mcdonough , former president of the new york federal reserve bank , said: it is often said that there is a worldwide community of central bankers .

i certainly feel that way .

central bankers in all countries share a number of concerns .

perhaps the most important of these is the desire for price stability .

while central bankers may differ in the way they seek price stability — differences grounded in our respective histories , customs , and institutions — the goal we all strive for is no less important .

although the purpose of this proposal is straightforward , it raises many technical issues that this report will consider .

as a preface to this discussion , the report will begin with pro and con cases given by economists who either favor or oppose the legislation focusing the federal reserve on an exclusive goal of achieving price stability .

the ultimate purpose of refocusing the federal reserve on a price stability goal is to increase the amount of real goods and services available to the nation , not , as the late professor james tobin reminded us , because "price or inflation stability is ... an ultimate social good. .

thus , it must be shown that inflation has a pernicious effect on economic growth , the efficiency with which the economy works , the choices available to americans to satisfy their needs and wants , or on employment .

such a case can be made .

but should price stability be the sole goal of monetary policy ? .

proponents make that case based on five powerful strands of economic theory and empiricism , as well as one political argument .

it is , perhaps , best to begin the case against a single goal for the federal reserve with the proposition that while the current monetary system does not have an explicit anchor such as would be provided by a fixed exchange rate or a legislated inflation target , it does have an implicit anchor .

the federal reserve has been extremely reluctant over the past two decades to let the u.s. inflation rate rise above 3% - 4% without intervention .

rates above 3% - 4% seem to bring on monetary tightening of the type that often leads to a cyclical downturn .

thus , in practice , the adoption of an inflation target cannot be supported on the grounds that the fed has neglected to pursue the goal of price stability .

the burden of proof should be on proponents to show that the fed's past performance could have been improved — or there is reason to believe that future performance could be improved — if a price stability regime had been in place .

the case against an exclusive price stability goal can be subdivided into six parts .

beginning in the late 1980s , a number of countries imposed a goal of price stability on their central banks .

their experience will be used in the exposition to follow because it demonstrates that the manner in which the legislation is written in those countries has either compounded or simplified the technical problems noted below .

mishkin and schmidt - hebbel identify 17 countries that currently use a goal of price stability ; in addition , the european central bank has such a goal .

the american model of central banking has distinctive attributes .

the u.s. congress delegates to a central bank its power to "coin money and regulate the value thereof. .

in doing so , it specifies a variety of goals that monetary policy should achieve that can be viewed as mutually inconsistent .

this lack of goal independence is , however , arguably superficial since the federal reserve has long been allowed to pick and choose the one or ones on which it will place the greatest emphasis during any given time period .

the federal reserve has also been given complete instrument independence in the sense that no constraints are placed on the monetary powers available to it to achieve its ends .

the exercise of monetary policy is completely at the discretion of the federal reserve .

a growing number of economists argue that a more desirable regime would be one in which the central bank is directed to achieve a single goal , price stability .

while this regime would restrict the goal independence of the federal reserve , instrument independence would continue as it is now .

most economists would agree that monetary policy has been highly successful in the past 25 years .

proponents of a single price stability goal for monetary policy must contend with the time - honored adage "if it ain't broke , don't fix it. .

while proponents are likely to agree that monetary policy has been a success in the last two and a half decades , they would attribute that success to the fed's decision to focus single - mindedly on price stability .

making price stability the sole goal of monetary policy would institutionalize this success , preventing any potential departure from this philosophy under future fed chairmen and insulating current policy from political pressure .

with the current regime of broad discretion , there is always the potential for the fed to spring opportunistic monetary surprises which would lead to an inflationary bias that would create long - term harm for short - term gain .

furthermore , they would argue that the fed pays lip service to goals that are contradictory and unattainable — thereby avoiding criticism — while focusing on only one goal .

this , they argue further , is a potential threat to the credibility , transparency , and accountability of monetary policy .

in proponents' eyes , a price stability goal would lead to an improvement on all three of these fronts , whereas the current multi - goal regime leads to uncertainty , opacity , and subjectivity .

some proponents are motivated by a desire to end discretionary policy , while others view a price stability goal as "constrained discretion. .

the latter believe that monetary policy can play a useful role in reducing the volatility of the business cycle , as long as constraints are present in the form of a price stability goal to prevent high inflation and monetary surprises .

critics would contend that price stability proponents underestimate the complexity of monetary policy and the broad and varied effects it has on the economy .

while most would acknowledge the salutary effects the fed's pursuit of price stability has produced , they would disagree that this is the only policy goal the fed can and should pursue .

instead , they would argue that the fed has proven in the last two decades that price stability can go hand - in - hand with a monetary policy that minimizes the excesses of the business cycle and maintains the soundness of the financial sector .

if a price stability goal is interpreted as precluding the fed from pursuing these other two goals , then they would argue that the economy would suffer as a result .

for example , a price stability goal could have limited the fed's ability to ease policy in response to recent oil shocks and the attacks of september 11 .

it remains to be seen if the recent expansion in federal reserve activities related to the financial crisis that began in the summer of 2007 will compromise its ability to maintain an inflation goal for the united states .

alternatively , if the price stability goal is interpreted as a regime of "constrained discretion" which still allows for the stabilization of output , then critics would view the current multi - goal mandate as more appropriate .

furthermore , they would argue that the complexity of the economy means that policy must rely on expert judgment , and the fed has proven in the past two decades that discretion can be pursued responsibly .

in conclusion , the price stability goal , while simple , is deceptively so .

the long and variable lags in policy effectiveness and unpredictable nature of shocks to the economy mean that the fed's control over inflation is imprecise and delayed .

for that reason , the fed could not reasonably be expected to keep inflation on a point target at all times , should a price stability goal be adopted .

this implies accountability would not be as straightforward as proponents might hope .

legislation can address this problem explicitly .

possible remedies for the problem include allowing inflation to stay within a range , targeting core rather than headline inflation , permitting exceptions when inflation would be allowed to miss its target under pre - determined circumstances , and targeting forecasted rather than contemporaneous inflation .

but critics would argue that none of these solutions really solves the inherent complications that makes the price stability goal impractical .

to date , congress has taken no legislative action on the issue of inflation targeting or changing the current mandate , but its hand may be forced in the near future .

fed chairman ben bernanke , a longtime advocate of inflation targeting , has argued that the fed could independently adopt one without any change to the current mandate .

this is a departure from the views of most proponents and opponents who see inflation targeting and changing the mandate to a sole goal of price stability as going hand in hand .

if the fed decides to unilaterally adopt an inflation target , congress can either prevent it through legislative action or accept it , actively through legislation or passively through inaction .

