"rhetoric," wrote aristotle , "is the power of determining in a particular case what are the available means of persuasion. .

this report reviews some effective means for the rhetoric of persuasive communication in speeches written by congressional staff for senators and representatives .

by speeches , this report means draft statements prepared for oral delivery by members .

such speeches are often prepared under the pressure of deadlines that leave minimal time for extensive revision .

moreover , they must often be drafted in whole or part for members who may have little opportunity to edit and amend them .

the burdens of public office ( as well as of campaigning ) and the insistent demand for speeches of every kind for a variety of occasions require some degree of reliance on speechwriters , a reliance that is heightened by the limitations of time and the urgencies of the media .

a speech thus "ghostwritten" should nevertheless reflect the intention and even the style of the speaker .

the best ghostwriters are properly invisible ; they subordinate themselves to the speaker in such a way that the final product is effectively personalized in the process of actual communication .

the only ways to achieve or even approach this ideal are practice and experience .

this report seeks to provide some guidance for congressional staff on the principles and practice of speechwriting .

the suggestions offered herein , when combined with practice , attention to audience and occasion , and , most importantly , the member's attitudes , convictions , and style , can help create a speech that can be a "seamless garment" when delivered by the member .

writing effective speeches requires a constant awareness of the distinction between the written and the spoken word: the speechwriter must learn to "write aloud. .

while the best speeches read as well as they sound , the novice speechwriter should give priority to the ear and not the eye .

his or her speech must be written to be heard , not read .

this means that easy intelligibility should be a paramount concern , so that the listening span is not strained .

one of the first rules of the speechwriting profession is that a sentence written to be heard should be simple , direct , and short .

when the speechwriter "writes aloud," george orwell's advice to cut out any word that can possibly be cut is helpful , so long as the resulting effect is clarity , and not verbal shorthand .

ciceronian oratory on the one hand and dick - and - jane simplicity on the other are extremes to be avoided .

the speechwriter thus faces the challenge of crafting words that convey the speaker's meaning clearly , but that also draw on the rich nuance and texture of spoken english .

the average spoken sentence runs from eight to 16 words ; anything longer is considered more difficult for listeners to follow by ear , and according to one expert , may be too long for the average listener to absorb and analyze quickly .

by comparison , written sentences of up to 30 words are easily understood by average readers .

given these generally accepted limitations , what devices are available to the writer to make more complex sentences and speech wording accessible to the listener ? .

complex sentences can be clarified by repeating key words and using simple connections .

by numerous rhetorical techniques , the speaker states , restates , and states again in different ways , the central themes of the speech .

what jefferson bates called "audience analysis" is probably the single most important factor to be considered in writing every speech: know your listeners , and you will have a much better chance of connecting with them .

another of the speechwriter's tasks is to assess the occasion at which the member has been asked to speak and tailor the remarks accordingly .

in contemporary society , the delivery of remarks by public figures is an expected element in almost every secular public ceremony , and at many religious services .

the speechwriter must ensure that the occasion and the speech agree with one another , in both tone and content .

for instance , veterans' day and memorial day are among the most solemn public holidays in the calendar .

for these two events , the speechwriter should focus on themes of commemoration , service , and sacrifice .

the atmosphere should appropriately be both somber , and hopeful: "their sacrifice led to a better , more secure life for those who followed them. .

high school and college commencements are of a different genre altogether .

the occasion may demand inspirational remarks , but as one observer noted , "i've heard speakers ... deliver a tedious , solemn policy address at graduation ceremonies in which the graduates and families just want to hit the exits and have a good time. .

conversely , a formal address to a learned society will differ dramatically from friendly remarks at a neighborhood picnic , town meeting , or retirement home .

simply put , the writer should exercise common sense in preparing remarks appropriate in tone and content to both the audience and the occasion .

another useful consideration for congressional staff is to plan the delivery of substantive remarks on substantive occasions .

if the member is scheduled to announce a major policy statement or initiative , it should be delivered in commensurate surroundings , and on occasions when media coverage will be adequate .

timing is also a serious factor ; speeches delivered at mid - morning , at lunchtime , or early afternoon at the latest , are far more likely to be covered that same day by local tv news .

the purpose of a speech and the occasion at which it will be delivered are closely related .

most frequently , the latter will govern the former .

william e. wiethoff suggests a "purpose" template for speechwriters in writing the speech .

in it he establishes three categories of purpose: information , persuasion , and entertainment .

how long should a member speak ? .

the answer to this fundamental question of speechwriting , like so many others , depends on a wide range of factors .

audience analysis and occasion have been previously noted , but the habits and attitudes of the speaker must also be taken into consideration .

the natural inclinations of the member must be examined .

is the member a person of few words , or is he or she a good talker ? .

does the member stick to the text , or lay it aside to share anecdotes , personal reminiscences , or even humor , with the audience ? .

these and other related questions can be answered only through experience on the part of the congressional speechwriter .

learning the member's style and preferences will result in a better product that communicates more effectively .

theme , audience , time , place , occasion and purpose — once these are settled , the speechwriter's next concern is to gather ideas , facts , examples , illustrations , quotations , and humor , in short , whatever is needed to give substance , character , and interest to the speech .

there is no shortcut for researching a speech , although a number of resources can speed the process .

congressional speechwriters often consult the congressional research service first when preparing a draft statement or an address for a member .

crs offers a range of speechwriting resources for the use of congressional staff , many of which are available from the crs home page , at http: / / www.crs.gov .

to find this report and other speechwriting resources , go to the crs home page and click on the tab on the right , "reference desk" http: / / www.crs.gov / reference / general / reference.shtml .

on the left side of the page you will find a link to "speechwriting & holidays / commemorative events" http: / / www.crs.gov / reference / general / speechwriting.shtml .

this page provides links to commemorative speech materials , many of them focusing on major holidays , such as the fourth of july and labor day , and month - long celebrations like black history month and native american heritage month .

information is provided on the history of and related facts about the holiday or celebration .

the speechwriting page also accesses sources providing practical tips for writing a speech , quotations , the full text of selected speeches and united states historical documents and writing guides .

other sources of information on public policy , reference resources , appropriations information , legal resources and many external links conveniently organized by topic are also available on the crs home page .

from the "reference desk," you can access "basic resources for daily work in congressional offices": government directories , encyclopedias , statistical sources , dictionaries , grammar guides , maps , and other online reference links .

there is also a "legislative reference source" page with links to facts about congress including information on membership , committees , rules and schedules .

effective delivery can transform a weak speech and make it sound very good .

poor delivery can ruin the best - prepared speeches , and sometimes does .

although delivery is not the concern of the speechwriter as such , it must be always in mind as a speech is actually written .

the speaker's pace , his or her style , mannerisms , tendencies ( such as departing from a text ) , peculiarities , or special difficulties ( words to avoid ) — these are elements with which the writer should be well acquainted before preparing any speech .

knowing how a member speaks is essential in preparing a draft that is both useful and realistic .

ideally , a speech draft ought to be reviewed three times — by the writer , by the prospective speaker , and by a disinterested third party .

of these three , priority should ordinarily be given to the speaker .

the revised product is likely to be more effective .

with speeches , as with food , however , too many cooks are undesirable .

moreover , time seldom permits this much critical evaluation and rewriting .

it may even be easier to provide for some appraisal of the speech's impact and audience reaction after delivery .

for example , it is said that senator robert f. kennedy's speech writers would follow his delivery of a speech word by word , noting those phrases or ideas that were well received , or others that created problems .

an effective political speech is defined not by rules of rhetoric , but by the character of response it evokes .

the speaker , then , is always concerned to measure that response and to elicit "positive feedback. .

this means a network of contacts that can report on the opinions and reactions of the audience , and evaluate the interest generated and evident a week or more after the event .

it requires an awareness of media coverage and subsequent treatment from constituents , the sponsoring organization , and others .

in short , it means adding a political relevance to the familiar phrase , "keeping in touch. .

although there are substantial distinctions between legislative and non - legislative speeches , the basic principles of preparation and presentation are identical for both .

good writing is nurtured by wide reading , which in turn fosters a sense of style , enriched vocabulary , accuracy in grammar , and a feeling for english syntax .

the best speechwriters will , through regular daily reading , bring an ever more abundant background to their work .

everything is grist for the speechwriter's mill .

moreover , nothing is surer in speechwriting than that "practice makes perfect. .

the more one writes , the easier the task becomes , and the smoother and more conversational the flow of the member's remarks .

as with so many aspects of speechwriting and delivery , the physical form of a speech is a matter of personal preference .

some speakers prefer to work from a completely polished text , one that may include carefully tailored "spontaneous" anecdotes and jokes at appropriate places , and may even incorporate hints on speech delivery or effective body language in the text .

others prefer to speak from notes derived from such a text , proceed from a series of "talking points," or simply extemporize .

whichever method is used , preparatory notes or an outline are recommended , with the cautionary warning that dependence on a manuscript can deaden the delivery , just as the excessive use of notes or cards can stimulate verbosity .

president - elect lincoln's farewell speech at springfield , illinois on february 11 , 1861 is arguably the shortest great speech ever delivered from the back of a train .

its railway car setting recalls to mind the now - vanished connection between political events and the railroad , including the whistle - stop campaigns of most presidential candidates from william jennings bryan to dwight eisenhower .

what jacques barzun called lincoln's "workaday style [would become] the american style par excellence," undermining the monopoly exercised by purveyors of "literary plush. .

the springfield speech illustrates with extraordinary brevity — it is only a 15 line paragraph — the lincolnian qualities of precision , vernacular ease , rhythmic virtuosity , and elegance .

the sense of right order and emphasis throughout culminates in the closing sentence — "one of the greatest cadences in english speech. .

the effect is achieved by the simple yet artful devices of parallelism , the balancing of similar and antithetical words phrases , and ideas , evoking rich biblical overtones among his hearers .

lincoln's style is rooted in the "speaking intonations" and "humanly simple vernacular" of everyday speech , heightened by form and rhythm , the distinctively american tradition seen at its best in such writers as emerson and frost .

although some hold that today there is no place for rhetorical eloquence , arguing that "bluntness and clarity" and simplistic thoughts are the norm , others assert that the craft of speechmaking , the impact of skilled political rhetoric is as significant as ever in our history .

lincoln's mastery of that craft remains a formidable example .

my friends: no one , not in my situation , can appreciate my feeling of sadness at this parting .

to this place , and the kindness of these people , i owe everything .

here i have lived a quarter of a century , and have passed from a young to an old man .

here my children have been born , and one is buried .

i now leave , not knowing when or whether ever i may return , with a task before me greater than that which rested upon washington .

without the assistance of that divine being who ever attended him , i cannot succeed .

with that assistance , i cannot fail .

trusting in him who can go with me , and remain with you , and be everywhere for good , let us confidently hope that all will yet be well .

to his care commending you , as i hope in your prayers you will commend me , i bid you an affectionate farewell .

the rise and , indeed , the virtual triumph in american political speaking of "the popular conversational idiom," with its emphasis on simplicity , brevity , and terseness , has tended to encourage "simplistic language together with slogans or catch words ...," influenced perhaps by the techniques of mass media advertising and particularly television .

"repetition and retention of a few simple ideas are stressed more than a complex concept. .

in consequence , some have noted a growing trend toward what some have characterized as a numbing mediocrity: "since the 1920s more political speakers have addressed larger audiences on a wider range of topics than at any time in history .

yet so marked is the decline in the quality of style that the majority of speeches are pedestrian , prosaic , and impotent. .

this last may be an excessively pessimistic evaluation of the state of contemporary political speech .

few , moreover , would advocate a return to the florid style of public speaking that prevailed as recently as the 1920s .

the remedy , in part , may be the cultivation of style .

"time should be devoted," writes l. patrick devlin , "to using impressive language," which he defines as "the most vivid , clear , concise , and meaningful style. .

it will be most effective if it bears the personal stamp of the speaker .

"the process of persuasion is ... more a matter of communicating values than logical information. .

in essence , good speechwriting requires that the speaker assume a role: to some extent , he or she must be able to impart confidence and to sense the character of an audience .

we need not agree with talleyrand's cynical observation that "speech was given to man to disguise his thoughts" to recognize that effective persuasion calls for the ability to win the hearts and minds of listeners .

to seem natural is not easy ; as george fluharty and harold ross wrote in public speaking : the speaker is estimating his audience and his audience is estimating him .

his ethics , his integrity , understanding , and humanity are strong forces for good and also strong components of his "ethos" or personal effect upon not only his present but also his future audiences .

the speaker should therefore make sure that the actual situation permits him to use a given persuasive device .

once again , the words of abraham lincoln , himself no mean practitioner of the public speaker's art , may serve to summarize the speechwriter's ultimate goal: when the conduct of men is designed to be influenced , persuasion , kind , unassuming persuasion , should ever be adopted .

it is an old and true maxim that "a drop of honey catches more flies than a gallon of gall. .

so with men .

if you would win a man to your cause , first convince him that you are his sincere friend .

therein is a drop of honey that catches his heart , which , say what he will , is the great high - road to his reason , and which , when once gained , you will find but little trouble convincing his judgment of the justice of your cause , if indeed that cause really is a good one .

