the american impeachment process places in the legislative branch the authority to remove the president , vice president , and other federal civil officers in the executive and judicial branches upon a determination that such officers have engaged in treason , bribery , or other high crimes and misdemeanors .

it is one of the checks and balances grounded in the american constitutional structure .

this report summarizes impeachment proceedings in the 111 th congress , examines relevant constitutional provisions , and provides a brief historical overview .

on march 4 , 2010 , h.res .

1031 , a resolution "impeaching g. thomas porteous , jr. , judge of the united states district court for the eastern district of louisiana , for high crimes and misdemeanors" and setting forth four articles of impeachment , was reported by the house judiciary committee , h.rept .

111-427 , and placed on the house calendar , calendar no .

170 .

on march 11 , 2010 , after one hour of debate , the house voted to impeach judge porteous .

in four separate unanimous votes , the house agreed to each of the articles of impeachment .

then the impeachment resolution was passed by a voice vote .

the members appointed as house managers for the porteous impeachment trial appeared before the senate to present the impeachment resolution , including the articles of impeachment brought against the judge , on march 17 , 2010 .

the senate , organized as a court of impeachment , then issued a summons to judge porteous requiring him to answer the articles brought against him by april 7 , 2010 , and appointed an impeachment trial committee of 12 senators to take evidence in the case .

the impeachment investigation of judge porteous began during the 110 th congress .

on june 17 , 2008 , pursuant to 28 u.s.c .

ยง355 ( b ) ( i ) , the judicial conference of the united states certified to the house of representatives its determination that consideration of impeachment of judge porteous may be warranted .

on september 17 , 2008 , the house of representatives adopted h.res .

1448 ( 110 th congress ) directing the house judiciary committee to inquire whether the house should impeach him .

a task force on judicial impeachment was established by the house judiciary committee to pursue this investigation .

the porteous impeachment investigation was not completed during the 110 th congress .

because the house of representatives is not a continuing body , in order for the house judiciary committee to continue its impeachment investigation in the 111 th congress , the house had to take action to renew the house judiciary committee's authority .

on january 13 , 2009 , the house passed h.res .

15 , giving the house judiciary committee authority to continue this investigation in the 111 th congress .

the task force on judicial impeachment , reestablished by the house judiciary committee on january 22 , 2009 , continued its investigation of judge porteous's conduct .

on january 21 , 2010 , house judiciary committee chairman john conyers , jr. , on behalf of himself , ranking member lamar smith , and all of the members of the house judiciary committee's task force on judicial impeachment , introduced h.res .

1031 .

the measure was referred the house judiciary committee the same day .

on march 4 , 2010 , the resolution was reported by the committee and placed on the house calendar .

on march 11 , 2010 , the house voted to impeach judge porteous , and approved four articles of impeachment by four unanimous votes .

the house then approved h.res .

1165 , appointing representative schiff , representative zoe lofgren of california , representative johnson of georgia , representative goodlatte , and representative sensenbrenner to be managers on the part of the house to conduct the impeachment trial on its behalf in the senate .

in addition , h.res .

1165 provided "that a message be sent to the senate to inform the senate of these appointments , and that the managers on the part of the house may exhibit the articles of impeachment to the senate and take all other actions necessary in connection with preparation for , and conduct of , the trial. .

on march 17 , 2010 , the house managers appeared before the bar of the senate to present the impeachment resolution and exhibit the articles of impeachment against judge porteous .

after organizing as a court of impeachment , the senate agreed to two resolutions .

s.res .

457 directed the sergeant at arms to serve upon judge porteous a summons requiring him to answer the articles against him by april 7 , 2010 .

the judge's answer was filed on that date .

under this resolution , the house managers had until april 21 , 2010 , to respond to judge porteous's answer with their replication .

their replication was filed with the senate on april 15 , 2010 .

in a letter filed in the senate on april 21 , 2010 , and served upon judge porteous's counsel the same day , the house managers made four corrections to the replication .

pursuant to rule xi of the "rules of procedure and practice in the senate when sitting on impeachment trials," the second resolution , s.res .

458 , created an impeachment trial committee to receive and report evidence in the impeachment trial of judge porteous .

upon the recommendations of the majority leader and the minority leader , the presiding officer appointed senators mccaskill , klobuchar , whitehouse , udall of new mexico , shaheen , kaufman , hatch , barrasso , demint , johanns , risch , and wicker to be members of this committee .

senator mccaskill will serve as chairman of the committee , while senator hatch will serve as vice chairman .

the senate impeachment trial committee held its organizational meeting on april 13 , 2010 .

pursuant to the rules that govern impeachment trials before the senate , the impeachment trial committee , after completing its work , submitted a certified record of its proceedings to the senate and filed its report summarizing the articles of impeachment and the evidence received .

in making its determinations in an impeachment trial , the full senate may rely upon the evidence collected by a senate impeachment trial committee or may gather further evidence .

in this case , the senate relied upon the impeachment trial committee's evidence and report .

in addition , the senate reviewed the post - trial filings of the house of representatives and judge porteous .

the determination whether to convict or acquit on any article rests with the full senate , as does the determination , upon conviction , of the judgment to be imposed .

the constitution limits a judgment upon conviction in an impeachment trial to removal or removal and disqualification from holding further federal offices .

on december 7 , 2010 , the full senate heard oral arguments from the parties on pending motions and on the merits of the case .

at the conclusion of final arguments presented by the house managers and judge porteous , the senate cleared the senate chamber and went into closed door deliberations on the motions and the articles of impeachment brought against judge porteous .

on december 8 , 2010 , the senate voted to convict judge porteous on each of the four articles of impeachment .

the vote to convict on article i was unanimous , by a vote of 96 to 0 .

he was convicted on article ii by a vote of 69 to 27 .

on article iii , judge porteous was convicted by a vote of 88 to 8 .

the vote to convict on article iv was 90 to 6 .

by virtue of having been convicted on these articles , judge porteous was removed from office .

in rare additional judgment , the senate , by a vote of 94 to 2 , voted to disqualify judge porteous from holding any future federal office .

the impeachment investigation with respect to judge porteous is one of two impeachment inquiries regarding federal judges undertaken in the 111 th congress .

on june 14 , 2009 , the house of representatives impeached judge samuel b. kent of the u.s. district court for the southern district of texas .

on june 19 , 2009 , the house adopted h.res .

520 ( 111 th congress ) , impeaching judge kent and setting forth four articles of impeachment .

five days later , the house managers presented h.res .

520 to the senate , sitting as a court of impeachment .

then the senate , acting in that capacity , pursuant to s.res .

202 , issued a summons to judge kent directing him to respond to the articles of impeachment against him by july 2 , 2009 .

the same day , pursuant to s.res .

203 , the senate appointed a committee of 12 senators to receive and report evidence with respect to these articles of impeachment under rule xi of the senate rules when sitting on an impeachment trial .

when served with the summons , judge kent tendered a letter of resignation from the federal bench to take effect on june 30 , 2009 .

on june 29 , 2009 , counsel to the president accepted judge kent's resignation on behalf of president obama .

on july 20 , 2009 , the house agreed to h.res .

661 , instructing the house managers to appear before the senate , sitting as a court of impeachment , and "advise the senate that , because samuel b. kent is no longer a civil officer of the united states , the house of representatives does not desire further to urge the articles of impeachment hitherto filed in the senate against samuel b .

kent. .

the senate agreed to a motion to dismiss the articles of impeachment against former judge kent on july 22 , 2009 .

authority to remove the president , vice president , and federal civil officers by impeachment has been placed , by constitutional mandate , in the hands of the legislative branch of the united states government .

although rooted in the soil of english impeachment experience , the american impeachment system differs from its english forebear in some significant respects .

recorded incidents of english impeachments may begin as early as 1376 , and one source would place the first in 1283 .

a more fixed procedure appears to have begun in 1399 , with the passage of the statute of i henry iv , c. 14 .

whichever date one chooses , it is clear that the english practice took root well before the colonial beginnings of the united states .

it ceased to be used in england at about the time that it became part of the american system of government .

the last two impeachments in england appear to have been those of warren hastings in 1787 and of lord melville in 1805 .

the english system permitted any person to be impeached by the house of commons for any crime or misdemeanor , whether the alleged offender was a peer or a commoner .

unlike the british system , which permitted penal sanctions to attach upon conviction of impeachment , the american system is designed to be remedial in function .

despite surface similarities to a criminal trial , the judgments which may be rendered upon conviction of an article of impeachment in the american system are limited to removal from office and disqualification from holding further offices of public trust .

thus , the american system seems more designed to protect the public interest than to punish the person impeached .

nevertheless , much of the procedure and practice involved in this country's application of its impeachment process draws guidance and support from british precedents .

the american impeachment process , a constitutionally based remedy , provides a legislative mechanism for investigating and trying allegations of some forms of serious misconduct on the part of the president , vice president , and "civil officers of the united states. .

this mechanism has been used in cases involving judges , presidents , and certain senior members of the executive branch .

it has been found not to apply to senators , and , although a parallel case does not exist as to members of the house of representatives , it seems likely that , on similar lines of reasoning , it would also be found inapplicable to them .

the "civil officer" language is not defined in the constitution , and its outer limits are still somewhat unclear .

it has been used to reach cabinet level officials .

it may be argued that it should be regarded as reaching anyone whose appointment to an office of public trust must be in compliance with the appointments clause of the constitution .

private citizens are not vulnerable to impeachment .

the constitutional language which states that impeachment may lie for "treason , bribery , or other high crimes or misdemeanors" also lacks definition in the document itself , although treason is defined elsewhere in the constitution .

here , too , the precedents provide some guidance as to what has been viewed as an impeachable offense , as do the debates at the constitutional convention of 1787 , but the outside boundaries of the language have not been fully explored .

it seems clear that a criminal offense may give rise to an impeachment .

yet in some of the impeachments which have gone to trial and conviction , some of the articles have involved conduct which did not constitute a crime , but which did involve serious misconduct or gross improprieties while in office or abuse of the powers of the office .

such serious misconduct may include personal conduct such as tax evasion or misconduct in connection with a personal bankruptcy .

some of the literature seems to suggest that the standard for impeachable offenses may be somewhat different for presidents and members of the executive branch than for judges .

the impeachment process itself appears to be placed completely in the hands of the legislative branch , although the subject of an inquiry may occasionally be brought to the attention of the house through communications from one of the other two branches or from one of the state legislatures .

the house has the responsibility to make the initial investigation and to determine whether or not to impeach .

if the members of the house decide that impeachment is appropriate , they vote to impeach and vote articles of impeachment specifying the particular grounds upon which the impeachment is based .

these are then presented to the senate for trial .

in the senate trial , the house of representatives is represented by managers , who may be assisted by counsel .

the individual impeached also is entitled to assistance of counsel .

after the senate has considered the evidence presented , it then must determine whether or not to convict upon each of the articles separately .

a conviction on any article must be supported by a vote of two - thirds of the senators present .

a conviction on any one of the articles constitutes a conviction in the impeachment trial ; the individual need not be convicted on all of the articles brought against him .

if the senate does vote to convict on an article , then it must determine what judgment is to flow from that decision .

the senate has two options: either to remove from office alone , or to remove from office and to prohibit the individual from holding other offices of public trust under the united states in the future .

recent precedents suggest that removal may flow automatically from conviction , but , if prohibition from holding further offices of public trust is to be applied , it must be voted upon specifically .

the two issues are divisible .

with regard to the determination as to the appropriate judgment , a simple majority vote is sufficient to sustain it .

a two - thirds majority is not required .

the impeachment process is a complex and cumbersome mechanism .

it places in the hands of the two legislative bodies the determination as to the fitness to continue in office of some of the officers of the judicial and executive branches .

as such it can act as a check upon abuses of power or instances of serious misconduct by those judicial and executive officers vulnerable to impeachment .

it also places significant demands upon legislative time and resources .

it is possible that this represents an effort by the constitutional framers to balance the need to provide a means of remedying such misconduct against the need to minimize the chance that this legislative power to intrude into the business or personnel of the other co - equal branches could itself be over - used or abused .

its constitutional framework is skeletal , providing minimal guidance as to the nature of the proceedings .

this void is filled to a great extent by house and senate rules , procedures , and precedents .

yet , some questions remain , a few of which have been addressed in this report .

