pursuant to the united nations framework convention on climate change , the united stateshas published "national inventories of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinksof all greenhouse gases not controlled by the montreal protocol , using comparable methodologies... agreed upon by the conference of the parties. .

 ( 11 ) ( see table 1 . ) .

table 1 .

u.s. greenhouse gas emissions ( mmtce ) ,1990-2001 source: environmental protection agency , inventory of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions and sinks: 1990-2001 ( april 2003 ) , epa 430r03004 .

 ( datafor 1991-1994 provided by epa. ) .

following international convention , epa presents the data in teragrams ofco 2 equivalent ; crs has converted thefigures to million metric tons of carbon equivalent ( mmtce ) , a metric that is more familiar to most u.s.policymakers .

a land - use changes and forestry sinks that sequester carbon ; included in net emissions total only .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) publishes the official emissions data annually .

 ( 12 ) the united states also from timeto time reports on emissions andexplains its climate change programs in the climate action report ( car ) to theunited nations ; the third car was published in 2002 .

 ( 13 ) the u.s. baselines for the unfccc and the kyoto protocol are shown in table 2 .

for the unfccc commitment , the baseline is 1990 emissions , or 1,675mmtce ; if the united states had acceded to the kyoto targets , the baseline wouldhave been 1,676 mmtce , a negligible difference .

by definition , sinks are not included in calculating the baselines .

table 2 .

u.s. baseline year greenhouse gas emissions source: epa , inventory of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions and sinks: 1990 - 2001 ) april 2003 , epa 430r03004 .

the emissions baselines shown in table 2 are not immutable .

each annual report includes updated estimates based on methodological and data revisions,although such changes are usually small .

revisions are discussed at some length ineach report .

the criteria for calculating emissions agreed upon by the conference ofparties hinge on both current technical knowledge and policy judgments .

newtechnical information can change factors , for example concerning calculation ofgreenhouse gas equivalents ; and policy judgments can be adjusted , for exampleconcerning the time frame for calculating effects .

in addition , a few technical issuesremain unresolved , for example in assigning emissions from fuels burned ininternational travel .

however , any changes tend to be modest , seldom affecting totalsmuch more than plus or minus 1% , except for sequestration figures , which have beensubject to larger changes .

 ( 14 ) besides actual quantities of emissions , an alternative measure of a nation's contribution to global warming is "greenhouse gas intensity of the economy" - - thatis , emissions per unit of gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

in effect , this measurefocuses on the efficiency of the economy in terms of greenhouse gas emissions: themore efficient , the fewer emissions per dollar of economic output and thus the lowerthe "greenhouse gas intensity. .

for the united states , greenhouse gas intensity hasbeen declining since at least the 1980s ; for the 1990s , the decline in intensity wasabout 10% , based on net emissions ( 15 ) ( see table 3 ) .

projecting greenhouse gas emissions involves modeling the nation's economicgrowth and activity , with special attention to variables affecting fossil fuelcombustion .

the modeling also depends on assumptions about energy policydirections .

if reducing emissions becomes a goal , then projections become subject to the outcome of unresolved issues in how the emissions reductions goals might bemet .

for example , the major source of co 2 emissions , fossil fuel combustion , is influenced by overall economic activity and growth as well as by energy policydecisions such as development of non - carbon based substitutes , the rate of adoptionof energy efficient technologies , and the retirement rate of nuclear facilities , amongothers .

these policy factors are difficult to predict in the absence of a concreteclimate change policy .

 ( 16 ) the climate change planproposed by president bush infebruary 2002 provides some new policy directions , but many elements depend oncongressional action ( eg , for funding ) or voluntary private sector initiatives , makingprojections of their impact problematic .

table 3 .

u.s. greenhouse gas intensity ( 1990-2001 ) source: table 1 ; economic report of the president , february 2003 , table b - 2 ; crscalculations .

under the unfccc , the united states committed to the voluntary goal of holdinggreenhouse gas emissions at the end of the 1990s to their 1990 levels .

if the united stateshad met this goal , its greenhouse gas emissions for 2000 would have been 1,675 mmtce .

however , u.s. emissions in 2000 were 1,921 mmtce ( not counting sinks ) .

these figuresindicate that in 2000 , the nation was exceeding its unfccc greenhouse gas emissionscommitment by 246 mmtce , or nearly 15% .

if the united states had acceded to the kyoto protocol , its greenhouse gases emissions target for the period 2008-2012 would have been 5 times 93% of the 1,676 mmtcebaseline , or 1,559 mmtce on average per year for the period .

this hypothetical goal wouldimply reductions equal to the difference between the goal and what would be "business asusual emissions" for the period 2008-2012 .

based on the car projection that emissions willbe 2,213 mmtce in 2010 , the average annual reduction that would be necessary for theunited states to meet the kyoto target of 1,559 mmtce per year for 2008-2012 would be654 mmtce per year , or about 30% below the estimated level of "business as usual"emissions .

higher than base case economic growth or lower penetration of energy - efficienttechnologies would mean that emissions would be even higher ( and reductions necessary tomeet a goal like kyoto greater ) .

slower economic growth , or faster penetration ofenergy - efficient technologies as suggested by the 5-lab study , would decrease emissions ( and hence reductions to meet a goal ) .

the president's greenhouse gas initiative has the goal of reducing , through voluntary activities , the intensity of net greenhouse gas emissions per unit of economic activity by 18%over the next 10 years ; this compares to a projected "business as usual" decline in intensityof 14% for the period - - compared to a decline during the 1990s of about 10% ( see table3 ) .

according to the white house announcement , this goal means that the current ( 2002 ) intensity of 183 metric tons of carbon emissions per million dollars of gdp would fall to 151mmtce per million dollars of gdp in 2012 ( see figure 4 ) .

 ( 25 ) at the anticipated increasedrate of intensity decline , total emissions would decline 100 mmtce below "business asusual" emissions ( although the absolute amount of emissions would continue to rise ) .

it istoo early to assess progress toward the administration's goal of diminishing greenhouse gasintensity .

source: global climate change policy book http: / / yosemite.epa.gov / oar / globalwarming.nsf / uniquekeylookup / shsu5bnmaj / $file / bush_gccp_021402.pdf these projected emissions levels ( and any implied reductions ) are gross estimates and do not take sinks into account ( except for the intensity projection ) .

as previously noted , thebaseline could be revised , at least slightly .

more important , such projections depend onassumptions about economic trends as well as about policy actions at the local , domestic , andinternational levels .

however , whatever the assumptions , the trend in total emissionsexperienced over the past decade and projected for the next decade is clearly upward , whilethe unfccc goal was for stabilization and the kyoto protocol calls for emissions levelsof developed nations to decline .

if one is concerned about assessing the implications of possible reduction requirementsin the future , two further factors must be considered .

one is sequestration , which removesco 2 from the atmosphere , thereby reducing gross emissions .

the second is a series ofproposed trading mechanisms that could allow a country to take credit for reductions itsponsors in other countries .

the united states was a strong supporter of including both thesevariables in the kyoto protocol .

sequestration could directly diminish a country's reductionrequirement ; trading does not change a reduction requirement , but it could affect costs andwho would actually achieve the reductions .

carbon sequestration .

atmospheric greenhouse gas levels are affected not only by emissions , but also by carbon sinks - - processes that remove and sequester carbon from the atmosphere .

activities that affectsequestration include farming and forestry practices .

for example , a positive net growth oftrees removes carbon from the atmosphere ; clearing forests typically releases carbon .

table1 , "u.s. greenhouse gas emissions , 1990 - 2001," includes figures for carbon sequestrationfrom land - use activities and forestry , which are the difference between "total emissions" and"net emissions. .

the unfccc states that signatory nations shall commit to "promote sustainable management , and promote and cooperate in the conservation and enhancement , asappropriate , of sinks and reservoirs of all greenhouse gases ... , including biomass , forestsand oceans as well as other terrestrial , coastal and marine ecosystems" ( article 4 ( 1 ) ( d ) ) .

the kyoto protocol also would provide that sinks can be taken into account in calculating a nation's emissions and its reduction obligation .

"the net changes ingreenhouse gas emissions from sources and removals by sinks resulting from directhuman - induced land - use change and forestry activities , limited to afforestation , reforestation,and deforestation since 1990 , measured as verifiable changes in stocks ... shall be used tomeet" the 2008-2012 commitments ( article 3 ( 3 ) ) .

in general , then , a net increase inhuman - induced carbon sequestration from forestry practices between 1990 and 2008-2012would be subtracted from emissions during the period , thereby reducing the amount of actualemissions that will have to be curtailed .

conversely , net negative sequestration from forestrypractices would be added to the emissions that will have to be reduced .

just how this calculation would be done is not prescribed in the protocol , and disagreements on how much carbon sequestration could be counted toward a nation'sreduction obligations were debated through several subsequent conferences .

in july 2001,the sixth conference of parties in bonn ( cop6 ) agreed to limits on sequestration activitiesthat could be credited against the protocol's reduction requirements .

although the unitedstates chose not to participate in these proceedings , the conference stated in a footnote ( 26 ) thatunder the methodology agreed upon , the united states could take credit for net increases ofsequestration of up to 28 million metric tons per year .

emissions trading .

emissions trading , strongly supported by the united states in the kyoto negotiations , derives from the principleof economic efficiency - - that reductions , if necessary , should be achieved at the lowestcost .

trading mechanisms thus are designed to allow low - cost reductions to substitute forhigher - cost ones .

the idea is that a country could achieve its reduction goal not only byreducing its domestic emissions , but also by reducing emissions elsewhere .

trading does notactually reduce a nation's reduction requirement , but it does allow it to contract for and tocount reductions elsewhere that are cheaper to achieve than domestic ones .

the kyoto protocol provides for emissions trading mechanisms ( 27 ) that can be used to"supplement" domestic reductions ; this offers the possibility that actual domestic greenhousegas reductions achieved by a party to the kyoto protocol will be less than the party's actualcommitment .

some portion of the reduction requirement could be shifted elsewhere .

theclinton administration argued that emission trading would be critical to u.s. compliancewith kyoto ; ( 28 ) a clinton administration economicanalysis suggested that u.s. compliancecosts would drop from $193 per ton with no international emissions trading to $23 per tonwith global trading .

 ( 29 ) cop6 agreed that therewould be no quantitative limit on the amountof credit a country could receive from trading , but that domestic action must constitute asignificant part of a nation's reduction efforts .

 ( 30 ) with no quantitative limit on trading , anyestimate of actual domestic reduction required to comply with the kyoto protocol , or of thecosts involved , remains problematic - - and is moot as long as the united states declines toparticipate in the kyoto process .

the precise numerical projections of greenhouse gas emissions ( or of proposedreductions ) should be viewed as indicative ( see figure 3 ) .

they are less accurate than theyappear , given the potential for revisions in data and the uncertainties of projections .

but inassessing the status of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions , the trendline for aggregate greenhousegas emissions is clear: for the united states , the overall trend is up .

none of the reviewedscenarios using assumptions that diminish emissions - - low economic growth , putting offretirement of nuclear facilities , accelerated fostering of energy - efficient technologies , thepresident's voluntary program to reduce greenhouse gas intensity - - reverses the upwardtrend in aggregate greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 .

 ( 31 ) historical data show that the united states failed to meet its voluntary commitment under the unfccc for returning aggregate emissions at the end of the 1990s decade to the1990 level .

any goal to reduce emissions to or below 1990 levels would require thecontinuing upward trend to turn down .

even with the potential for sequestration andemissions trading to reduce domestic reduction efforts , a goal to reverse greenhouse gasemissions trends would represent an extraordinary technical and political challenge for u.s.energy and environmental policy .

