during executive - legislative budget discussions during the final days of the105th congress , negotiators added $880 million for foreign operations spending infy1999 to amounts approved by the house and senate ( h.r .

4569 and s. 2334 ) in september .

senior executive branch officials had advisedthe president to veto these earlier measures because of inadequate funding .

asenacted on october 21 in h.r .

4328 , the omnibus consolidated andemergency supplemental appropriations , 1999 , foreign operations funds total$31.63 billion , including $12.827 billion for regular programs , $539 million formdb arrears payments , $399 million in child survival , former soviet aid , africaembassy bombing - related , and counter - narcotics "emergency" supplementalspending , and $17.9 billion for the imf .

excluding the imf , total foreignoperations money approved for fy1999 is $618 million more than for fy1998 , but$385 million less than the president requested .

much of the additional foreignoperations resources added in h.r .

4328 is allocated for former sovietaid , usaid operating expenses , disaster relief , the peace corps and u.s.contributions to the global environment facility .

congressional negotiators also settled several other major foreign operations issues in disagreement between the house and senate .

the bill caps internationalfamily planning aid at $385 million but drops house - passed abortion restrictions .

h.r .

4328 includes the full $17.9 billion u.s. payment to theinternational monetary fund ( imf ) , subject to conditions concerning recipientcountry trade and financial policies , greater transparency in imf operations , andfund lending at above - market rates .

the measure drops the house - passed ban onu.s .

funding for the administration's program to curb north korea's nuclearweapons production but subjects the $35 million to additional certificationrequirements and delays the money's availability until next year .

the legislation,as approved by both houses , begins aid reductions for israel and egypt .

the annual foreign operations appropriations bill is the primary legislativevehicle through which congress reviews and votes on the u.s. foreign assistancebudget and influences executive branch foreign policy making generally .

 ( 1 ) it containsthe largest share - - about 69% - - of total international affairs spending by the unitedstates ( see figure 1 ) .

the legislation funds all u.s. bilateral development assistanceprograms , managed mostly by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , together with several smaller independent foreign aid agencies , such as thepeace corps and the inter - american and african development foundations .

foreignoperations includes separate accounts for aid programs in the former soviet union ( also referred to as the new independent states ( nis ) account ) and central / easterneurope , activities that are jointly managed by usaid and the state department .

security assistance ( economic and military aid ) for israel and egypt is also part of theforeign operations spending measure , as are smaller security aid programsadministered largely by the state department , in conjunction with usaid and thepentagon .

u.s. contributions to the world bank and other regional multilateraldevelopment banks , managed by the treasury department , and voluntary paymentsto international organizations , handled by the state department , are also funded inthe foreign operations bill .

finally , the legislation includes appropriations for threeexport promotion agencies: the overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) ,the export - import bank , and the trade and development agency .

from the perspective of congressional oversight and involvement in u.s. foreign aid policy making , the foreign operations bill has taken on even greatersignificance during the past decade .

congress has not enacted a foreign aidauthorization bill since 1985 , leaving most foreign assistance programs withoutregular authorizations emanating from the legislative oversight committees .

as aresult , foreign operations spending measures increasingly have expanded their scopebeyond spending issues and played a major role in shaping , authorizing , and guidingboth executive and congressional foreign aid and broader foreign policy initiatives .

it has been largely through foreign operations appropriations that the united stateshas modified aid policy and resource allocation priorities since the end of the coldwar .

the legislation has also been a key tool used by congress to apply restrictionsand conditions on administration management of foreign assistance , actions thathave frequently resulted in executive - legislative clashes over presidentialprerogatives in foreign policy making .

 table 1 .

status of foreign operations appropriations,fy1999 president clinton submitted his fy1999 federal budget request to congress on february 2 , 1998 , including funding proposals for foreign operations appropriationsprograms .

during the next several months , house and senate foreign operationssubcommittees held a series of hearings , including testimony from secretary of statealbright , treasury secretary rubin , and usaid administrator atwood .

inmid - may , house and senate appropriations committees issued budget authority andoutlay allocations in may and june to each of their 13 subcommittees , paving the wayfor initial action on these spending bills .

the house foreign operationssubcommittee approved a draft bill on july 15 , 1998 , that was amended and orderedreported by the full appropriations committee on september 10 ( h.r .

4569 ) .

the house passed h.r .

4569 on september 17 , 255-161 .

thesenate skipped a subcommittee markup , as the full appropriations committeereported a bill on july 21 ( s. 2334 ) .

after two days of debate , the fullsenate approved s. 2334 on september 2 by a vote of 90-3 .

foreign operations , like seven other regular spending measures , was incorporatedinto h.r .

4328 , the omnibus consolidated and emergencysupplemental appropriations , 1999 , passed by the house and senate on october20 / 21 , and signed into law on october 21 .

in recent years , as the united states has adjusted its foreign and defense policyto a post - cold war environment , one of the major foreign assistance issues forcongress and executive branch policymakers has been the question of budgetresource allocation and how to reduce foreign aid spending while sustaining theprogram as an effective foreign policy tool .

table 2 .

foreign operations appropriations , fy1993 to fy1999 ( discretionary budget authority in billionsof current dollars ) * amounts for fy1998 and fy1999 do not include appropriations for payments of u.s. arrears to multilateral development banks ( mdbs ) ( $360 million and $539million , respectively ) .

fy1999 further does not include a $17.861 billion for the imfand $399 million in "emergency" supplemental funds .

under terms of the balancedbudget act of 1997 and other budget laws , appropriations for mdb arrears , the imf,and "emergency" supplementals are not scored against the foreign operationsspending allocation .

for comparative purposes with prior years , including mdbarrears and "emergency" supplementals , fy1998 appropriations would total $13.147billion and fy1999 $13.765 billion .

after peaking in size at $20.7 billion in fy1985 , foreign operations appropriations began a period of declining levels , falling to about $12.3 billion infy1997 .

foreign aid spending cuts were especially sharp in fy1996 when congresscut funding by $1.15 billion , or nearly 9% from the previous year .

administrationofficials and many in the broader foreign policy community argued that such severebudget reductions in a short period of time seriously undermined many u.s. foreignpolicy interests and limited the ability of american officials to influence overseasevents .

after foreign operations funding levels fell again in fy1997 - - althoughby much smaller amounts - - the state department and other executive agencieslaunched an aggressive campaign in support of a foreign policy budget request forfy1998 that sought to reverse the decade - long downward trend .

congress approvedmuch of the president's $1 billion increase recommended for this year , settingforeign operations appropriations at $13.15 billion for fy1998 .

currently , foreignoperations represents 0.78% of the entire federal budget and 2.4% of totaldiscretionary budget authority .

by comparison , these same figures in fy1985 were2% and 4.6% , respectively .

over the longer term of the past 20 years , foreign operations spending has experienced three distinct trends when calculated in real terms , taking into accountthe effects of inflation .

the first period was marked by a steady growth in foreignoperations appropriations levels during the early 1980s when the united statesrapidly expanded security - related aid programs in central america , pakistan , and tocountries providing the u.s. with military bases .

funding peaked in fy1985 at$31.9 billion ( in fy1999 dollars ) followed by a sharp cut in fy1986 as the effectsof the gramm - rudman deficit reduction initiative took hold and limited federalspending in most areas .

for the next five years , during a second phase of foreignoperations budget trends , appropriations remained relatively stable at about $19.5billion per year ( real terms ) .

at about the time of the end of the cold war , foreign aid spending began to fall steadily - - from about $16.7 billion in fy1992 , to $15 billion in fy1995 , to $13billion in fy1997 ( real terms ) .

appropriations for fy1997 were the smallestforeign operations level , in real terms , since 1975 when congress slashed foreignassistance spending during the u.s. withdrawal from vietnam .

even with additionalfunding for this year , in real terms fy1998 foreign operations spending is about30% below the average appropriation level approved by congress during the late1980s , 19% less than fy1992 , a year that might be considered the first post - coldwar foreign aid budget , and 10% less than fy1995 when the majority in congresschanged .

foreign operations programs: crs issue brief ib88093 .

drug control: international policy , by raphael perl .

crs issue brief ib96008 .

multilateral development banks , by jonathan sanford .

crs issue brief ib89150 .

refugee assistance in the foreign aid bill , by lois mchugh .

crs issue brief ib86116 .

u.n. system funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib96026 .

u.s. international population assistance: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

foreign operations country / regional issues: crs issue brief ib95052 .

africa: u.s. foreign assistance issues , by raymond copson .

crs issue brief ib95077 .

the former soviet union and u.s. foreign assistance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs issue brief ib85066 .

israel: u.s. foreign assistance , by clyde mark .

crs issue brief ib91141 .

north korea's nuclear weapons program , by larry niksch .

crs foreign affairs and national defense division http: / / www.loc.gov / crs / foreign / fandpage.html export - import bank http: / / www.exim.gov / inter - american development bank http: / / www.iadb.org / international monetary fund http: / / www.imf.org / peace corps http: / / www.peacecorps.gov / trade and development agency http: / / www.tda.gov / united nations children's fund ( unicef ) http: / / www.unicef.org / united nations development program ( undp ) http: / / www.undp.org / u.s. agency for international development http: / / www.info.usaid.gov / u.s. department of state http: / / www.state.gov / world bank http: / / www.worldbank.org / .

 table 6 .

foreign operations appropriations - - discretionary budget authority ( millions of dollars ) a .

the account structure for development aid differs among various versions of the bills .

thistable shows a consistent and comparable account structure based on enacted development aidfor fy1998 and fy1999 .

b .

in addition , division b , emergency supplemental appropriations , of h.r .

4328 includes $50 million for child survival programs , $46 million for the former soviet aid , $20million for anti - terrorism , $233 million for counter - narcotics , and $50 million in esf for africaembassy bombing - related aid .

because they are designated as "emergency" requirements , thesefunds do not score against the foreign operations totals .

c. the administration request and senate bill included the ireland fund as part of the economicsupport fund .

d. under the terms of the balanced budget act of 1997 , appropriations for multilateraldevelopment bank ( mdb ) arrearage payments and the imf do not score against budgetallocations for foreign operations programs in fy1999 .

the total lines in this table showthree different amounts from which common comparisons are made: 1 ) excluding mdb arrearsand imf funds , amounts that reflect foreign operations allocations ; 2 ) including mdb arrears,but excluding the imf , a figure useful for comparing fy1998 and fy1999 ; and 3 ) including allfunds in the bill .

none of these totals include the $399 million emergency supplementals .

