the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa ) provides a comprehensive federal scheme for the regulation of employee pension and welfare benefit plans offered by employers .

while erisa does not require an employer to offer pension and welfare benefits , it does mandate compliance with its provisions if such benefits are offered .

congress enacted erisa to eliminate the conflicting and inconsistent regulation of pension and employee welfare benefit plans by state laws .

the provisions at issue in the preemption debate are sections 502 ( a ) and 514 ( a ) of erisa .

section 514 ( a ) expressly preempts "any and all state laws insofar as they may now or hereafter relate to any employee benefit plan ..." section 502 ( a ) creates a civil enforcement scheme that allows a participant or beneficiary of a plan to bring a civil action for the following reasons: "to recover benefits due to him under the terms of the plan , to enforce his rights under the terms of the plan , or to clarify his rights to future benefits under the terms of the plan. .

under section 502 ( a ) , a participant or beneficiary is also entitled "to obtain other appropriate equitable relief. .

erisa regulates employee benefit plans that are offered by an employer to provide medical , surgical , disability , and health insurance benefits .

many of these employee benefit plans have turned to managed care as a way to provide low - cost benefits .

the term "managed care" refers to a payment or delivery arrangement where the health plan attempts to control or coordinate the use of health services by its enrolled members in to control spending and promote improved health .

plans contain costs and monitor the delivery of health services through the use of case management and utilization review .

case management typically involves a third - party evaluation of information presented by the participant and his doctor .

this evaluation is used to determine the need for and type of medical care to be provided .

utilization review encompasses various techniques , including pre - certification and concurrent review .

pre - certification requires plan participants to seek approval from the managed care entity before obtaining certain medical procedures or utilizing certain benefits , such as non - emergency hospitalization .

concurrent review occurs when a participant must seek continuing approval for utilizing certain benefits .

while some form of utilization review is employed by most health plans , it is characteristically a function of health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) .

an hmo is a managed care entity that accepts financial risk for a defined set of health care benefits in return for a fixed monthly per capita premium paid by or on behalf of each enrolled member .

unlike fee - for - service plans or preferred provider organizations ( ppo ) that allow some flexibility for selecting a provider , hmos require that healthcare be received through providers employed by or affiliated with the hmo .

hmos are favored by some because of their ability to provide healthcare in an efficient and cost - effective manner .

however , there has been increasing concern over the hmos' use of utilization review techniques and the quality of healthcare provided through hmos .

this concern has sometimes resulted in litigation .

some federal courts have applied the preemption provisions of erisa to preempt state tort claims of negligence or professional malpractice brought by patients against their doctors , health insurers , and / or companies that conduct cost containment measures on behalf of the health plan .

the preemption of these claims has significantly impacted plaintiffs by denying them the opportunity to recover various types of damages under state law .

in a state tort action , a plaintiff may recover compensatory , consequential , or punitive damages .

however , under erisa , a successful plaintiff may recover only the benefits he would have been entitled to under the terms of the plan , reasonable attorney's fees , and court costs .

the scope and application of erisa's preemption provisions have been addressed by the u.s. supreme court .

in general , the court recognizes a presumption against preemption unless congress has explicitly or implicitly shown an intent to preempt state laws .

erisa contains an explicit preemption clause at section 514 ( a ) .

the language of section 514 ( a ) shows that congress intended to preempt any state law that "relate[s] to any employee benefit plan. .

the court has interpreted this language as applying to any state law that "has a connection with or reference to such a plan. .

the court has stated that "[u]nder this 'broad common sense meaning,' a state law may 'relate to' a benefit plan , and thereby be pre - empted , even if the law is not specifically designed to affect such plans , or the effect is only indirect. .

while the court's early decisions suggested that the application of erisa's explicit preemption clause was limitless , its decision in new york state conference of blue cross & blue shield plans v. travelers ins .

co. signaled a change in the court's interpretation of section 514 ( a ) .

in travelers , several commercial insurers challenged a state law that required them , but not blue cross and blue shield , to pay surcharges .

the commercial insurers argued that the law was preempted by erisa because it "relate[d] to" employer - sponsored health insurance plans .

in addressing the issue of erisa's preemption clause , the court first noted that there is a "presumption that congress does not intend to supplant state law. .

the court then turned to whether congress intended to preempt state law by looking to "the structure and purpose of the act. .

the court concluded that "nothing in the language of the act or the context of its passage indicates that congress chose to displace general health care regulation , which historically has been a matter of local concern. .

in other recent cases , the court has similarly recognized the states' ability to regulate matters of health and safety , and has concluded that state laws of general applicability are not necessarily preempted by erisa .

while section 514 ( a ) provides a federal defense of erisa preemption , section 502 ( a ) implicates the jurisdictional doctrine of complete preemption .

section 502 ( a ) identifies how a participant or beneficiary may recover benefits or enforce or clarify rights under the terms of a plan .

the court has reasoned that congress may so completely preempt a particular area that "any civil complaint raising [a] select group of claims is necessarily federal in character. .

under the doctrine of complete preemption , a state claim that conflicts with a federal statutory scheme may be removed to federal court .

in the context of erisa , complete preemption refers to state claims that duplicate causes of action provided under section 502 ( a ) .

in pilot life insurance co. v. dedeaux , the court found that erisa preempted the respondent's state common law causes of actions asserting improper processing of a claim for benefits under an employee benefit plan .

in metropolitan life insurance co. v. taylor , a case decided on the same day as dedeaux , the court considered whether the respondent's state claims were not only preempted by erisa , but also "displaced by erisa's civil enforcement provision .

 .

 .

to the extent that complaints filed in state courts purporting to plead such state common law causes of action are removable to federal court. .

after reviewing the language of erisa and its legislative history , the court in taylor held that state law claims concerning benefit plans governed by erisa arise under the laws of the united states and are removable to federal court by the defendants .

consequently , the respondent's remedies were limited to those provided under erisa , rather than the more generous remedies available under state law .

the procedure for determining whether a case will be moved from state court to federal court is governed by section 1441 ( a ) of the federal rules of civil procedure ( frcp ) .

under frcp ยง1441 ( a ) any civil action brought in state court may be removed to federal district court if the defendants can show that the federal district court has original jurisdiction .

courts follow the "well - pleaded complaint rule" which allows the plaintiff to determine whether an action is heard in state or federal court .

the plaintiff is able to choose his forum because "[i]t is long settled law that a cause of action arises under federal law only when the plaintiff's well - pleaded complaint raises issues of federal law. .

the fact that the defendant's defense arises under federal law is not enough to move the case to federal court .

however , under the doctrine of complete preemption , a state claim may be removed to federal court if congress has completely preempted a particular area .

the question of removal is important in liability cases against hmos governed by erisa .

in a typical liability case against an hmo , the plaintiff files a tort claim , i.e. , negligence , medical malpractice , wrongful death , personal injury , vicarious liability , etc. , in state court .

the defendant will usually remove the case to federal court and seek dismissal of the state law claims on the ground that such claims are preempted by erisa , which provides the only cause of action for the plaintiff's claim .

as a threshold issue , the federal district court must determine whether it has jurisdiction over the claim .

if it does not have jurisdiction , it must remand the claim back to state court without considering the defendant's motion to dismiss .

if the court does have jurisdiction over the claim , then it will consider the defendant's motion to dismiss the plaintiff's state liability claims .

in determining whether the court has jurisdiction over an erisa claim , the court will examine whether the plan in question is an erisa plan and , if so , whether the state law claims are preempted by erisa .

numerous states have enacted statutes that provide a cause of action to participants in managed care plans who have been harmed by the failure to adhere to a duty of care .

rather than attempt to make general state negligence laws applicable to managed care entities , these laws create new state causes of action imposing a duty of care on these entities .

in general , managed care entities and other health insurance carriers in these states are bound by a specified duty of care .

when this duty is breached , participants have a cause of action against the managed care entities and carriers .

the cause of action appears to be a type of tort action alleging negligence and the breach of the specified duty .

in any tort action , the plaintiff must prove his case by a preponderance of the evidence to be successful ; that is , a plaintiff will prevail if the evidence shows that the fact sought to be proved is more likely than not .

the texas health care liability act ( thcla ) , which was enacted on may 22 , 1997 , seeks to regulate managed care in three ways .

first , it provides a statutory cause of action against managed care entities that fail to meet an ordinary care standard when making healthcare treatment decisions .

second , it establishes an independent review procedure to determine whether treatment is appropriate and medically necessary .

third , it protects physicians from hmo - imposed indemnity clauses and from retaliation by hmos for advocating medically necessary care for their patients .

aetna challenged the act on the grounds that it was preempted by section 514 of erisa , but the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit determined that various provisions of the act are not preempted by erisa .

the fifth circuit concluded that the liability , anti - indemnification , and anti - retaliation provisions of the act are not preempted by erisa .

however , the court determined that the independent review provisions are preempted .

the fifth circuit's opinion is discussed in detail below .

the fifth circuit found that the liability provisions impose liability for only a "limited universe of events. .

the provisions do not permit claims based on a managed care entity's denial of coverage .

claims involving coverage decisions in the administration of a plan would be preempted by erisa .

in this case , the provisions allow claims based on the negligent delivery of medical services and impose vicarious liability on managed care entities for that negligence .

the fifth circuit maintained that vicarious liability does not "relate to" a provider's role as an erisa plan administrator or affect the structure of the plans so as to require preemption .

further , the fifth circuit stated that it was not persuaded that congress intended for erisa to supplant the state's regulation of the quality of medical practice .

the act's anti - indemnification provision prohibits a managed care entity from including an indemnification clause in its contracts with doctors and other healthcare providers that would hold it harmless for its own acts .

the anti - retaliation provision prohibits a managed care entity from refusing to renew a doctor or healthcare provider because he advocated medically necessary treatment .

aetna argued that these provisions impermissibly mandate the structure and administration of erisa plan benefits .

the fifth circuit concluded that the anti - indemnification and anti - retaliation provisions are not preempted by erisa because they address the quality of care provided by the managed care entities and "do not compel the entities to provide any substantive level of coverage as health care insurers. .

further , the fifth circuit contended that the provisions preserve a physician's independent judgment in the face of a managed care entity's incentives for cost containment .

citing pegram , the fifth circuit reasoned that the effect of the provisions is consistent with the court's finding that "states are currently allowed to impose malpractice liability on hmos for [providing incentives]. .

the fifth circuit found that because the independent review provisions "attempt to impose a state administrative regime" on coverage determinations they are preempted by erisa .

in responding to texas' argument that the independent review provisions may be saved by erisa's saving clause for laws that regulate insurance , the fifth circuit maintained that the clause does not operate if "the state law at issue creates an alternative remedy for obtaining benefits under an erisa plan. .

in this case , the independent review provisions establish an alternate mechanism for obtaining benefits under the terms of a plan .

because a plan would be bound by the decision of the independent review organization , a participant could obtain a benefit even if he doesn't follow erisa's civil enforcement procedures .

in moran v. rush prudential hmo , the seventh circuit concluded that an illinois external review statute did not conflict with erisa's civil enforcement scheme and was saved from preemption by erisa .

like the fifth circuit , the court determined that the statute "related to" an employee benefit plan .

the court also found that the statute regulated insurance , and thus was protected by erisa's saving clause .

further , the court maintained that erisa's deemer clause was not applicable because the plan at issue was an insured plan , that is offered by an hmo and not self - funded by an employer .

the court relied on the supreme court's interpretation of the deemer clause in fmc corp. v. holliday .

in that case , the court found that the deemer clause "makes clear that if a plan is insured , a state may regulate it indirectly through regulation of its insurer and its insurer's insurance contracts. .

in this case , the plan was offered by rush prudential hmo .

unlike the fifth circuit , the seventh circuit found that the illinois external review statute does not create an "alternative remedy scheme" that conflicts with section 502 ( a ) of erisa .

although the statute requires an hmo to provide a covered service if an independent reviewing physician determines that the service is medically necessary , the court found that the procedure created by the statute is "not tantamount to the relief offered" under section 502 ( a ) .

the court explained that because the provisions of the statute were incorporated into the plaintiff's insurance contract , they did not operate as an alternative remedy for recovering benefits .

rather , the provisions established an additional internal mechanism for making decisions about when a service is medically necessary .

the court appears to have distinguished external review that becomes a part of a plan because of a state statute from external review that is simply mandated by state law .

on appeal , the supreme court affirmed the judgement of the seventh circuit .

the court determined that section 4-10 of the illinois statute was a regulation of the business of insurance , and thus saved from preemption pursuant to erisa's savings clause and the mccarran - ferguson act .

the court reviewed section 4-10 against a multi - factor test used to determine whether a state law regulates the business of insurance .

under the multi - factor test , the court first asked whether , "with a common - sense view," the law was specifically directed toward the insurance industry .

with regard to the illinois statute , the court found that , despite rush's contrary assertions , the statute was directed at the insurance industry and did not apply to any other industry .

the court then considered three factors established under mccarran - ferguson to determine whether the illinois statute should be saved from preemption .

a state law would not be subject to preemption if it ( 1 ) has the effect of transferring or spreading risk ; ( 2 ) if it is an integral part of the policy relationship between the insurer and the insured ; or ( 3 ) if it is limited to entities within the insurance industry .

the court noted that the factors were guideposts , and that a state law is not required to satisfy all three to survive preemption .

applying the three factors to the illinois statute , the court determined that the second and third factors were clearly satisfied .

recognizing that the statute could likely be saved from preemption under mccarran - ferguson , rush also argued that preemption was appropriate because congressional intent should override erisa's savings clause .

in making this argument , rush compared the provisions in the illinois statute to the claims for damages which the court found to be preempted in pilot life ins .

co. v. dedeaux .

in pilot life , the court found that erisa preempted a participant's claim for damages because the claim constituted an alternative remedy outside the limited scope of remedies congress provided for in erisa .

the court distinguished the illinois statute from the remedy sought in pilot life and other cases , finding that the illinois statute merely prescribes "a state regulatory scheme that provides no new cause of action under state law and authorizes no new form of ultimate relief. .

the court also rejected rush's argument that independent review was an "alternative scheme of arbitral adjudication," and thus in conflict with congress' intent to confine dispute resolution under erisa to the courts .

in dismissing rush's argument , the court noted that the state scheme was significantly different from arbitration , and was actually closer to a "mandate for [a] second opinion" rather than arbitration .

in aetna health inc. v. davila , a participant and a beneficiary of erisa - regulated employee benefit plans suffered injuries allegedly arising from plan administrators' decisions not to provide coverage for medication and an extended hospital stay recommended by the respondents' treating physicians .

rather than appealing the decision , asking a court for a preliminary injunction , or purchasing treatment and seeking reimbursement , one respondent took an alternative medication from which he allegedly suffered a severe reaction , and the other respondent experienced postsurgery complications after being discharged .

the respondents sued their plan administrators for failure to exercise ordinary care in the handling of coverage decisions in violation of a duty imposed by the thcla .

the petitioners removed the cases to federal district court arguing that the respondents' causes of action were completely preempted by section 502 ( a ) of erisa .

the district court agreed , and the respondents appealed .

the fifth circuit consolidated their cases along with several others , and found that the respondents' claims under the thcla were not preempted by erisa .

the supreme court granted certiorari and held that the respondents' claims under the thcla were completely preempted by section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) and should be removed to federal court .

the court determined that if an individual brings suit complaining of a denial of coverage for medical care where the individual is entitled to such coverage only because of the terms of an erisa - regulated employee benefit plan , and where no legal duty ( state or federal ) independent of erisa is violated , the suit falls within the scope of section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) .

in davila , the court found that the duty imposed by the thcla on managed care entities to "exercise ordinary care when making health care treatment decisions" did not arise independent of erisa or the plan terms in the respondents' cases .

the respondents brought suit to rectify a wrongful denial of benefits promised under erisa - regulated plans , not to remedy a violation of a legal duty independent of erisa .

thus , the court found that the causes of action fell within the scope of section 502 ( a ) ( 1 ) ( b ) , were therefore completely preempted , and were removable to federal court .

