the igs' four principal responsibilities are ( 1 ) conducting and supervising audits and investigations relating to the programs and operations of the agency ; ( 2 ) providing leadership and coordination and recommending policies to promote the economy , efficiency , and effectiveness of these ; ( 3 ) preventing and detecting waste , fraud , and abuse in these ; and ( 4 ) keeping the agency head and congress fully and currently informed about problems , deficiencies , and recommended corrective action .

to carry out these purposes , igs have been granted broad authority to: conduct audits and investigations ; access directly all records and information of the agency ; request assistance from other federal , state , and local government agencies ; subpoena information and documents ; administer oaths when taking testimony ; hire staff and manage their own resources ; and receive and respond to complaints from agency employees , whose confidentiality is to be protected .

in addition , the homeland security act of 2002 gave law enforcement powers to criminal investigators in offices headed by presidential appointees .

igs , moreover , implement the cash incentive award program in their agencies for employee disclosures of waste , fraud , and abuse ( 5 u.s.c .

4511 ) .

igs have reporting obligations regarding their findings , conclusions , and recommendations .

these include reporting: ( 1 ) suspected violations of federal criminal law directly and expeditiously to the attorney general ; ( 2 ) semiannually to the agency head , who must submit the ig report ( along with his or her comments ) to congress within 30 days ; and ( 3 ) "particularly serious or flagrant problems" immediately to the agency head , who must submit the ig report ( with comments ) to congress within seven days .

the central intelligence agency ( cia ) ig must also report to the intelligence committees if the director or acting director is the focus of an investigation or audit .

by means of these reports and "otherwise" ( eg , testimony at hearings ) , igs are to keep the agency head and congress fully and currently informed .

in addition to having their own powers ( eg , to hire staff and issue subpoenas ) , ig independence is reinforced through protection of their budgets ( in the larger establishments ) , qualifications for their appointment , prohibitions on interference with their activities and operations ( with a few exceptions ) , and fixing the priorities and projects for their offices without outside direction .

an exception to the igs' rule occurs when a review is ordered in statute , although inspectors general , at their own discretion , may conduct reviews requested by the president , agency heads , other igs , or congressional offices .

other provisions are designed to protect the igs' independence and ensure their neutrality .

for instance , igs are specifically prohibited from taking corrective action themselves .

along with this , the inspector general act prohibits the transfer of "program operating responsibilities" to an ig .

the rationale for both is that it would be difficult , if not impossible , for igs to audit or investigate programs and operations impartially and objectively if they were directly involved in making changes in them or carrying them out .

igs serve under the "general supervision" of the agency head , reporting exclusively to the head or to the officer next in rank if such authority is delegated .

with but a few specified exceptions , neither the agency head nor the officer next in line "shall prevent or prohibit the inspector general from initiating , carrying out , or completing any audit or investigation , or from issuing any subpoena...." under the ig act , the heads of only six agencies — the departments of defense , homeland security , justice , and the treasury , plus the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) and federal reserve board — may prevent the ig from initiating , carrying out , or completing an audit or investigation , or issuing a subpoena , and then only for specified reasons: to protect national security interests or ongoing criminal investigations , among others .

when exercising this power , the head must explain such action within 30 days to the house government oversight and reform committee , the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee , and other appropriate panels .

the cia ig act similarly allows the director to prohibit or halt an investigation or audit ; but he or she must notify the house and senate intelligence panels of the reasons , within seven days .

presidentially appointed igs in the establishments — but not in designated federal entities ( dfes ) — are granted a separate appropriations account ( a separate budget account in the case of the cia ) for their offices .

this restricts agency administrators from transferring or reducing ig funding once it has been specified in law .

under the inspector general act , igs in the larger establishments are appointed by the president , subject to senate confirmation , and are to be selected without regard to political affiliation and solely on the basis of integrity and demonstrated ability in relevant fields .

two other igs appointed by the president operate under similar but distinct requirements .

the cia ig is to be selected under these criteria as well as experience in the field of foreign intelligence .

and the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction ( sigar ) is the only ig appointed by the president alone .

presidentially nominated and senate - confirmed igs can be removed only by the president ; when so doing , he must notify congress of the reasons .

by comparison , igs in the dfes are appointed by and can be removed by the agency head , who must notify congress in writing when exercising this power .

the usps ig is the only ig with removal "for cause" and then with the written concurrence of at least seven of the nine governors , who also appoint the officer .

terms of office are set for three igs , but with the possibility of reappointment: in the postal service ( seven years ) , aoc ( five years ) , and u.s. capitol police ( five years ) , with selection by the capitol police board .

indirectly , the peace corps ig faces an effective term limit , because all positions there are restricted to five to 8½ years .

with regard to special inspector general for iraq reconstruction ( sigir ) and sigar , each post is to end 180 days after its parent entity's reconstruction funds are less than $250 million .

several presidential orders govern coordination among the igs and investigating charges of wrongdoing by high - echelon officers .

two councils , governed by e.o .

12805 , issued in 1992 , are the president's council on integrity and efficiency ( pcie ) and a parallel executive council on integrity and efficiency ( ecie ) .

chaired by the deputy director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , each is composed of the appropriate igs plus officials from other agencies , such as the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) and special counsel .

investigations of alleged wrongdoing by igs or other top oig officials ( under the ig act ) are governed by a special integrity committee , composed of pcie and ecie members and chaired by the fbi representative ( e.o .

12993 ) , with investigations referred to an appropriate executive agency or to an ig unit .

other coordinative devices have been created administratively .

statutory offices of inspector general have been authorized in 67 current federal establishments and entities , including all 15 cabinet departments ; major executive branch agencies ; independent regulatory commissions ; various government corporations and boards ; and five legislative branch agencies .

all but nine of the oigs are directly and explicitly under the 1978 inspector general act .

each office is headed by an inspector general , who is appointed in one of three ways: ( 1 ) 30 are nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate in "establishments," including all departments and the larger agencies under the ig act , plus the cia ( table 1 ) .

 ( 2 ) 36 are appointed by the head of the entity in 29 "designated federal entities" — usually smaller boards and commissions — and in seven other units , where the igs operate under separate authority: sigir , ondi , and five legislative agencies ( table 2 ) .

 ( 3 ) one ( in sigar ) is appointed by the president alone ( sec .

1229 , p.l .

110-181 ) .

initiatives in response to the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes arose to increase oig capacity and capabilities in overseeing the unprecedented recovery program .

these include igs or deputies from affected agencies on a homeland security roundtable , chaired by the dhs ig ; membership on a hurricane katrina contract fraud task force , headed by the justice department ; an office in the dhs oig to oversee disaster assistance activities nationwide ; and additional funding for the oig in homeland security .

in the 110 th congress , the igs in dod and in other relevant agencies have been charged with specific duties connected with combating waste , fraud , and abuse in wartime contracting ( p.l .

110-181 ) .

a new ig has been instituted in the aoc , in the gao , and in the afghanistan reconstruction effort , while other legislative action requires that full - agency websites link to the separate oig "hotline" websites .

separate recommendations have arisen in the recent past , such as consolidating dfe oigs under presidentially appointed igs or under a related establishment office ( gao - 02-575 ) .

pending proposals in the 110 th congress include the following: requiring ig annual reviews to report on program effectiveness and efficiency ( h.r .

6639 ) ; and establishing igs for the judicial branch ( h.r .

785 and s. 461 ) and the washington metropolitan area transit authority ( h.r .

401 ) .

the intelligence authorization act for fy2009 ( h.r .

5959 and s. 2996 ) would create an inspector general for the entire intelligence community , a provision opposed by the bush administration ; and would grant statutory recognition to specified oigs in the defense department .

other bills — h.r .

928 and 2324 , whose earlier versions incurred objections from omb — have been reconciled and await chamber action .

these proposals are designed to increase the igs' independence and powers .

different versions have called for providing specifics on initial oig budget estimates to congress ; removing an ig only for "cause" ; setting a term of office for igs ; establishing a council of inspectors general for integrity and efficiency in statute ; revising the pay structure for igs ; allowing for ig subpoena power in any medium ; and granting law enforcement powers to qualified igs in dfes .

