waste discharges from municipal sewage treatment plants into rivers and streams , lakes , and estuaries and coastal waters are a significant source of water quality problems throughout the country .

states report that municipal discharges are the second leading source of water quality impairment in all of the nation's waters .

pollutants associated with municipal discharges include nutrients ( which can stimulate growth of algae that deplete dissolved oxygen , a process that harms aquatic ecosystems , since most fish and other aquatic organisms "breathe" oxygen dissolved in the water column ) , bacteria and other pathogens ( which may impair drinking water supplies and recreation uses ) , and metals and toxic chemicals from industrial and commercial activities and households .

the clean water act ( cwa ) prescribes performance levels to be attained by municipal sewage treatment plants in order to prevent the discharge of harmful quantities of waste into surface waters , and to ensure that residual sewage sludge meets environmental quality standards .

it requires secondary treatment of sewage ( equivalent to removing 85% of raw wastes ) , or treatment more stringent than secondary where needed to achieve water quality standards necessary for recreational and other uses of a river , stream , or lake .

in addition to prescribing municipal treatment requirements , the cwa authorizes the principal federal program to aid wastewater treatment plant construction .

congress established this program in the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972 ( p.l .

92-500 ) , significantly enhancing what previously had been a modest grant program .

since then , congress has appropriated more than $92 billion to assist cities in complying with the act and achieving the overall objectives of the act: restoring and maintaining the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters ( see table 1 ) .

title ii of p.l .

92-500 authorized grants to states for wastewater treatment plant construction under a program administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

federal funds are provided through annual appropriations under a state - by - state allocation formula contained in the act ; the formula ( which has been modified several times since 1972 ) is based on states' financial needs for treatment plant construction and population .

states used their allotments to make grants to cities to build or upgrade categories of wastewater treatment projects including treatment plants , related interceptor sewers , correction of infiltration / inflow of sewer lines , and sewer rehabilitation .

amendments enacted in 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) initiated a new program to support , or capitalize , state water pollution control revolving funds ( srfs ) .

states continue to receive federal grants , but now they provide a 20% match and use the combined funds to make loans to communities .

monies used for construction are repaid to states to create a "revolving" source of assistance for other communities .

the srf program replaced the previous title ii program in fy1991 .

federal contributions to srfs were intended to assist a transition to full state and local financing by fy1995 ; srfs were to be sustained through repayment of loans made from the fund after that date .

the intention was that states would have greater flexibility to set priorities and administer funding in exchange for an end to federal aid after 1994 , when the original cwa authorizations expired .

however , although most states believe that the srf is working well today , early funding and administrative problems , plus remaining funding needs ( discussed below ) , delayed the anticipated shift to full state responsibility .

congress has continued to appropriate funds to assist wastewater construction activities , as shown in table 1 .

 ( this table excludes appropriations for congressionally earmarked water infrastructure grants in individual communities and regions , which totaled $7.5 billion from fy1989 through fy2015. ) .

authorizations for srf capitalization grants expired in fy1994 , making this an issue of congressional interest .

 ( appropriations have continued , as shown in table 1 . ) .

in the 104 th congress , the house passed a comprehensive reauthorization bill ( h.r .

961 ) , which included srf provisions to address problems that have arisen since 1987 , including assistance for small and disadvantaged communities and expansion of projects and activities eligible for srf assistance .

however , no legislation was enacted , because of controversies over other parts of the bill .

one recent focus has been on projects needed to control wet weather water pollution , overflows from combined and separate stormwater sewer systems .

funding needs for projects to address these types of projects are estimated to be nearly $106 billion .

the 106 th congress passed a bill authorizing $1.5 billion of cwa grant funding specifically for wet weather sewerage projects ( in p.l .

106-554 ) , because under the srf program , "wet weather" projects compete with other types of eligible projects for available funds .

however , authorization for these "wet weather" project grants expired in fy2003 and has not been renewed .

no funds were appropriated .

in several congresses since the 107 th , house and senate committees have approved bills to extend the act's srf program and increase authorization of appropriations for srf capitalization grants , but no legislation other than appropriations has been enacted until recently .

issues debated in connection with these bills included extending srf assistance to help states and cities meet the estimated $298 billion in funding needs ; modifying the program to assist small and economically disadvantaged communities ; and enhancing the srf program to address a number of water quality priorities beyond traditional treatment plant construction , particularly the management of wet weather pollutant runoff from numerous sources , which is the leading cause of stream and lake impairment nationally .

congress did enact certain changes to the srf provisions of the cwa in 2014 ( p.l .

113-121 ) .

these amendments addressed several issues , including extending loan repayment terms from 20 years to 30 years , expanding the list of srf - eligible projects to include energy - and water - efficiency , increasing assistance to indian tribes , and imposing "buy american" requirements on srf recipients .

however , the amendments did not address other long - standing or controversial issues , such as: authorization of appropriations for srf capitalization grants , which expired in fy1994 ; state - by - state allocation of capitalization grants ; and applicability of prevailing wage requirements under the davis - bacon act , which currently apply to use of srf monies .

this legislation also includes provisions authorizing a five - year pilot program for a new type of financing , a water infrastructure finance and innovation act ( wifia ) program , authorizing federal loans and loan guarantees for wastewater and public water supply projects .

this new program is intended to assist large water infrastructure projects , especially projects of regional and national significance , and to supplement but not replace other types of financial assistance , such as srfs .

congress has recently focused extensively on reducing federal spending , making it a challenge for legislators to provide federal assistance for water infrastructure programs .

although interest in meeting the nation's water infrastructure needs is strong and likely to continue , policy makers will balance proposals to assist local communities with policies to achieve greater fiscal discipline .

unclear for now is how infrastructure programs will fare in these debates .

