social security provides insured workers and their eligible family members with a measure of protection against the loss of income due to the worker's retirement , disability , or death .

the amount of the monthly benefit payable to workers and their family members is based on the worker's career - average earnings from jobs covered by social security ( i.e. , jobs in which the worker's earnings were subject to the social security payroll tax ) .

the social security benefit formula is weighted to replace a greater share of career - average earnings for low - paid workers than for high - paid workers .

this means that low - paid workers receive relatively high benefits in relation to their payroll tax contributions , although the dollar amount of their benefits is lower than that provided to high - paid workers .

the benefit formula , however , cannot distinguish between workers who have low career - average earnings because they worked for many years at low earnings in social security - covered employment and workers who appear to have low career - average earnings because they worked for many years in jobs not covered by social security .

 ( those years show up as zeros in their social security earnings records , which , when averaged , lower their career earnings from covered work. ) .

consequently , workers who split their careers between covered and noncovered employment — even highly paid ones — may also receive the advantage of the weighted formula .

the windfall elimination provision ( wep ) is a modified benefit formula designed to remove the unintended advantage , or "windfall," of the regular benefit formula for certain retired or disabled workers who spent less than full careers in covered employment and who are also entitled to pension benefits based on earnings from jobs not covered by social security .

the reduction in initial benefits caused by the wep is designed to place affected workers in approximately the same position they would have been in had all their earnings been covered by social security .

workers qualify for social security benefits if they worked and paid social security payroll taxes for a sufficient amount of time in covered employment .

retired workers need at least 40 quarters of coverage ( or about 10 years of covered work ) , whereas disabled workers generally need fewer quarters of coverage .

initial benefits are based on a worker's career - average earnings from jobs covered by social security .

in computing the initial benefit amount , a worker's annual taxable earnings are indexed ( i.e. , adjusted ) to average wage growth in the national economy .

this is done to bring earlier years of earnings up to a comparable , current basis .

next , a summarized measure of a worker's career - average earnings is found by totaling the highest 35 years of covered earnings and then dividing by 35 .

after that , a monthly average , known as a v erage indexed monthly e arnings ( aime ) , is found by dividing the annual average by 12 .

once the worker's aime has been derived , it is then entered into the social security benefit formula to produce the worker's initial benefit amount .

the benefit formula is progressive , replacing a greater share of career - average earnings for low - paid workers than for high - paid workers .

the benefit formula applies three factors — 90% , 32% , and 15% — to three different levels , or brackets , of aime .

the result is known as the primary insurance amount ( pia ) and is rounded down to the nearest 10 cents .

the pia is the worker's basic benefit before any adjustments are applied .

the benefit formula applicable to a given worker is based on the individual's earliest eligibility year ( ely ) , that is , the year in which the worker first attains age 62 , becomes disabled , or dies .

for workers whose ely is 2019 , the pia is determined as follows in table 1 .

the averaging provision in the benefit formula tends to cause workers with short careers in social security - covered employment to have low aimes , even if they had high earnings in their noncovered career , similar to people who worked for low earnings in covered employment throughout their careers .

this is because years of zero covered earnings are entered as zeros into the formula that averages the worker's earnings history over 35 years .

for example , a person with 10 years in social security - covered employment would have an aime that reflects 25 years of zero earnings , even if that person worked for 25 years in a high - paying , noncovered career .

consequently , for a worker whose aime is low because his or her career was split between covered and noncovered employment , the benefit formula replaces more of covered earnings at the 90% rate than if the worker had spent a full 35-year career in covered employment at the same earnings level .

the higher replacement rate for workers who have split their careers between social security - covered and noncovered jobs is sometimes referred to as a "windfall. .

a different social security benefit formula , known informally as the windfall elimination provision , applies to certain workers who are entitled to social security benefits as well as to pension benefits from employment not covered by social security .

under the wep , the 90% factor in the first bracket of the formula is reduced to as low as 40% .

the effect is to lower the proportion of earnings in the first bracket that are converted to benefits .

table 2 illustrates how the regular benefit formula and the wep work in 2019 for someone with a 40% factor .

in this scenario , the monthly benefit is $463.00 lower under the wep than under the regular benefit formula ( $1,017.00 minus $554.00 ) .

note that the wep reduction is limited to the first bracket in the aime formula ( 90% vs. 40% ) , while the 32% and 15% factors for the second and third brackets are unchanged .

as a result , for aime amounts that exceed the first formula threshold of $926 , the wep reduction remains a flat $463 per month .

for example , if the worker had an aime of $4,000 instead of $1,500 , the wep reduction would still be $463 per month .

the wep therefore causes a proportionally larger reduction in benefits for workers with lower aimes and monthly benefit amounts .

a guarantee in the wep ensures that the wep reduction cannot exceed half of the noncovered pension based on the worker's noncovered work .

this guarantee is designed to help protect workers with low pensions from noncovered work .

the wep does not apply to workers who have 30 or more years of substantial employment covered under social security , with an adjusted formula for workers with 21 to 29 years of substantial covered employment , as shown in table 3 .

the wep applies to benefits payable to retired or disabled workers who meet the criteria above and to their eligible dependents ; however , it does not apply to benefits payable to survivors of deceased insured workers .

groups of workers likely to be affected by the wep include certain state and local government employees who are covered by alternative pension plans through their employers and most permanent civilian federal employees hired before january 1 , 1984 , who are covered by the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) .

the wep does not apply to federal employees performing service on january 1 , 1984 , to which coverage was extended on that date by reason of the social security amendments of 1983 ( p.l .

98-21 ) ; employees of a nonprofit organization who were exempt from social security coverage on december 31 , 1983 , and who became covered for the first time on january 1 , 1984 , under p.l .

98-21 ; workers who attained age 62 , became disabled , or were first eligible for a pension from noncovered employment before 1986 ; workers who receive foreign pension payments after 1994 that are based on a totalization agreement with the united states ; workers whose only noncovered pension is based on earnings from noncovered domestic or foreign employment before 1957 ; and railroad workers whose only noncovered pension is based on earnings from employment covered by the railroad retirement act .

according to the social security administration ( ssa ) , as of december 2018 , nearly 1.9 million social security beneficiaries were affected by the wep ( table 4 ) .

the overwhelming majority of those affected ( about 94% ) were retired workers .

approximately 3% of all social security beneficiaries ( including disabled workers and dependent beneficiaries ) and 4% of all retired - worker beneficiaries were affected by the wep in december 2018 .

of retired workers affected by the wep , approximately 58% were men ( table 5 ) .

for data on the number and share of social security beneficiaries affected by the wep , by state , see table a - 1 and table a - 2 in the appendix , respectively .

the wep was enacted in 1983 as part of major amendments ( p.l .

98-21 ) designed to shore up the financing of the social security program .

the 40% wep formula factor was the result of a compromise between a house bill that would have substituted a 61% factor for the regular 90% factor and a senate proposal that would have substituted a 32% factor .

the purpose of the 1983 provision was to remove an unintended advantage that the regular social security benefit formula provided to certain retired or disabled worker - beneficiaries who were also entitled to pension benefits based on earnings from jobs not subject to the social security payroll tax .

the regular formula was intended to help workers who spent their lifetimes in low - paying jobs , by providing them with a benefit that replaces a higher proportion of their career - average earnings than the benefit provided to workers with high career - average earnings .

however , the formula does not differentiate between those who worked in low - paid jobs throughout their careers and other workers who appear to have been low paid because they worked many years in jobs not covered by social security .

under the old law , workers who were employed for only a portion of their careers in jobs covered by social security — even highly paid ones — also received the advantage of the weighted formula , because their few years of covered earnings were averaged over their entire working career to determine the average covered earnings on which their social security benefits were based .

the wep is intended to place affected workers in approximately the same position they would have been in had all their earnings been covered by social security .

the impact of the wep on low - income workers has been the subject of debate .

jeffrey brown and scott weisbenner ( hereinafter "brown and weisbenner" ) point out two reasons why the wep can be regressive .

first , because the wep adjustment is confined to the first bracket of the benefit formula ( $926 in 2019 ) , it causes a proportionally larger reduction in benefits for workers with lower aimes and benefit amounts .

second , a high earner is more likely than a low earner to cross the "substantial work" threshold for accumulating years of covered earnings ( in 2019 this threshold is $24,675 in social security - covered earnings ) ; therefore , high earners are more likely to benefit from the provision that phases out the wep for people with between 21 and 29 years of covered employment .

brown and weisbenner found that the wep does reduce benefits disproportionately for lower - earning households .

for some high - income households , applying the wep to covered earnings even provides a higher replacement rate than if the wep were applied proportionately to all earnings , covered and noncovered .

brown and weisbenner found that the wep can also lead to large changes in social security replacement rates based on small changes in covered earnings , particularly when a small increase in covered earnings carries a person over the threshold for an additional year of substantial covered earnings , leading to an adjustment in the wep formula applied to the aime .

h.r .

141 ( social security fairness act of 2019 ) and s. 521 were introduced by representative rodney davis on january 3 , 2019 , and senator sherrod brown on february 14 , 2019 , respectively .

the legislation would repeal the wep and the government pension offset ( gpo ) , which reduces the social security benefits paid to spouses and widow ( er ) s of insured workers if the spouse or widow ( er ) also receives a pension based on government employment not covered by social security .

the elimination of the wep and gpo would apply to benefits payable for months after december 2019 .

in 2016 , ssa's office of the chief actuary ( ocact ) projected that repealing both the wep and the gpo would reduce the long - range actuarial balance ( i.e. , increase the net long - term cost ) of the combined social security trust funds by 0.13% of taxable payroll .

the ocact estimated that repealing only the wep would reduce the long - range actuarial balance of the combined trust funds by 0.08% of taxable payroll .

s. 710 ( social security fairness for firefighters and police officers act ) was introduced by senator pat toomey on march 7 , 2019 .

the bill would exempt certain firefighters and police officers with five years of qualified service from the wep and the gpo .

h.r .

1205 and s. 915 , identical bills both titled the social security fairness act of 2017 , would have repealed the wep as well as the gpo .

the elimination of the wep and gpo would have applied to benefits payable for months after december 2017 .

h.r .

6933 and s. 3526 , identical bills both titled the equal treatment of public servants act of 2018 , proposed to replace the wep with a new proportional formula for individuals who would become eligible for oasdi benefits in 2025 or later .

the proposal would have also provided for a rebate payment starting in 2020 for individuals affected by the current wep .

in october 2018 , the ocact projected that the enactment of this legislation would increase ( improve ) the long - range actuarial balance of the combined trust funds by 0.04% of taxable payroll .

other bills in the 115 th congress related to the wep included h.r .

6962 , the social security equity act of 2018 , and s. 3433 , the social security fairness for firefighters and police officers act .

h.r .

6962 would have reduced the wep benefit reduction relative to current law , and s. 3433 would have exempted certain firefighters and police officers with five years of qualified service from the wep and the gpo .

