t he overseas private investment corporation ( opic ) is a wholly owned u.s. government corporation that seeks to promote economic growth in less developed economies through the mobilization of private capital , in support of u.s. foreign policy goals .

it is often referred to as the u.s. government's development finance institution ( dfi ) .

opic's enabling legislation is the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l .

87-195 ) , as amended .

the foreign assistance act provides opic with authority to conduct its activities for a renewable period of time ( see appendix a ) .

over the past several years , congress has extended opic's authority through appropriations law .

most recently , an fy2017 continuing resolution extended opic's authority through april 28 , 2017 ( p.l .

114-254 ) .

the foreign assistance act directs opic to "mobilize and facilitate the participation of united states private capital and skills in the economic and social development of less developed countries and areas , and countries in transition from nonmarket to market economies ... under the policy guidance of the secretary of state. .

opic works to fulfill its mandate by providing political risk insurance , project and investment funds financing , and other services to promote u.s. direct investment overseas .

its services are intended to mitigate the risks affecting u.s. international investment , such as political risks ( including currency inconvertibility , expropriation , and political violence ) , for u.s. firms making qualified investments overseas .

opic characterizes itself as "demand - driven," providing services based on user interest .

opic's activities may support u.s. exports , and it is involved in u.s. trade promotion interagency processes and initiatives .

congress does not approve individual opic projects , but has authorization , appropriations , oversight , and other legislative responsibilities related to the agency and its activities .

congress authorizes opic's ability to conduct its credit and insurance programs for a period of time that it chooses ; can amend or change its governing legislation as it deems appropriate ; and approves an annual appropriation for opic that sets an upper limit on the agency's administrative and program expenses , which are covered by opic's own funds .

the senate confirms presidential appointments to opic's board of directors and to the opic positions of president and executive vice president .

the 115 th congress may take up a number of issues related to opic , chief of which could be whether to renew opic's authority and , if so , under what terms .

congress also may examine opic's financial product offerings , policies , activity composition , and organizational structure , among other issues .

this report is structured into three parts: ( 1 ) opic background ; ( 2 ) international context for development finance ; and ( 3 ) key issues for congress related to opic .

external financial flows to developing countries come through a number of channels .

one is official development assistance ( oda ) from foreign governments ( eg , grants , concessional lending ) .

another is private capital flows from foreign companies , including through foreign direct investment ( fdi ) .

in developing countries , oda historically was the main source of external financing .

over time , fdi flows have grown relative to oda flows ( see figure 4 ) .

traditionally , fdi largely has flowed from developed countries to developing countries , but emerging markets and developing countries also are becoming significant fdi sources .

along with the changing international investment landscape , the international development policy landscape has evolved with bilateral and multilateral development financing institutions ( dfis ) playing a more active role .

dfis are used here to refer to entities that provide officially backed ( or government - backed ) support ( eg , through direct loans , loan guarantees , or insurance ) for private sector investment in less developed countries .

it is difficult to find centralized , comprehensive sources of information on dfi activities .

officially backed investment financing activities are outside of the scope of the oecd arrangement on officially supported export credits ( "the arrangement" ) , which includes notification procedures and reporting requirements on activity .

countries vary in terms of how much information they publish on their dfi activities .

the international finance corporation , using its database , estimated that private sector commitments ( not including political risk insurance ) by certain international financial institutions to developing countries grew from about $10 billion in 2002 to over $40 billion in 2010 .

a subsequent estimate by the center for strategic & international studies ( csis ) , which it said was based on the same set of institutions , pegged that total at about $68 billion in 2013 .

the level of dfi support through political risk insurance also may be significant .

the berne union , an international group of private and state export credit and foreign investment insurers , maintains statistics on political risk insurance provided by its members linked to fdi .

however , these data may include investment support not related to development finance , given the group's membership .

according to the berne union , its members' newly underwritten investment insurance transactions reached $97 billion in 2015 .

while developed countries , such as the united states ( through opic ) and some other g - 7 countries , traditionally have been the sources of development finance , emerging economies such as china , brazil , and india also have become significant players in this space ( see appendix b ) .

the growing number of development finance players and volumes of investment financing have resulted in greater and varied competition for u.s. businesses — competition from firms in both developed countries and in emerging economies as they move up the value chain .

u.s. companies may seek opic assistance to counter the officially backed investment support that their competitors receive .

at the same time , from an economic perspective , the role of government - backed financing and its impact on markets is debated .

below are some general comparisons of opic and selected other dfis ; these comparisons are illustrative of the dfi landscape and not comprehensive .

ownership: opic and certain other dfis are owned exclusively by the public sector , such as cdc ( united kingdom ) and deg ( germany ) .

others , such as fmo ( the netherlands ) and proparco ( france ) , have joint public and private ownership .

regional and multilateral dfis ( such as ebrd and ifc ) have multiple shareholders from various countries .

organizational structure: countries vary in how they organize their investment and export financing functions .

the united states houses investment and export financing functions in separate entities , opic and ex - im bank respectively .

the two agencies have different missions — with opic focused more on foreign policy and development goals and ex - im bank geared toward commercial goals — although they do coordinate on certain transactions .

by comparison , some other countries house these functions in the same entity .

for example , jbic ( japan ) conducts both investment and export financing operations .

international rules: as discussed earlier , the investment financing activities of dfis fall outside of the forms of financing regulated by international disciplines through the oecd arrangement on officially supported export credits .

the arrangement includes limitations on financial terms and conditions in areas such as down payments , repayment terms , interest rates and premia , and country risk classifications .

it contains notification procedures and reporting requirements for countries' export credit activities to encourage transparency .

among other things , the oecd arrangement does not apply to investment support not directly linked or tied to procurement from the country providing the official support .

financial instruments : opic provides investment support through direct loans , loan guarantees , and political risk insurance .

in contrast , many other dfis offer a larger suite of financial products , including participating as a limited partner in private equity funds .

opic has previously stated that it is the only one of at least 30 private sector - focused dfis without the ability to participate as a limited partner in private equity funds .

for instance , the portfolios of most members of the european development finance institutions ( edfi ) contained support through equity or "quasi - equity" instruments at the end of 2015 .

in some cases , equity or quasi - equity was the primary focus of dfi activity .

additionally , some dfis provide "project - specific and general technical assistance. .

opic provides limited technical support .

portfolio size: the size of dfi portfolios varies .

for example , opic's cumulative portfolio totaled nearly $20 billion in fy2015 .

in comparison , the 15 edfi members collectively had a total portfolio of €36 billion ( about $39 billion ) at the end of 2015 .

in comparison , china appears to have the largest presence in international development finance , according to a study conducted by boston university and the chinese academy of social sciences .

this study estimates that two chinese "policy banks" had outstanding loans to overseas borrowers totaling $684 billion at the end of 2014 , making available $106 billion in development finance .

ex - im bank's annual competitiveness report focuses on export financing , but includes some data on investment financing .

based on ex - im bank estimates , in 2015 , china's new investment support alone totaled $49 billion , exceeding that of other ecas , which had $42 billion combined .

portfolio distribution: dfis support projects in a range of economic sectors .

dfis traditionally have favored infrastructure , but have focused more recently on other sectors such as financial services ( see above for opic composition ) .

in 2015 , the financial sector represented the largest sector of support in the portfolios of edfi members collectively ( 30% of a €36 billion , or about $39 billion , portfolio ) followed by power ( 18% ) , industry or manufacturing ( 16% ) , other infrastructure ( 11% ) , agribusiness ( 8% ) , services ( 5% ) , and other sectors ( 12% ) .

in contrast , chinese development finance is aimed mainly at infrastructure .

chinese government loans and related financing have been directed at constructing roads , rail , hospitals , schools , housing , and water and energy infrastructure , with the involvement of chinese firms , including state - owned enterprises .

policy requirements: requirements that projects must meet in order to receive support vary by dfi , such as with respect to environmental , worker rights , and other conditions .

opic is widely regarded in the development finance community as having among the most extensive policy requirements for projects to receive its support .

according to opic , it has been a leader among dfis in "developing and applying environmental and social policies that advance long - term sustainable development. .

edfi states that its european dfi members have adopted a "shared set of principles for responsible financing , which underlines that respect for human rights and environmental sustainability is a prerequisite for financing by edfis. .

in terms of china's development finance regime , for example , "[d]ue to in - country dynamics , corruption , or disparate standards frameworks , some chinese development projects have produced adverse outcomes for the environment , labor , and local livelihoods... .

opic presents a number of possible issues for congress , chief of which could be a debate about its reauthorization .

congress also may examine opic's product offerings , policy requirements for supporting projects , activity composition , and organizational structure .

congress may examine whether to reauthorize opic and , if so , the length of time for which to extend its authority and under what terms .

in recent years , members of congress have introduced various types of bills concerning opic's authority ( see text box ) .

congressional views differ on the justifications for and against opic .

one issue is the relationship between opic and the private sector .

supporters argue that opic fills gaps in private sector political risk insurance and financing for investment and helps "level the playing field" for u.s. businesses competing against foreign companies supported by their own dfis , while critics argue that opic distorts the flow of capital and resources away from efficient uses and crowds out viable , private sector alternatives for investment financing and insurance .

those in favor of opic also assert that it provides support for projects , markets , and sectors where government - backed financing and insurance can make the most difference ( eg , large - scale , long - term infrastructure projects , investments by small businesses , projects in developing countries , and during financial crises ) , while those critical of opic point out that the majority of u.s. overseas investments occur without opic support and question why opic should take on risk when the private sector does not want to .

other issues include the composition of opic's activities and its outcomes .

supporters argue that u.s. companies of all sizes benefit from opic and that opic charges interest , premia , and other fees for its support , while critics contend that opic , as a form of government intervention , is "corporate welfare" and that , by dollar value , larger companies are the primary beneficiaries .

supporters note opic's risk management practices and record , while critics express concern about the potential risks that opic's activities pose to u.s. taxpayers .

also , supporters argue that opic screens projects for "additionality" and that its activities contribute to u.s. jobs and exports , while critics question opic's opportunity costs and express concern that opic supports companies whose overseas investments may result in the outsourcing of u.s. jobs .

from a foreign policy perspective , supporters contend that opic's activities , on a demand - driven basis , advance u.s. development and national security interests by contributing to economic development in poor countries , while critics counter that the actual composition of opic's activities may not reflect u.s. foreign policy priorities and that the development benefits of opic's activities are questionable .

from an operational standpoint , some argue that opic would benefit from multi - year authorizations and "that the potential risk of a lapse undermines the private sector's confidence in opic's effectiveness , given that clients and projects require long - term planning and exit horizons. .

others argue that shorter extensions may provide opportunity for congress to weigh in more frequently on opic operations through the lawmaking process .

questions may be raised about the extent that yearly renewals of authority through the appropriations process affect opic and what issues may be discussed in a broader debate about opic's authority .

congress also may evaluate the impact of a lapse or expiration of opic's authority .

for instance , opic's authority lapsed during april - september 2008 .

during this period , opic was able to disburse funds for already committed projects , but was unable to sign contracts for new projects .

this lapse in authority reportedly contributed to a backlog of projects in opic's pipeline of , by one estimate , about $2 billion of potential transactions .

opic currently provides political risk insurance , project and investment funds financing through direct loans and loan guarantees , and other services .

congress may consider whether to adjust opic's product offering .

equity authority .

a long - standing topic of debate is whether opic should be able to make equity investments in investment funds , in addition to the current debt financing that it provides for such funds .

according to opic , it currently does not have resources to make limited partnership investments .

opic's fy2017 congressional budget justification includes a request for authority to use up to $20 million from its credit reform appropriation and $20 million in transfer authority to invest in private equity funds that serve opic's mission .

proponents argue that equity authority would enable opic to exert greater influence in an investment's strategic goals and economic , social , and governance policies ; that foreign counterparts , many of whom have equity authority , may be more likely to partner with opic on projects , increasing opic's ability to leverage its resources ; and that opic could use the higher returns generally associated with equity investments to support more projects .

critics may raise concerns about the u.s. government taking an ownership stake in a private enterprise , the greater resources required for equity investments , and the greater risks and financial exposure that equity investments entail .

technical assistance .

another point of debate is whether opic should have a consistent ability to provide grants , such as for technical assistance , for the projects that it supports .

those in favor of such proposals contend that providing technical assistance would enhance opic's effectiveness in supporting projects .

on the other hand , critics contend that providing opic with a significant grant function would duplicate the roles of usaid and tda in development assistance .

in supporting u.s. private sector investment overseas , opic seeks to balance multiple policy objectives , including foreign assistance , development , economic , environmental , and other policy goals .

congress could evaluate how opic might prioritize and balance these various objectives .

opic's environmental policies on greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission reductions ( which some stakeholders refer to as a "carbon cap" ) , in particular , have been the subject of congressional action and vigorous stakeholder debate ( see text box ) .

on one hand , such efforts may serve u.s. environmental policy goals and help to improve the sustainability of opic's activities .

on the other hand , some u.s. businesses argue that the ghg emissions reduction effort can constrain their ability to utilize opic support and place them at a competitive disadvantage vis - à - vis foreign firms when competing for international project contracts ( eg , major infrastructure projects in sub - saharan africa ) .

other dfis generally do not have the same level of policy restrictions that opic has , potentially enabling them to support a broader array of energy - related projects .

from a development perspective , some argue that the ghg emission reduction effort prevents opic from supporting projects likely to have the largest development impact .

one area of congressional interest could be whether opic's portfolio has an appropriate mix in terms of its development objectives and is directed sufficiently to those areas in which it may be most needed .

some stakeholders , for example , have expressed concern about what they see as opic's shift away from projects in sectors commonly viewed as contributing to poverty reduction ( eg , agriculture , infrastructure , and transportation ) and toward projects in other sectors where development benefits may be less clear ( eg , finance and hotels ) .

drivers of such trends may have been environmental policies constraining support for large - scale infrastructure projects , as well as the need to balance financial risks and be self - sustaining .

congressional concern was voiced , for example , about opic's support for projects that do not necessarily , on their face , appear to align with opic's development mission , such as the construction of a shopping mall in jordan , expanded billboard advertising in ukraine , and hotels in armenia and georgia .

others may counter that opic conducts development impact assessments of proposed projects and monitors the development impact of existing projects ; they also may point to the development impacts of projects discussed in opic's annual policy reports , for instance in terms of host country employment .

another area of interest could be considering opportunities for enhancing opic's support for specific geographical areas or sectors that are of u.s. policy priority .

for example , the electrify africa act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-121 ) , among other things , directs opic to prioritize and expedite its support for power projects in sub - saharan africa .

on one hand , greater resources may increase capacity to promote investment , but on the other hand , federal agencies' allocation of funds for trade and investment promotion is generally demand - driven .

thus , for example , if u.s. firms do not seek such assistance due to lack of sufficient commercial interest , such funds may not be fully tapped .

at the same time , promotion of development finance opportunities by opic could motivate u.s. companies to become more engaged .

opic's organizational structure may present possible areas of congressional consideration , including in the following areas .

reorganization .

during the presidential campaign , president - elect trump proposed to consolidate trade - related agencies and departments into one office called the "american desk" under the department of commerce .

the general contours of the trump proposal appear to be reminiscent of president obama's call for reorganization authority to reorganize and consolidate , into one department , the trade - related functions of opic and five other federal entities into one department to streamline the federal government and make it more effective .

the proposal , however , did not gain much traction in congress , largely due to concerns about its implications for the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) and its u.s. trade negotiation and enforcement functions .

other proposals offered by stakeholders include consolidating federal agencies focused on promoting international development through private sector tools ( such as opic , tda , and certain elements of usaid ) , and / or creating a "development finance agency. .

such proposals raise debates about whether reorganization would reduce costs and improve the effectiveness of trade policy programs , or undermine their effectiveness given the differing missions of federal trade agencies .

privatization or termination .

other possible options include privatizing or terminating opic , the feasibility of which previously has been analyzed .

supporters of such options may argue that opic's self - sustaining nature is proof that there is no market failure ; that opic competes with or crowds out the private sector , which is more efficient and better suited than the federal government to support investments ; and that opic's activities impose potential costs and risks on u.s. taxpayers , since they are backed by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government .

those in favor of opic may argue that the federal government plays a unique role in addressing market failures ; that opic's backing by the full faith and credit of the u.s. government may make certain transactions more commercially attractive or give opic leverage to guarantee repayment in a way that is not available to the private sector ; and that federal investment support is critical when there is a shortfall in private sector financing and insurance .

internal oversight .

opic's own internal oversight structure presents another area of interest .

usaid's inspector general has legal authority to conduct reviews , investigations , and inspections of opic's operations and activities ,   while external auditors conduct audits of opic's financial statements and report findings to opic's board of directors .

one possibility is establishing an opic - specific inspector general .

some may support this approach given differences in opic's private sector financing focus and usaid's grant - making functions .

opponents may assert that the current opic - usaid arrangement suffices or express concern about the additional resources a new inspector general could require .

other possibilities include directing ex - im bank's inspector general to conduct opic oversight .

some may support this on the basis that ex - im bank and opic offer some similar financing and insurance products , though others may express concern because of differences in the two agencies' missions and stakeholders .

appendix a. opic authorization history opic operates on a renewable basis under the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended ( 22 u.s.c .

§2191 et seq . ) .

the foreign assistance act includes a provision authorizing opic to perform certain functions until its sunset date , which congress has periodically extended .

that provision , in 22 u.s.c .

§2195 ( a ) ( 2 ) , currently states , "the authority of subsections ( a ) , ( b ) , and ( c ) of section 2194 of this title [political risk insurance , loan guarantees , and direct loans , respectively] shall continue until september 30 , 2007. .

this sunset date reflects the last extension of opic's authority on a multi - year basis ; the opic amendments act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-158 ) extended opic's authority for nearly four years until september 30 , 2007 .

since then , opic generally has continued operating based on extensions of its authority in appropriations law , which opic has characterized as authorization "waivers. .

 ( one exception was a six - month period in 2008 when its authority lapsed. ) .

these "waivers" have occurred through consolidated appropriations acts and continuing resolutions ( crs ) .

for instance , section 7061 ( b ) of the fy2016 consolidated appropriations act extended opic's authority until september 30 , 2016 ; it stated , "notwithstanding section 235 ( a ) ( 2 ) of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , the authority of subsections ( a ) through ( c ) of section 234 of such act shall remain in effect until september 30 , 2016" ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

most recently , an fy2017 continuing resolution extended opic's authority through april 28 , 2017 ( p.l .

114-254 ) .

table a - 1 provides a list of legislation identified by crs as creating opic and extending its authority during 1961-2007 , as well as the associated statutory text and new sunset date .

to identify the legislation in this table , crs examined the notes of title 22 sections 2194 and 2195 of the u.s. code , and searched congress.gov and proquest congressional for additional pieces of legislation extending opic's authority .

while all efforts were made to ensure the comprehensiveness of this list , the presence of any gaps in authorization legislation should not be regarded as determinative of opic's authorization status .

during 1961-2007 , congress extended opic's authority on numerous occasions on a multi - year basis , generally ranging from two to four years .

on some occasions , congress extended opic's authority for a shorter period during this time frame .

extensions of opic's authority occurred in various forms , but appear to have had substantially the same effect of allowing opic to continue operating .

some extensions were through laws specifically listed in the "amendments" section to 22 u.s.c .

§2195 ( thus amending the foreign assistance act ) .

these included extensions in opic - specific legislation , legislation focused on foreign affairs or international trade more broadly , and appropriations legislation .

other extensions , particularly in more recent years , took the form of authorization "waivers" ( as characterized by opic ) in appropriations acts that allowed opic's functions to remain in effect but did not amend opic's sunset date in the foreign assistance act .

in a few instances , there appear to be "gaps" in legislation extending opic's sunset date , such as in 1981 , 1985 , and 1992 .

these possible gaps in authority appear to have been for a few weeks to a few months .

unlike the gap in 2008 ( noted above ) , crs has not been able to determine whether these possible gaps affected opic's authority to conduct its functions .

appendix b. illustrative dfi .

