the federal government offers many opportunities for internships , fellowships , and work experiences .

however , there is no single centralized source for finding information on every opportunity .

this report describes prominent and popular internet resources for such opportunities and gives applicants a place to begin their search .

the internet resources provided are not exhaustive .

applying for an internship or fellowship is similar to applying for admission to a college or university .

the application process takes time and effort , often requiring essays and interviews .

in pursuit of success , applicants typically begin their search early and explore what best suits their interests and career goals .

application deadlines and program durations vary from agency to agency .

applicants often apply to more than one program because competition is stiff , with the number of applicants often far exceeding the number of positions available .

opportunities are generally available in the spring , summer , and fall , with summer positions being the most popular and competitive .

the terms fellowship and internship are sometimes used interchangeably in the names of specific programs .

fellowships are generally intended for persons with advanced degrees or substantial professional experience and are usually salaried positions lasting nine months to a year or more .

internships , which are either salaried or volunteer short - term arrangements , usually require relatively little experience and are often filled by students .

although they are sometimes confused with interns , congressional pages are high school students who serve congress as messengers .

the house page program ceased operations in august 2011 , while the senate still employs pages .

for more information on the senate page program , see its website at https: / / www.senate.gov / reference / reference_index_subjects / pages / vrd.htm .

the duties , responsibilities , and salaries ( if any ) of interns and fellows vary from program to program .

most program responsibilities are substantive in nature and often involve challenging projects .

they may range from conducting legislative research for a congressional office to biomedical research at the national institutes of health .

some programs or universities that offer academic credit may require the intern or fellow to produce a report on the work experience and obtain evaluations from program supervisors .

in addition , some programs lead to federal job placement .

recruitment programs like presidential management fellows and the congressional research service graduate recruit program may offer permanent employment after the successful completion of program requirements .

because program details vary from agency to agency , it is best to consult the appropriate website or to contact the program office directly .

opm administers the government - wide pathways programs , which are composed of two fairly new programs — the internship program and the recent graduates program — and the existing presidential management fellows program .

the website includes program fact sheets and a faqs section .

https: / / www.opm.gov / policy - data - oversight / hiring - information / students - recent - graduates / federal agencies that participate in the pathways programs include the department of housing and urban development , general service administration , and the department of health and human services .

the pathways programs at agencies have specific information on their employee websites , such as the department of state at http: / / careers.state.gov / work / pathways and nasa at http: / / nasajobs.nasa.gov / studentopps / pathways.htm .

this selective bibliography lists more sources of information on internships , fellowships , and summer job opportunities .

the publications can be used to find additional work experience opportunities both inside and outside the federal government .

these works may be available in local libraries or school or college guidance offices .

annotations identify publications that are issued annually .

other publications are updated irregularly ; check with publishers for information on the latest editions .

best intern ever: roll call's guide to acing your internship washington , dc: cq roll call , 2014 , http: / / cdn.videos.rollcall.com / files / hn - best - intern - ever - final.pdf a free e - book , described as the "ultimate capitol hill internship guide," from the cq roll call publishing group .

congressional intern handbook: a guide for interns and newcomers to capitol hill .

washington , dc: congressional management foundation , 2006 , http: / / www.congressfoundation.org / publications / intern - handbook described as a "nuts - and - bolts guide to working in a congressional office," this free , downloadable publication includes a chapter on "finding a job or another internship" on capitol hill .

this handbook is used in many congressional offices .

encyclopedia of associations .

farmington hills , mi: gale cengage .

annual .

this publication can be used to locate organizations by subject area .

when standard internship directories contain no entries for internships in a specific field , relevant groups listed in this publication may be able to suggest contacts for internship opportunities .

this work can be found in many libraries in print or in electronic form in the associations unlimited subscription database .

insider's guide to political internships: what to do once you're in the door .

boulder , co: westview press , 2002 .

this publication provides advice on "surviving and thriving" in political internships , including on capitol hill and in congressional district offices .

vault guide to top internships .

new york , ny: vault .

annual .

this directory profiles internship programs at more than 100 companies , organizations and government agencies .

some of this information is also available on the internship portion of the vault website at http: / / www.vault.com / find_an_internship.aspx .

washington internships : philadelphia , pa: university of pennsylvania press , 2009 .

this book provides information on how to become a valued intern and enhance networking skills .

insider tips are given on such things as how to deal with work related tasks and locating summer housing .

