the continued growth of the internet for personal , government , and business purposes may be affected by a number of technology policy issues being debated by congress .

among them are access to and regulation of broadband ( high - speed ) internet services , computer and internet security , internet privacy , the impact of "spam," concerns about what children may encounter ( such as pornography ) when using the internet , management of the internet domain name system , and government information technology management .

this report provides overviews of those issues , plus appendices providing a list of acronyms , and a discussion of legislation passed in earlier congresses .

other issues that are not directly related to technology could also affect the use and growth of the internet , such as intellectual property rights and internet taxation .

those are not addressed in this report .

this report does not attempt to track legislation .

for more timely information , see the other crs reports identified in the following sections .

a december 2006 survey by the nielsen / net ratings market research firm found that 78% of active home web users connected via broadband during the month of november , up 13 percentage points from 65% of active web users a year ago .

social activities dominate broadband time online: websites for online gaming , instant messaging , e - mail and social networking all made the top 10 list when ranked by average time per person among broadband users at home .

the internet has become an integral part of everyday social life , particularly among children and teenagers .

a spring 2006 pew internet & american life survey found that 48 million americans — mostly those with high - speed access at home — have posted content to the internet .

broadband internet access gives users the ability to send and receive data at speeds far greater than conventional "dial up" internet access over existing telephone lines .

broadband technologies — cable modem , digital subscriber line ( dsl ) , satellite , wireless internet , and fiber — are currently being deployed nationwide by the private sector .

while the numbers of new broadband subscribers continue to grow , some areas of the nation — particularly rural and low - income communities — continue to lack sufficient access to high - speed broadband internet service .

in order to address this problem , the 109 th congress considered , but did not pass , legislation to address the scope and effect of federal broadband financial assistance programs ( including universal service ) , and the impact of regulatory policies and new technologies on broadband deployment .

these issues are anticipated to continue to be a focus of the broadband policy debate in the 110 th congress .

some policymakers , believing that disparities in broadband access across american society could have adverse economic and social consequences on those left behind , assert that the federal government should play a more active role to avoid a "digital divide" in broadband access .

one approach is for the federal government to provide financial assistance to support broadband deployment in underserved areas .

in the 109 th congress , legislation was introduced , but not enacted , to provide financial assistance ( including loans , grants , and tax incentives ) to encourage broadband deployment .

 ( for more information on federal assistance for broadband deployment , see crs report rl30719 , broadband internet access and the digital divide: federal assistance programs , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

others , however , question the reality of the "digital divide," and argue that federal intervention in the broadband marketplace would be premature and , in some cases , counterproductive .

the debate over access to broadband services has prompted policymakers to examine a range of other issues to ensure that broadband will be available on a timely and equal basis to all u.s. citizens .

one facet of this debate focuses on whether present laws and subsequent regulatory policies are needed to ensure the development of competition and its subsequent consumer benefits , or conversely , whether such laws and regulations are overly burdensome and discourage needed investment in and deployment of broadband services .

the regulatory debate focuses on a number of issues including the extent to which legacy regulations should be applied to traditional providers as they enter new markets , the extent to which legacy regulations should be imposed on new entrants as they compete with traditional providers in their markets , and the treatment of new and converging technologies .

for example , present law requires all incumbent local exchange ( telephone ) carriers ( ilecs ) , such as verizon or sbc , to open up their networks to enable competitors to lease out parts of the incumbent's network .

these unbundling and resale requirements , which are detailed in section 251 of the telecommunications act of 1996 , were enacted in an attempt to open up the local telephone network to competitors .

whether such "open access" regulations should be applied to ilecs when they offer new non - dominant services such as broadband connections , or to new market entrants such as cable television companies when they offer services ( such as voice and broadband ) remains under debate .

whether regulators should play a role to ensure that the internet remains open to all , often referred to as "net neutrality" became a major part of and is expected to continue to be , a major focus of the ongoing congressional debate .

equally contentious is the debate over whether legacy regulations , such as the requirement that cable television companies obtain a local franchise as a prerequisite for offering video service , be extended to other entrants , such as telephone companies , if they choose to enter the video market .

a third and related debate surrounds the appropriate regulatory framework that should be imposed on new technologies such as voice over internet protocol ( voip ) and other internet protocol services as well as bundled service offerings .

the regulatory treatment of broadband technologies — whether offered by traditional or emerging providers , or incumbent or new entrants — remains a major focus of the policy debate .

cities , counties , and states have taken up the issue of whether to mandate open access requirements on local cable franchises .

in june 1999 , a federal judge ruled that the city of portland , oregon had the right to require open access to the tele - communications incorporated ( tci ) broadband network as a condition for transferring its local cable television franchise to at&t .

on march 14 , 2002 , the fcc adopted a declaratory ruling which classified cable modem service as an "interstate information service," subject to fcc jurisdiction and largely shielded from local regulation .

after a series of conflicting court decisions the us supreme court in a june 27 , 2005 action ( national cable and telecommunications association v. brand x internet services ) , ruled that the fcc should be given deference in its decision that cable broadband service should be classified as an "interstate information service. .

the classification of cable modem service as an "interstate information service" will result in fcc treatment under the less rigorous title i of the 1934 communications act .

similarly , in an august 5 , 2005 action , the fcc ruled that the regulatory treatment of wireline broadband services will be granted regulatory parity .

the fcc ruled that , subject to a one - year transition period , which expired in august 2006 , wireline broadband internet access services ( commonly delivered by dsl technology ) are defined as information services , thereby placing telephone company dsl services on an equal regulatory footing with cable modem services .

regulatory parity was also granted to broadband over power line ( bpl ) service , when the fcc , in a november 2006 decision , determined that such service would also be classified as an "interstate information service" subject to title i regulation .

finally , emerging broadband technologies — such as fiber , wireless ( including "3g" , "wi - fi" and "wimax" ) , and bpl — continue to be developed and / or deployed , and have the potential to affect the regulatory and market landscape of broadband deployment .

the 110 th congress and the fcc will likely consider policies to address the emergence of these and other new broadband technologies .

in addition , how and to what extent "social regulations" such as 911 requirements , disability access , law enforcement obligations , and universal service support , should be applied to emerging technologies is also under debate .

a related issue , the emergence of municipal broadband networks ( primarily wireless and fiber based ) and the debate over whether such networks constitute unfair competition with the private sector has become a significant policy issue ( for more information on municipal broadband , see crs report rs20993 , wireless technology and spectrum demand: advanced wireless services , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

on october 21 , 2002 , all 13 of the internet's root domain name system servers were targeted by a distributed denial of service attack .

while the attack had little overall effect on the performance of the internet , a more sophisticated and sustainable attack might have had a more deleterious impact .

as use of the internet grows , so has concern about security of and security on the internet .

a long list of security - related incidents that have received wide - ranging media coverage ( e.g .

melissa virus , the love bug , and the code red , nimda , slammer , and blaster worms ) represents the tip of the iceberg .

more recently , hackers using trojan horses and other techniques , were able to place keylogging software on the personal computers of people with online trading accounts to surreptitiously acquire their personal account information .

the hackers used the information to access these personal accounts to buy little known stocks in which they ( the hackers ) had invested , driving up the price .

the thieves then dumped their shares for a profit .

every day , persons gain access , or try to gain access , to someone else's computer without authorization to read , copy , modify , or destroy the information contained within .

these persons range from juveniles to disgruntled ( ex ) employees , to criminals , to competitors , to politically or socially motivated groups , to agents of foreign governments .

the extent of the problem is unknown .

much of what gets reported as computer "attacks" are probes , often conducted automatically with software widely available for even juveniles to use .

but the number of instances where someone has actually gained unauthorized access is not known .

not every person or company whose computer system has been compromised reports it either to the media or to authorities .

sometimes the victim judges the incident not to be worth the trouble .

sometimes the victim may judge that the adverse publicity would be worse .

sometimes the affected parties do not even know their systems have been compromised .

there is some evidence to suggest , however , that the number of incidents is increasing .

according to the computer emergency response team ( cert ) at carnegie - mellon university , the number of incidents reported to it has grown just about every year since the team's establishment — from 132 incidents in 1989 to over 137,000 incidents in 2003 .

since many attacks are now coordinated and cascade throughout the internet , cert no longer tracks the number of incidents reported to them .

while the total number of incidents may be rising exponentially , it is interesting to note that , according to the computer crime and security survey , the percentage of respondents that reported unauthorized use of their computer systems over the previous 12 months has declined since the year 2000 .

the impact on society from the unauthorized access or use of computers is also unknown .

again , some victims may choose not to report losses .

in many cases , it is difficult or impossible to quantify the losses .

but social losses are not zero .

trust in one's system may be reduced .

proprietary and / or customer information ( including credit card numbers ) may be compromised .

any unwanted code must be found and removed .

the veracity of the system's data must be checked and restored if necessary .

money may be stolen from accounts or extorted from the victim .

if disruptions occur , sales may be lost .

if adverse publicity occurs , future sales may be lost and stock prices may be affected .

estimates of the overall financial losses due to unauthorized access vary and are largely speculative .

estimates typically range in the billions of dollars per major event like the love bug virus or the series of denial - of - service attacks of february 2000 .

similar estimates have been made for the code red worms .

estimates of losses internationally range up to the tens of billions of dollars .

in the 2005 computer crime and security survey , 687 responders ( out of a total of 700 ) estimated financial losses totaling $130 million in the previous 12 months .

according to the survey , viruses accounted for the most financial losses ( $43 million ) , followed by loss of proprietary information .

denial of service attacks accounted for $7 million in losses .

two of the online brokers whose customers' accounts were used in the "pump - and - dump" scheme mentioned above reported spending $22 million to compensate their customers .

for more discussion on the economic impact of attacks against computer systems , and the difficulties in measuring it , see crs report rl32331 , the economic impact of cyber - attacks , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

 ( pdf ) aside from the losses discussed above , there is also growing concern that unauthorized access to computer systems could pose an overall national security risk should it result in the disruption of the nation's critical infrastructures ( eg , transportation systems , banking and finance , electric power generation and distribution ) .

these infrastructures rely increasingly on computer networks to operate , and are themselves linked by computer and communication networks .

in february 2003 , the president's critical infrastructure board ( established by president george w. bush through e.o .

13231 but later dissolved by e.o .

13286 ) released a national strategy to secure cyberspace .

the strategy assigned a number of responsibilities for coordinating the protection of the nation's information infrastructure to the department of homeland security .

most of the department's efforts in cybersercurity are managed by the national cyber security division ( ncsd ) within in the preparedness directorate .

as part of the strategy , the ncsd has assumed a major role in raising awareness of the risks associated with computer security among all users , from the home user to major corporations , and to facilitate information exchange between all parties .

to this end numerous cooperative and coordinating groups and fora have been established .

one such activity is u.s. - cert , a cooperative effort by the national cyber security division and carnegie mellon's cert , which among other services and activities , produces alerts of new and existing attacks and guidelines for preventing or responding to them .

congress has shown , and continues to show , a strong interest in the security of computers and the internet .

over the years this interest has been manifested in numerous hearings by a multitude of committees and subcommittees , in both the house and the senate .

legislation has also been passed .

the federal computer fraud and abuse statute ( 18 u.s.c .

1030 ) was initially added as part of the comprehensive crime control act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-473 ) .

this act , as amended , makes it a federal crime to gain unauthorized access to , damage , or use in an illegal manner , protected computer systems ( including federal computers , bank computers , computers used in interstate and foreign commerce ) .

legislation specifically requiring system owners / operators to take actions to protect their computer systems has been confined to executive federal agencies ( most recently , the federal information security management act of 2002 , p.l .

107-347 , title iii ) .

other legislation is primarily aimed at protecting privacy by protecting certain personal information held by government and private sector entities and affects computer security indirectly .

for example , the gramm - leach - bliley act ( p.l .

106-102 , title v ) and the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 ( hippa , p.l .

104-191 , title ii , subtitle f ) require that entities have in place programs that protect the financial and health - related information , respectively , in their possession .

the sarbanes - oxley act of 2002 ( p.p .

107-204 ) also indirectly affects private sector computers and networks , by requiring certain firms to certify the integrity of their financial control systems as part of their annual financial reporting requirements .

to the extent that this information resides on computer systems , these requirements extend to those systems .

congress also supports a number of programs that help develop computer security education , training , and research at selected universities .

for an overview of federal legislation and other federal documents associated with computer and internet security , see crs report rl32357 , computer security: a summary of selected federal laws , executive orders , and presidential directives , by [author name scrubbed] .

it is not clear how these efforts have affected the overall security of the internet .

given the perceived rise in security threats and attacks , there is a general sense that more must be done .

aside from the inherent vulnerabilities associated with highly interconnected information networks , two major sources of vulnerabilities exist: software , and network configuration and management .

operating systems and applications developers say they are paying greater attention to designing better security into their software products .

but it is still common to have vulnerabilities found in products after they have been put on the market .

in some cases , patches have had to be offered at the same time a new product is brought onto the market .

although patches typically are offered to fix these vulnerabilities , many system administrators do not keep their software / configurations current .

many intrusions take advantage of software vulnerabilities noted many months earlier , for which fixes have already been offered .

there are as yet no agreed upon industry standards for determining how secure a firm's computer system should be or for assessing how secure it is in fact .

some observers speculate that it is only a matter of time before owners of computer systems are held responsible for damage done to a third - party computer as a result of inadequately protecting their own systems .

nor are there any agreed upon standards on how secure a vendor's software product should be .

the federal government , in cooperation with a number of other countries , has developed a set of international common criteria for information technology security evaluation , to allow certified laboratories to test security products and rate their level of security for government use .

these criteria may evolve into industry standards for certifying security products .

some in the security community feel that security will not improve without some requirements imposed upon the private sector .

however , both users and vendors of computer software suggest that the market is sufficient to address security in the most cost - effective manner .

the bush administration , as the clinton administration before it , has chosen to use engagement and not regulation to encourage the private sector to improve security .

however , both administrations did not rule out the use of regulation if necessary .

for a discussion of the difficulties associated with setting standards , see crs report rl32777 , creating a national framework for cybersecurity: an analysis of issues and options , by [author name scrubbed] ( pdf ) .

during the 109 th congress , legislation was introduced that , again , primarily addressed privacy issues with indirect impact on computer security .

in light of large losses of personal information through fraud , lost records , and unauthorized access , a number of bills were introduced that extended the requirements to safeguard and protect personal information , similar to that found in gramm - leach - bliley and hippa , to "information brokers" and / or required any organization engaged in interstate commerce holding personal information to inform consumers of any security breach that may have compromised their information .

bills commonly referred to as "spyware" legislation were also introduced .

these topics are discussed in the next section of this report .

the theft of a laptop computer from the home of a employee of the department of veterans affairs in may 2006 , containing personal information of over 20 million military veterans , while not an internet - related incident , renewed focus on the ability of federal agencies to enforce their own information security policies and procedures and to hold agency officials accountable .

such concern led the house to pass the veterans identity and credit security act of 2006 ( h.r .

5835 ) that included amendments to the federal information security management act .

the senate did not take up the bill .

similar activity is expected in the 110 th congress .

concerns related to internet privacy encompass a wide range of issues .

at the center of these issues is how networks can facilitate the collection and transfer of data inexpensively and on a large scale .

while such data transfers can improve the efficiency and effectiveness of services , they can also pose great risk if the information is not appropriately protected .

one example is the surreptitious installation of software ( "spyware" ) by website operators to collect personally identifiable information ( pii ) and share that information with third parties , usually without the knowledge or consent of the people concerned .

another example is identity theft , which is a form of fraud in which the personal identifying information of an individual , such as a social security number , name , or date of birth , is co - opted by another person to facilitate committing a criminal or fraudulent act by impersonating the victim .

one aspect of increased use of the internet for electronic mail ( e - mail ) has been the advent of unsolicited advertising , also called "unsolicited commercial e - mail ( uce ) ," "unsolicited bulk e - mail," "junk e - mail , "or "spam. .

complaints focus on the fact that some spam contains or has links to pornography , that much of it is fraudulent , that it is a nuisance , and the volume is increasing .

although consumers are most familiar with spam on their personal computers , it also is becoming an issue in text messaging on wireless telephones and personal digital assistants ( pdas ) .

in 2003 , congress passed a federal anti - spam law , the can - spam act ( p.l .

108-187 ) , which became effective on january 1 , 2004 .

the act preempts state laws that specifically address spam but not state laws that are not specific to e - mail , such as trespass , contract , or tort law , or other state laws to the extent they relate to fraud or computer crime .

it does not ban unsolicited commercial e - mail .

rather , it allows marketers to send commercial e - mail as long as it conforms with the law , such as including a legitimate opportunity for consumers to "opt - out" of receiving future commercial e - mails from that sender .

it does not require a centralized "do not e - mail" registry to be created by the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , similar to the national do not call registry for telemarketing .

the law requires only that the ftc develop a plan and timetable for establishing a "do not e - mail" registry and to inform congress of any concerns it has with regard to establishing it .

the ftc reported to congress in june 2004 that without a technical system to authenticate the origin of e - mail messages , a registry would not reduce the amount of spam , and , in fact , might increase it .

authentication is a technical approach that could be used to control spam that is under study by a number of groups , including isps , who are attempting to develop a single authentication standard for the industry .

additionally , the can - spam act included a provision requiring the fcc to establish regulations to protect wireless consumers from spam .

many argue that technical approaches , such as authentication , and consumer education , are needed to solve the spam problem — that legislation alone is insufficient .

nonetheless , there is considerable interest in assessing how effective the can - spam act is in reducing spam .

the effectiveness of the law may be difficult to determine , however , if for no other reason than there are various definitions of spam .

proponents of the law argue that consumers are most irritated by fraudulent e - mail , and that the law should reduce the volume of such e - mail because of the civil and criminal penalties included therein .

skeptics counter that consumers object to unsolicited commercial e - mail , and since the bill legitimizes commercial e - mail ( as long as it conforms with the law's provisions ) , consumers actually may receive more , not fewer , unsolicited commercial e - mail messages .

thus , whether "spam" is reduced depends in part on how it is defined .

in december 2005 , the ftc submitted a report to congress , as required under the can - spam act , on the act's effectiveness and enforcement , and whether any changes are needed .

based on information from isps , the general public , e - marketers , law enforcers , and technologists , the report concluded that the act has been effective in two areas: legitimate online marketers have adopted the "best practices" mandated by the act , and the act provides an additional tool for law enforcement officials and isps to bring suits against spammers .

however , it also concluded that some aspects of the spam problem have not changed , such as its international dimension .

it also reported on a number of "troubling" changes in the e - mail landscape , such as the inclusion of malicious content ( "malware" ) in spam messages .

the report outlined three steps to further improve the effectiveness of the act: passage of legislation to improve the ftc's ability to trace spammers and sellers who operate outside u.s. borders ; continued consumer education ; and continued improvement in anti - spam technologies , especially domain - level authentication .

most recently , the 109 th congress passed the undertaking spam , spyware , and fraud enforcement with enforcers beyond borders act of 2005 ( us safe web ) ( p.l .

109-455 ) .

the bill allows the ftc and parallel foreign law enforcement agencies to share information while investigating allegations of "unfair and deceptive practices" that involve foreign commerce , but raised some privacy concerns because the ftc would not be required to make public any of the information it obtained through foreign sources .

preventing children from encountering unsuitable material as they use the web has been a major congressional concern for many years .

in response to this concern , congress has passed such laws as the 1996 communications decency act ( cda ) , the 1998 child online protection act ( copa ) , and the 2000 children's internet protection act ( cipa ) , all of which dealt in some way with the content found on the internet .

more recently , however , additional attention has been given to protecting children from exploitation and predators on the internet .

for example , in the last few years , social networking sites , such as myspace , have become popular with teenagers and young adults .

unfortunately , there have been a number of incidents recently in which children were abducted and / or lured to meet adults over these services .

because of these incidents , congress began exploring ways to limit children's access to these sites , or at least to limit the ability of adults to contact children .

during the 109 th congress , h.r .

5319 , the deleting online predators act of 2006 ( dopa ) , would have amended the communications act of 1934 to prohibit schools and libraries receiving "e - rate" funding from providing access to these types of websites to minors .

the proposal was controversial because the definition of social networking sites could potentially limit access to a wide range of websites , including many with harmless or educational material .

although this bill did not pass , this issue is likely to receive continued attention in the 110 th congress .

"data retention" is another topic that is likely to receive continued attention from policymakers in the 110 th congress .

data retention is the practice of isps maintaining electronic records of subscriber activity , regardless of whether those records have been identified as being needed for an ongoing investigation .

at this time , isps typically discard records that log subscriber activity when those records are no longer required for business purposes ( eg , network monitoring , billing disputes ) .

however , law enforcement agencies have expressed that they would like data to be retained for longer periods — in general , the time periods suggested have ranged from one to two years — to ensure they can successfully prosecute online child predators and individuals producing and downloading child pornography .

proposals that have been discussed range from simply maintaining records of what websites subscribers visit to requiring the storage of the contents of e - mail messages and individual web pages visited .

isps have expressed a number of concerns , including the cost of retaining the data , web content being included in data retention legislation , and the privacy and security risks of having such a massive data warehouse available .

opponents of such legislation note that current law already allows law enforcement agencies to mandate data retention for 90-days ; further , privacy advocates are concerned that police would potentially be able to obtain records of e - mail chatter , web browsing , or chat room activity that normally are discarded .

the 110 th congress will continue to monitor issues related to the internet domain name system ( dns ) .

internet domain names were created to provide users with a simple location name for computers on the internet , rather than using the more complex , unique internet protocol ( ip ) number that designates their specific location .

as the internet has grown , the method for allocating and designating domain names has become increasingly controversial .

the evolving role of the internet in the political economy of the united states continues to attract increased congressional attention to government information technology management issues .

interest has been further heightened by national information infrastructure development efforts , e - government projects , and homeland security initiatives .

although wide - ranging , some of the most significant information technology management challenges facing the federal government include fcc regulation of converging technologies , funding for information technology research and development , ongoing development and oversight of electronic government ( e - government ) initiatives , and the growing use of open source software by federal agencies .

one of the most significant issues facing the fcc is the evolution of the communications industry towards an all - digital , broadband world that has blurred the distinctions between services , also called "convergence. .

the fcc has restructured over the past few years to better reflect the realities of convergence , but the agency is still required to adhere to the statutory requirements of its governing legislation , the communications act of 1934 .

thus , while convergence has made distinguishing among types of data increasingly difficult , the fcc must continue to differentiate among services based on the distinctions drawn in the 1934 act .

unfortunately , when all data looks the same and functionally similar services are provided by companies governed by different titles of the 1934 act , questions of fairness and competitive advantage may arise .

as newer technologies and services are developed and deployed , applying legacy regulations to them may begin to appear more strained .

the fcc has continued to address a number of issues directly related to convergence: the regulatory classification of services via the internet protocol ( eg , voice over internet protocol [voip] ) and law enforcement's ability to conduct wiretaps effectively ( i.e. , using the communications assistance for law enforcement act [calea] ) .

during the 110 th congress , as there was during the 109 th congress , there may be legislation to enact a national franchising system for video service providers .

if so , this will likely require additional attention from the fcc as well .

the fcc will also remain focused on broadband deployment .

the agency will continue to monitor its policies to encourage new providers to roll out new services ( eg , power companies will be deploying broadband over powerlines [bpl] ) as well as continue to promote deployment to underserved areas and populations , i.e. , rural and low - income communities , through universal service and other programs ( eg , the e - rate ) .

one of the difficulties in addressing the issues facing the fcc is that so many of them now intersect .

so many of the broadband issues are inter - related that it is often difficult to sort out where one issue ends and another begins .

for example , voip , calea , and bpl are all tied to the concept of broadband convergence and reliance on the internet for information and it becomes difficult , if not impossible , to discuss one without touching on the others .

effectively addressing these types of issues may well be the greatest challenge facing both the fcc and congress in the near future .

at the federal level , almost all of the funding for information science and technology and internet development is part of a single government - wide initiative , the networking and information technology research and development program ( nitrd ) .

this program was previously ( 1997-2000 ) called the computing , information , and communications program ( cic ) and , prior to that ( 1992-1997 ) , the high performance computing and communications program ( hpcc ) .

the nitrd is an interagency effort to coordinate key advances in information technology ( it ) research and leverage funding into broader advances in computing and networking technologies .

under the nitrd , participating agencies receive support for high - performance computing science and technology , information technology software and hardware , networks and internet - driven applications , and education and training for personnel .

the fy2007 budget calls for $3.074 billion for the nitrd program , an increase of $0.21 billion over the fy2006 budget estimate of $2.855 billion .

research emphases are focused on eight program component areas ( also called pcas ) : high - end computing ( hec ) infrastructure and applications , hec research and development , cyber security and information assurance , human computer interaction and information management , large scale networking , software design and productivity , high confidence software and systems , and social , economic , and workforce implications of it and it workforce development .

key issues facing congressional policymakers include whether nitrd is accomplishing its goals and objectives to enhance u.s. information technology research and development , whether the funding level is appropriate or should be changed to reflect changing u.s. priorities , and defining the private sector's role in this initiative .

electronic government ( e - government ) is an evolving concept , meaning different things to different people .

however , it has significant relevance to four important areas of governance: ( 1 ) delivery of services ( government - to - citizen , or g2c ) ; ( 2 ) providing information ( also g2c ) ; ( 3 ) facilitating the procurement of goods and services ( government - to - business , or g2b , and business - to - government , or b2g ) ; and ( 4 ) facilitating efficient exchanges within and between agencies ( government - to - government , or g2g ) .

for policymakers concerned about e - government , a central area of concern is developing a comprehensive but flexible strategy to coordinate the disparate e - government initiatives across the federal government .

the movement to put government online raises as many issues as it provides new opportunities .

some of these issues include , but are not limited to: security , privacy , management of governmental technology resources , accessibility of government services ( including "digital divide" concerns as a result of a lack of skills or access to computers , discussed earlier ) , and preservation of public information ( maintaining comparable freedom of information procedures for digital documents as exist for paper documents ) .

although these issues are neither new nor unique to e - government , they do present the challenge of performing governance functions online without sacrificing the accountability of , or public access to , government that citizens have grown to expect .

some industry groups have also raised concerns about the u.s. government becoming a publicly funded market competitor through the provision of fee - for - services such as the u.s .

postal service's now - discontinued ebillpay service , which allowed consumers to schedule and make payments to creditors online http: / / www.usps.com / paymentservices / ops_discontinued.htm .

e - government initiatives vary significantly in their breadth and depth from state to state and agency to agency .

perhaps one of the most well - known federal examples is the firstgov website http: / / www.firstgov.gov , which first went online on september 22 , 2000 .

firstgov is a web portal designed to serve as a single locus point for finding federal government information on the internet .

the firstgov site also provides access to a variety of state and local government resources .

another example is the grants.gov initiative http: / / www.grants.gov / , which is designed to provide a single portal for all available federal grants , enabling users to search , download applications , and apply for grants online .

at the department of treasury , the internal revenue service ( irs ) administers the free file initiative http: / / www.irs.gov / efile / article / 0,,id=118986,00.html , which has partnered with industry to provide free online tax preparation and electronic filing services for eligible taxpayers .

pursuant to the july 18 , 2001 , omb memorandum m - 01-28 , an e - government task force was established to create a strategy for achieving the bush administration's e - government goals .

in doing so , the task force identified 23 interagency initiatives designed to better integrate agency operations and information technology investments .

these initiatives , sometimes referred to as the quicksilver projects , are grouped into four categories ; government - to - citizen , government - to - government , government - to - business , and internal effectiveness and efficiency .

examples of these initiatives include an e - authentication project led by the general services administration ( gsa ) to increase the use of digital signatures , the eligibility assistance online project ( also referred to as govbenefits.gov ) led by the department of labor to create a common access point for information regarding government benefits available to citizens , and the small business administration's one - stop business compliance project , being designed to help businesses navigate legal and regulatory requirements .

a 24 th initiative , a government wide payroll process project , was subsequently added by the president's management council .

in 2002 the e - clearance initiative , originally included as part of the enterprise human resources integration project , was established as a separate project , for a total of 25 initiatives .

since that time , the bush administration has reclassified the e - authentication initiative as "a separate initiative that provides secure and robust authentication services to the 24 [i]nitiatives," bringing the official tally again to 24 initiatives .

as the initial round of e - government projects has matured , omb has focused attention on initiatives that consolidate information technology systems in nine functional areas , or lines of business ( lob ) .

these include financial management , human resource management , grants management , case management , federal health architecture , information security , budget formulation and evaluation , geospatial systems , and information technology infrastructure .

these initiatives were chosen , in part , because they represent core business functions common to many departments and agencies , and / or have the potential to reap significant efficiency and efficacy gains .

these lob initiatives are anticipated to create $5 billion in savings over 10 years .

on december 17 , 2002 , president bush signed the e - government act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-347 ) into law .

the law contains a variety of provisions related to federal government information technology management , information security , and the provision of services and information electronically .

one of the most recognized provisions involves the creation of an office of electronic government within omb .

the office is headed by an administrator , who is responsible for carrying out a variety of information resources management ( irm ) functions , as well as administering the interagency e - government fund provided for by the law .

for the 110 th congress , continued oversight of the quicksilver projects , the implementation of the e - government act , and the development and funding of the second generation lines of business e - government initiatives are the primary oversight issues .

other issues include ongoing efforts to develop a federal enterprise architecture , which serves as a blueprint of the business functions of an organization , and the technology used to carry out these functions http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / egov / a - 1-fea.html ; the recruitment and retention of it managers , at both the chief information officer ( cio ) and project manager levels ; and balancing the sometimes competing demands of e - government and homeland security .

the use of open source software by the federal government has been gaining attention as organizations continue to search for opportunities to enhance their information technology ( it ) operations while containing costs .

a growing number of state and local governments have also been exploring the official adoption of open source software .

likewise , open source software may also play a role in the growth of regional health information organizations ( rhios ) , as part of an effort to spread the use of e - health records .

for the federal government and congress , the debate over the use of open source software intersects several other issues , including , but not limited to , the development of homeland security and e - government initiatives , improving government information technology management practices , strengthening computer security , and protecting intellectual property rights .

in the 110 th congress , the debate over open source software is anticipated to revolve primarily around information security and intellectual property rights , including the possible development of a legal definition of open source software .

however , issues related to cost and quality are likely to be raised as well .

open source software refers to a computer program whose source code , or programming instructions , is made available to the general public to be improved or modified as the user wishes .

some examples of open source software include the linux operating system and apache web server software .

in contrast , closed source , or proprietary , programs are those whose source code is not made available and can only be altered by the software manufacturer .

in the case of closed source software , updates to a program are usually distributed in the form of a patch or as a new version of the program that the user can install but not alter .

some examples of closed source software include microsoft word and corel wordperfect .

the majority of software products most commonly used , such as operating systems , word processing programs , and databases , are closed source programs .

for proponents , open source software is often viewed as a means to reduce an organization's dependence on the software products of a few companies while possibly improving the security and stability of one's computing infrastructure .

for critics , open source software is often viewed as a threat to intellectual property rights with unproven cost and quality benefits .

so far there appear to be no systematic analyses available that have conclusively compared closed source to open source software on the issue of security .

in practice , computer security is highly dependent on how an application is configured , maintained , and monitored .

similarly , the costs of implementing an open source solution are dependent upon factors such as the cost of acquiring the hardware / software , investments in training for it personnel and end users , maintenance and support costs , and the resources required to convert data and applications to work in the new computing environment .

consequently , some computer experts suggest that it is not possible to conclude that either open source or closed source software is inherently more secure or more cost efficient .

the official u.s. federal government policy regarding the use of open source software by government agencies is described in a july 2004 office of management and budget ( omb ) memorandum on software acquisition , m - 04-16 memoranda for senior procurement executives , chief information officers , software acquisition .

the memorandum states that the policies guiding government information technology investment decisions are "technology and vendor neutral" and that agencies' technology choices "must be consistent with the agency's enterprise architecture and the federal enterprise architecture. .

agencies are also instructed to take into account a number of other merit - based factors , including information security , licensing requirements , and total cost of ownership .

implicit in these requirements is an expectation that agencies will also make choices based on the quality of the product .

the growing emphasis on improved information security and critical infrastructure protection overall , will likely be an influential factor in future decisions to implement open source solutions .

the rapidly changing computer environment may also foster the use of a combination of open source and closed source applications , rather than creating a need to choose one option at the exclusion of another .

appendix a .

list of acronyms alphabetical listing categorical listing appendix b .

legislation passed by the 105 th - 109 th congresses during the years that this report has been published ( since the 105 th congress ) , various topics have been covered based on congressional interest and action .

some of those issues continue to be of interest to congress and are discussed in this edition of the report .

others , however , appear to be resolved from a congressional point of view , and therefore are not discussed in the main text .

nevertheless , it appears useful to retain information about legislation that passed on those subjects .

following is such a summary of all laws that have been tracked in this report over the years , by topic .

tables showing which laws were passed in each congress appear at the end of this section .

broadband internet access the farm security and rural investment act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-171 , section 6103 ) authorizes the secretary of agriculture to make loans and loan guarantees to eligible entities for facilities and equipment providing broadband service in rural communities .

the national science foundation authorization act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-368 , section 18 ( d ) ) directs the national science foundation to conduct a study of broadband network access for schools and libraries .

the commercial spectrum enhancement ac t ( title ii of h.r .

5419 , p.l .

108-494 ) seeks to make more spectrum available for wireless broadband and other services by facilitating the reallocation of spectrum from government to commercial users .

the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ) , title iii sets a hard deadline for the digital television transition , thereby reclaiming analog television spectrum to be auctioned for commercial applications such as wireless broadband .

computer security the computer crime enforcement act ( p.l .

106-572 ) establishes department of justice grants to state and local authorities to help them investigate and prosecute computer crimes .

the law authorizes the expenditure of $25 million for the grant program through fy2004 .

the fy2001 department of defense authorization act ( p.l .

106-398 ) includes language that originated in s. 1993 to modify the paperwork reduction act and other relevant statutes concerning computer security of government systems , codifying agency responsibilities regarding computer security .

internet privacy ( including identity theft ) the identity theft and assumption deterrence act ( p.l .

105-318 ) sets penalties for persons who knowingly , and with the intent to commit unlawful activities , possess , transfer , or use one or more means of identification not legally issued for use to that person .

language in the fy2001 transportation appropriations act ( p.l .

106-246 ) and the fy2001 treasury - general government appropriations act ( included as part of the fy2001 consolidated appropriations act , p.l .

106-554 ) addresses website information collection practices by departments and agencies .

section 501 of the fy2001 transportation appropriations act prohibits funds in the fy2001 treasury - general government appropriations act from being used by any federal agency to collect , review , or create aggregate lists that include personally identifiable information ( pii ) about an individual's access to or use of a federal website , or enter into agreements with third parties to do so , with exceptions .

section 646 of the fy2001 treasury - general government appropriations act requires inspectors general of agencies or departments covered in that act to report to congress within 60 days of enactment on activities by those agencies or departments relating to the collection of pii about individuals who access any internet site of that department or agency , or entering into agreements with third parties to obtain pii about use of government or non - government websites .

the internet false identification prevention act ( p.l .

106-578 ) updates existing law against selling or distributing false identification documents to include those sold or distributed through computer files , templates , and disks .

it also requires the attorney general and secretary of the treasury to create a coordinating committee to ensure that the creation and distribution of false ids is vigorously investigated and prosecuted .

the usa patriot act ( p.l .

107-56 ) , passed in the wake of the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , inter alia expands law enforcement's authority to monitor internet activities .

the cyber security enhancement act , included as section 225 of the homeland security act ( p.l .

107-296 ) , amends the usa patriot act to further loosen restrictions on internet service providers ( isps ) as to when , and to whom , they can voluntarily release information about subscribers .

prior to the terrorist attacks , concern had focused on the opposite issue — whether law enforcement officials might be overstepping their authority when using a software program named carnivore ( later renamed dcs 1000 ) to monitor internet activities .

although the usa patriot act expands law enforcement's authority to monitor internet activities , congress also passed a provision in the 21 st century department of justice authorization act ( p.l .

107-273 , section 305 ) requiring the justice department to notify congress about its use of carnivore or similar systems .

the e - government act ( p.l .

107-347 ) , inter alia , sets requirements on government agencies as to how they assure the privacy of personal information in government information systems and establishes guidelines for privacy policies for federal websites .

the intelligence reform and terrorism protection ac t ( p.l .

108-458 ) was passed largely in response to recommendations from the 9 / 11 commission , which investigated the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks .

among its many provisions , the act creates a privacy and civil liberties oversight board ( section 1061 ) , composed of five members , two of whom ( the chairman and vice - chairman ) must be confirmed by the senate .

the board's mandate is to ensure that privacy and civil liberties are not neglected when implementing terrorism - related laws , regulations , and policies .

the 9 / 11 commission had recommended creation of such a board because of concern that the usa patriot act , enacted soon after the attacks , shifts the balance of power to the government .

spam: unsolicited commercial e - mail the can - spam act , p.l .

108-187 , sets civil or criminal penalties if senders of commercial e - mail do not provide a legitimate opportunity for recipients to "opt - out" of receiving further commercial e - mail from the sender , if they use deceptive subject headings , if they use fraudulent information in the header of the message , if they "harvest" e - mail addresses from the internet or use "dictionary attacks" to create e - mail addresses , if they access someone else's computer without authorization and use it to send multiple commercial e - mail messages , or engage in certain other activities connected with sending "spam. .

spam is variously defined by participants in the debate as unsolicited commercial e - mail , unwanted commercial e - mail , or fraudulent commercial e - mail .

the can - spam act preempts state laws that specifically regulate electronic mail , but not other state laws , such as trespass , contract , or tort law , or other state laws to the extent they relate to fraud or computer crime .

it authorizes , but does not require , the federal trade commission to establish a centralized "do not e - mail" list similar to the national do not call list for telemarketing .

the ftc has concluded that a do not e - mail list is not feasible at this time .

the undertaking spam , spyware , and fraud enforcement with enforcers beyond borders act of 2005 ( us safe web ) , p.l .

109-455 would allow the federal trade commission and parallel foreign law enforcement agencies to share information while investigating allegations of "unfair and deceptive practices" that involve foreign commerce .

internet domain names the next generation internet research act ( p.l .

105-305 ) directs the national academy of sciences to conduct a study of the short - and long - term effects on trademark rights of adding new generation top - level domains and related dispute resolution procedures .

the anticybersquatting consumer protection act ( part of the fy2000 consolidated appropriations act , p.l .

106-113 ) gives courts the authority to order the forfeiture , cancellation , and / or transfer of domain names registered in "bad faith" that are identical or similar to trademarks .

the act provides for statutory civil damages of at least $1,000 , but not more than $100,000 per domain name identifier .

the dot kids implementation and efficiency act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-317 ) directs the national telecommunications and information administration of the department of commerce to require the .us registry operator to establish , operate , and maintain a second level domain that is restricted to material suitable for minors .

the protect act ( p.l .

108-21 ) contains a provision ( sec .

108 , misleading domain names on the internet ) that makes it a punishable crime to knowingly use a misleading domain name with the intent to deceive a person into viewing obscenity on the internet .

increased penalties are provided for deceiving minors into viewing harmful material .

 ( crs report rs21328 , internet: status report on legislative attempts to protect children from unsuitable material on the web , by [author name scrubbed] , provides further information on this and other legislative efforts to protect children from unsuitable material on the internet. ) .

the fraudulent online identity sanctions act ( title ii of the intellectual property protection and courts amendments act of 2004 , p.l .

108-482 ) increases criminal penalties for those who submit false contact information when registering a domain name that is subsequently used to commit a crime or engage in copyright or trademark infringement .

the adam walsh child protection and safety act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-248 ) increases the penalty from 4 to 10 years' imprisonment for persons who knowingly use a misleading domain name with the intent to deceive a minor into viewing harmful material .

protecting children from unsuitable material and predators on the internet the child online protection act , title xiv of division c of the fy1999 omnibus appropriations act , p.l .

105-277 ) , made it a crime to send material over the web that is "harmful to minors" to children .

similar language was also included in the internet tax freedom act ( title xi of division c of the same act ) .

called "cda ii" by some in reference to the communications decency act that passed congress in 1996 , but was overturned by the supreme court , the bill restricted access to commercial material that is "harmful to minors" distributed on the world wide web to those 17 and older .

this act also was challenged in the courts .

see crs report 98-670 , obscenity , child pornography , and indecency: brief background and recent developments , by [author name scrubbed] , for a summary of court actions .

the children ' s online privacy protection act ( title xiii of division c of the fy1999 omnibus appropriations act , p.l .

105-277 ) , requires verifiable parental consent for the collection , use , or dissemination of personally identifiable information from children under 13 .

the protection of children from sexual predators act ( p.l .

105-314 ) is a broad law addressing concerns about sexual predators .

among its provisions are increased penalties for anyone who uses a computer to persuade , entice , coerce , or facilitate the transport of a child to engage in prohibited sexual activity , a requirement that internet service providers report to law enforcement if they become aware of child pornography activities , a requirement that federal prisoners using the internet be supervised , and a requirement for a study by the national academy of sciences on how to reduce the availability to children of pornography on the internet .

the children ' s internet protection act ( title xvii of the fy2001 labor - hhs appropriations act , included in the fy2001 consolidated appropriations act , p.l .

106-554 ) requires most schools and libraries that receive federal funding through title iii of the elementary and secondary education act , the museum and library services act , or "e - rate" subsidies from the universal service fund , to use technology protection measures ( filtering software or other technologies ) to block certain websites when computers are being used by minors , and in some cases , by adults .

when minors are using the computers , the technology protection measure must block access to visual depictions that are obscene , child pornography , or harmful to minors .

when others are using the computers , the technology must block visual depictions that are obscene or are child pornography .

the technology protection measure may be disabled by authorized persons to enable access for bona fide research or other lawful purposes .

e - government the e - government act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-347 ) amends title 44 u.s.c .

by adding chapter 36 — management and promotion of electronic government services , and chapter 37 — information technology management program , which includes a variety of provisions related to information technology management and the provision of e - government services .

among its provisions , the law establishes an office of electronic government in the office of management and budget to be headed by an administrator appointed by the president .

it also authorizes $345 million through fy2006 for an e - government fund to support initiatives , including interagency and intergovernmental projects , that involve the "development and implementation of innovative uses of the internet or other electronic methods , to conduct activities electronically. .

additionally , the law includes language that re - authorizes and amends the government information security reform act ( gisra ) , establishes an information technology worker exchange program between the federal government and the private sector , promotes the use of share - in - savings procurement contracts , and establishes coordination and oversight policies for the protection of confidential information and statistical efficiency ( the confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act of 2002 ) .

intellectual property congress passed the digital millennium copyright act ( p.l .

105-304 ) implementing the world intellectual property organization ( wipo ) treaties regarding protection of copyright on the internet .

the law also limits copyright infringement liability for online service providers that serve only as conduits of information .

electronic and digital signatures the government paperwork elimination act ( title xvii of division c of the omnibus appropriations act , p.l .

105-277 ) directs the office of management and budget to develop procedures for the use and acceptance of "electronic" signatures ( of which digital signatures are one type ) by executive branch agencies .

the millennium digital commerce act ( p.l .

106-229 ) regulates internet electronic commerce by permitting and encouraging its continued expansion through the operation of free market forces , including the legal recognition of electronic signatures and electronic records .

electronic commerce the internet tax nondiscrimination act ( p.l .

107-75 ) extended the internet tax moratorium through november 1 , 2003 .

facing expiration of that moratorium , congress passed the internet tax non - discrimination act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-435 ) .

among its provisions , the act: 1 ) extended the e - commerce tax moratorium for four years , from november 1 , 2003 through november 1 , 2007 ; 2 ) expanded the definition of internet access to include both providers and buyers of internet access ; 3 ) grandfathered through november 1 , 2007 , internet access taxes enforced before october 1 , 1998 ; 4 ) similarly grandfathered through november 1 , 2005 internet access taxes enforced before november 1 , 2003 ; and 5 ) excluded voice over internet protocol ( voip ) and similar voice services .

