climate change policy actions are underway at state , federal , regional , and international levels .

as a party to the united nations framework convention on climate change , the united states committed to the objective of achieving "stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system" ; and to preparing "national action plans" to address emissions of greenhouse gases .

the domestic debate intensified with the negotiations relating to the kyoto protocol , agreed to in december , 1997 .

specifically , under the terms of the kyoto protocol , the united states would have committed to reducing its average annual net carbon - equivalent emissions of six gases — carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , nitrous oxide , methane , perfluorocarbons , hydrofluorocarbons , and sulfur hexafluoride — by 7% below 1990 levels ( 1995 for the fluorinated gases ) over the five - year period 2008-2012 .

if it had been ratified by the senate , the kyoto agreement would have moved the debate beyond the mix of "study," "no regrets," and "voluntary actions" policies of the george h. w. bush , clinton , and george w. bush administrations .

the clinton administration , however , never submitted the kyoto protocol to the senate , and subsequently president george w. bush rejected it outright .

in lieu of the approach of the kyoto protocol , featuring binding commitments to reduce emissions by developed and transitional nations , president george w. bush proposed a two - pronged approach: one to focus on further research and development to better characterize global climate change and its causes , the other to reduce the amount of greenhouse gases emitted per unit of economic activity through voluntary actions .

in addition , on july 27 , 2005 , the bush administration announced formation of a six - nation asia - pacific partnership on clean development and climate ( app ) , with the goal of meeting "national pollution reduction , energy security and climate change concerns , consistent with the principles of the u.n .

framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) " through "a voluntary , non - legally binding framework for international cooperation. .

additionally , in may , 2007 , the president announced that the united states would convene a meeting of the world's "major economies" that are responsible for most greenhouse gas emissions .

held in september , 2007 , the final statements of the "major economies meeting on energy security and climate change" emphasized the need to integrate such meetings into the overall unfccc negotiations .

the u.s. summary of the meeting focused on the "aspirational" nature of reduction goals , reflecting the administration's rejection of mandatory reduction targets .

a second meeting was held in january , 2008 .

meanwhile , the congress engaged in oversight and consideration of legislative initiatives .

a bill addressing climate change , s. 2191 , reached the senate floor in 2008 , but after a series of parliamentary maneuvers , the senate failed to invoke cloture .

with the new administration taking office in january 2009 , changes in congressional membership , and new chairman of a key house committee , energy and commerce , new legislative initiatives are expected for the 111 th congress .

because of the uncertainties associated with global climate change — the extent to which global climate change is occurring , what the effects might be and their magnitude , the economic and social consequences that would follow from actions to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases , the relationships between emissions and economic activity , the costs of actions or of taking no action , the time frame of impacts , etc. — each individual's perception of what , if anything , to do is strongly influenced by personal and community values ; perceptions of human progress and adaptability ; experience , education and training ; and outlook in how to cope with risks and uncertainty .

these differing perspectives of persons affect their observations and interpretations of the issue , influencing their decisions on whether policy interventions are necessary and , if so , what kinds of intervention .

at the same time , personal perspectives can change ; new knowledge , education , and / or moral suasion may impact on policymaking and individual and corporate behavior , and may also be necessary to create conditions for successfully implementing initiatives relating to climate change .

the many personal proclivities and professional constructs that help shape an individual's perspectives on environmental issues in general , and global climate change in particular , can be grouped into three perspectives that affect proposed policies .

these perspectives , which can intertwine and overlap , are: that environmental problems are the result of inappropriate or misused technologies , and that the solutions to the problems lie in improving or correcting technology ; that environmental problems are the result of market failures , and that the solutions to the problems lie in ensuring that market decisions take into account all costs , including environmental damages ; and that environmental problems result from a combination of ignorance of , indifference to , and even disregard for , the ecosystem on which human life ultimately depends , as well as for the other living creatures that share the planet ; and that the solutions to environmental problems lie in developing an understanding of and a respect for that ecosystem and in providing mechanisms for people to express the priority they place on the environment in their daily choices .

each of these perspectives can be considered a "lens" through which individuals and policy communities view the issue — a lens that provides a particular focus on the nature of the problem and for the kinds of actions to solve it .

for shorthand , they might be termed the technological lens , the economic lens , and the ecological lens , respectively .

each perspective and its associated policy approaches generally are sufficiently distinct that a dominating tendency in policy options can be discerned .

as policy frameworks , these lenses incorporate terminology and methods associated with diverse academic disciplines and professions , including not only engineering , economics , and ecological sciences , but also various social sciences , jurisprudence , theology , and others .

as policy frameworks , they should not be confused with any one academic discipline or profession ; rather , they are perspectives on policymaking , on how to focus on a policy issue .

while the lenses can be analyzed as distinct perspectives , most of the time for most people they represent predilections rather than conscious alternatives .

the lenses differ primarily in what aspects of the issue come into focus , resulting in some being magnified , others obscured , or even distorted .

the appropriateness of this focusing is dependent on the characteristics of the specific issue and the orientation of the policymaker .

thus , a policymaker viewing global climate change through one lens — say , the technological lens — is not necessarily disregarding economic or ecological factors , although these factors tend to lie outside , and may be less discernible , than the more clear focus on technological options .

ultimately , given the diversity of policymakers and the potential overlapping of viewpoints , any global climate policy considered will likely involve a mix of initiatives representing all of the perspectives .

such a mix may reflect mutual accommodation as much as conscious agreement that a combination of approaches better ensures progress toward mitigation goals .

the purpose here is not to suggest that one lens is superior to another , but rather to articulate the differing perspectives in order to facilitate communication among different parties and interests .

each of the three lenses implies fundamentally different ways of assessing policy actions to address global climate change .

crucial variations emerge in perspectives on cost analysis , scientific uncertainty , and the role of government .

the technological , economic , and ecological "lenses" represent ways of viewing responses to environmental problems .

none is inherently more "right" or "correct" than another ; rather , they overlap and to varying degrees complement and conflict with each other .

most people hold to each of the lenses in varying degrees and combinations .

for example , a person who is quite concerned about the potential of global climate change from an ecological perspective , but concerned also about the economic costs and the effectiveness of a reduction program , might see a "no regrets" policy as most prudent under the circumstances .

in contrast , an ecological perspective combined with a strong technological perspective would see no reason for not pushing forward with a strong reduction program without delay .

a third possibility could be a risk aversion perspective deriving from cost - benefit concerns combined with a technological perspective , a combination that could lead one to a strong research and development program combined with phased - in and selective technological incentives based on potential cost - effectiveness .

the combination of possibilities are many , depending on the depth of commitment to any one perspective or to any particular aspect ( seriousness , effectiveness , costs ) of the problem .

table 3 summarizes the three lenses identified in this report .

as indicated , they reflect differing assumptions about the nature of the problem , the means to a solution , and the governmental role in crafting that solution .

the lenses are not mutually exclusive , but rather reflect differing emphases on what is a very complex issue .

these different emphases can be seen when examining the lenses according to different policymaking criteria ; the governmental role differs substantially between the lenses .

in actual implementation , any global climate change response would involve the government in multiple roles: promoting new technology , ensuring that the marketplace functions properly , and educating the public .

table 4 presents other policymaking criteria .

once again , one sees conflict and complementarity across the different lenses .

eliminating non - market barriers can be a key to technological development , a removal that those peering through the economic lens would likely see as appropriate , although difficult .

similarly , those employing the technological lens have no objection to the ecological orientation of those using that lens , although they might question the need for such considerations — especially since those looking through the ecological lens might demand such thorough analysis of the implications of new technologies that its costs of development could be greatly increased or its adoption might be delayed .

however , those viewing through the economic lens might object to the perspective given by the ecological lens , if it were to give weight to values or concerns that could not be justified through cost - benefit analysis ( analysis to which those peering through the ecological lens might object ) .

elements of all three lenses can be seen in the policies promoted during the george w. bush administration and in the actions of the congress — although different perspectives dominate .

for the administration , the technological ( and to a lesser degree , the ecological ) lens appeared very important to the long - term success of its initiatives .

the focus of administration initiatives was on development and use of technology to achieve reductions without significant economic pain .

that the administration rejected a mandatory program suggests that the economic lens heavily influenced the design of its climate change program .

unlike the clinton administration , the george w. bush viewed costs to be a major obstacle to reducing greenhouse gases in the near term .

for the congress , the failure to date to enact any comprehensive climate change legislation seems to reflect a focus on increasing certainty about the problem and on the costs of actions , consistent with the economic lens .

while congress did ratify the 1992 framework convention on climate change and enacted several global climate change provisions in the 1992 energy policy act , a "go - slow" approach is manifest by such actions as the senate's unanimous vote of 95-0 in support of s.res .

98 , which stated the administration should sign no agreement that would result in serious harm to the economy or that did not include developing countries ( along with developed countries ) within its control regime .

in addition , the resolution stated that any agreement submitted to the senate include a detailed and comprehensive economic impact assessment of the treaty .

yet , while similar concern about the economy was expressed in s.amdt .

866 in 2005 , that action also put the senate on record for taking action .

action was initiated in 2008 with the reporting of and floor debate on s. 2191 , which would have established a cap - and - trade program to address climate change .

this approach itself is consistent with viewing the issue from an economic perspective — but the fact of action suggests either a shift toward perceived benefits outweighing costs , or , perhaps , a refocusing through other policymaking lenses .

the effort by various interests to convince the public that their perspective is correct , and that those of others reflect either wishful thinking , misinformation , or excuses , will likely continue .

such efforts will be affected by improvements in the scientific understanding of global climate change , and of the domestic and international implications for strategies for addressing it .

however , the pivotal decision - making point — whether that understanding warrants action or not — will be mediated in large part by the lens through which policymakers view the new knowledge .

ultimately , it is the balance between all three perspectives that will shape policy options and eventually determine the character and timing of any policy response to the problem .

