the first secretary of the senate , samuel allyne otis , was elected on april 8 , 1789 , two days after the senate first achieved a quorum .

the secretary of the senate was initially responsible for keeping the minutes and records of the senate , transmitting messages to the house of representatives , and purchasing supplies .

today , the secretary of the senate's jurisdiction has been expanded beyond the original duties .

these additional responsibilities include supervision of the clerks , curators , official recorders of debates , and the parliamentarian ; the disbursement of payroll ; the education of the senate pages ; and the maintenance of public records .

the secretary also serves as the chief financial officer of the senate and is the custodian of the senate seal .

in the event that the secretary dies , resigns , or is disabled , the assistant secretary of the senate acts as secretary until a new secretary is elected or the disability has ended .

acting jointly , only the majority and minority leaders and the president pro tempore can certify that the secretary is unable to perform her duties .

the duties and responsibilities of the secretary of the senate have developed over time through several sources .

these sources include statutes , senate rules and orders , and custom and precedent .

statutes , rules and orders , and other materials may be found in the united states code , which is the codification , by subject matter , of the general and permanent laws of the united states ; the united states statutes at large , which is the collection of all laws and resolutions enacted during each session of congress ; the senate manual , which contains the texts of the ( 1 ) standing rules of the senate , ( 2 ) standing orders of the senate , ( 3 ) rules for the regulation of the senate wing of the united states capitol , and ( 4 ) excerpts from laws applicable to the senate ; and through custom and precedent .

many of the duties of the secretary of the senate are defined by the senate committee on appropriations and the senate committee on rules and administration .

as a consequence of its jurisdiction over senate administrative matters , the senate committee on rules and administration oversees operations of the secretary of the senate .

the secretary of the senate's duties and responsibilities can be divided into three broad categories: financial , administrative , and legislative .

the secretary is the chief financial officer of the senate .

as such , the secretary is responsible for funds appropriated to the senate and for managing and supervising the disbursing office , which among its financial duties handles the senate payroll and related personnel matters .

the secretary also conducts audits of senate financial activities .

details on expenditures of funds appropriated to the senate are published semi - annually by the secretary in the senate document , report of the secretary of the senate .

the secretary of the senate is responsible for a number of services within the senate .

these responsibilities include the senate stationery room ; the senate library ; the conservation and preservation office ; the office of public records ; the senate historical office ; the office of senate curator ; the office of senate security ; the office of interparliamentary services ; the office of printing and document services ; the disbursing office ; the senate page program ; and the senate gift shop ( including gift shop revolving fund ) .

other duties of the secretary of the senate include maintenance of the senate public website ; supervision of senate staff displaced by the death or resignation of a senator ; and supervision of the senate legal counsel .

the secretary of the senate manages functions that support the legislative process in the senate , such as signing legislation after senate passage .

the secretary also supervises the following staff ( listed with their roll in the senate legislative process ) : bill clerk ( records the senate's official activities and status of legislation ) ; enrolling clerk ( prepares senate - passed legislation before it is sent to the president ) ; executive clerk ( records senate actions during executive sessions , produces the executive calendar , and processes nominations and treaty resolutions received from the president ) ; journal clerk ( records the senate's daily legislative proceedings and prepares a history of legislation for the senate journal ) ; legislative clerk ( reads aloud bills and amendments , the senate journal , messages to the senate ; calls the roll and prepares the daily calendar of business ) ; official reporters of debates ( prepare verbatim reports of senate floor proceedings for the congressional record ) ; and parliamentarian ( advises senators and staff on senate precedents and rules , precedents , and statutes related to senate proceedings ) .

in addition , the secretary of the senate manages the following offices: daily digest ( preparing the resume of each day's activities of the senate for the congressional record , including committee hearings and meetings , and floor actions ) ; captioning services office ( provides captions of senate proceedings for the hearing - impaired ) ; continuity of operations program ( supports the senate's ability to conduct business and access data at an offsite location , in conjunction with the senate sergeant at arms ) .

since 1789 , 32 men and women have been elected secretary of the senate .

table a - 1 lists those individuals , the congress , when their terms began , and when their terms concluded .

