on april 6 , 1789 , james mathers was elected as senate doorkeeper and became the chamber's first elected officer .

on february 5 , 1798 , mathers's duties were expanded when he was "invested with the authority of sergeant - at - arms , to hold said office during the pleasure of the senate , whose duty it shall be to execute the commands of the senate , from time to time , and all such process as shall be directed to him by the president of the senate. .

initially , the senate met in closed - door sessions and it was the responsibility of the doorkeeper to ensure that a quorum of senators was present and that other interested parties were kept out of the chamber .

this officer is hereafter referred to as sergeant at arms .

today , the sergeant at arms performs the original duties of the doorkeeper and is responsible for the protection of the senate wing of the capitol , the senate office buildings , and the senate chamber .

in addition , the sergeant at arms serves as the senate's chief protocol officer and has administrative responsibility for senate offices and other senate services , including the senate beauty and barber shops , the senate garage , the senate post office , the senate recording studio , and the senate photographic studio .

the sergeant at arms is elected by the senate and serves "from congress to congress until a successor is chosen. .

the duties and responsibilities of the sergeant at arms and doorkeeper have developed over time through several sources .

these sources include statutes , senate rules and orders , and customs and precedents .

statues , rules and orders , and other materials may be found in the united states code , which is the codification , by subject matter , of the general and permanent laws of the united states ; the united states statutes at large , which is the collection of all laws and concurrent resolutions enacted during each session of congress , published in the order they were enacted into law ; the senate manual , which contains the texts of the ( 1 ) standing rules of the senate , ( 2 ) standing orders of the senate , ( 3 ) rules for the regulation of the senate wing of the united states capitol , and ( 4 ) excerpts from law applicable to the senate ; and custom and precedent .

additionally , many of the duties of the sergeant at arms are defined by the senate committee on appropriations and the senate committee on rules and administration .

as a consequence of its jurisdiction over senate administrative matters , the senate committee on rules and administration oversees operations of the sergeant at arms .

the duties and responsibilities of sergeant at arms can be divided into three broad categories: law enforcement and security , protocol , and administration .

each category reflects the basic responsibility to ensure safe and effective operation of the senate .

as the senate's chief law enforcement officer , the sergeant at arms is responsible for security in the senate wing of the capitol , the senate office buildings , adjacent grounds , and for the security of senators .

at the request of a majority of senators present on the floor , the sergeant at arms also has the authority to compel the attendance of absent senators .

the sergeant at arms enforces rules made by the senate committee on rules and administration and serves as a member of the capitol police board , which is authorized by law to design , install , and maintain security systems for the capitol and its grounds .

together with the secretary of the senate , the sergeant at arms develops and maintains a continuity - of - operations plan that enables the senate to conduct business and access data at offsite locations , and oversees the office of security and emergency preparedness , which serves as the senate's emergency planning and response team .

as the chief of protocol of the senate , the sergeant at arms performs ceremonial functions that exist through custom and precedent .

in carrying out these duties , the sergeant at arms greets and escorts the u.s. president , heads of states , and other official senate guests while attending functions in the capitol ; leads senators from the senate side of the capitol to the house chamber for joint sessions of congress , to their places on the inaugural platform , and to any other place the senate travels as a body ; and assists in arrangements for inaugurations and the planning of funerals of senators who die while in office .

by custom , the sergeant at arms is custodian of the senate gavel .

the sergeant at arms is responsible for protocol surrounding the death of a senator .

these responsibilities include the enforcement of a provision in the standing orders of the senate which prohibits flowers in the senate chamber unless an order is given waiving the prohibition for a display of flowers on the desk of a deceased senator on the day of eulogies .

the sergeant at arms also ascertains that the construction of a monument to a deceased senator , who is to be buried in the congressional cemetery in washington , d.c. , conforms to specific construction materials and procedures .

as an administrative officer of the senate , the sergeant at arms is responsible for specified services to senators' offices , including the following: acquiring home state office space , including mobile office space ; purchasing office equipment and maintaining records of equipment use ; operating computer support services ; managing telecommunications services ; establishing prices of items available for use in senate offices ; and administering orientation seminars for senators , senate officials , or members of the staffs of senators or senate officials and other similar meetings .

the administrative duties of the sergeant at arms also include services to the senate as a whole , including the following: senate service department , which is responsible for production of newsletters and other senate mailings , purchase and maintenance of equipment , storage of senate publications , and micrographics services ; senate computer center , which oversees senate computer operations ; senate post office , and recording and photographic studios ; senate barber and beauty shops ; custodial services , office furnishings and equipment , and automobiles ; senate garage and other parking facilities ; appointment desk to greet visitors on official business ; senate health promotion office ; senate placement office ; senate telecommunications , the capitol telephone exchange , and the senate telephone directory ; capitol guide service and other visitor services including assistance in braille , sign language interpretation , and telecommunications devices for the deaf ; senate page program and assignment of duties to messengers ; oversight of the doorkeepers ; issuance of identification cards to senate employees ; disposal of surplus equipment ; and education and training programs for senate staff as needed .

since 1789 , 38 men and women have been elected sergeant at arms of the senate .

table a - 1 lists those individuals , the congress , when their term began , and when their term concluded .

