before 1961 , no prior authorization was required for defense appropriations , except for construction funds .

in 1959 , the armed services committees attached a rider to the construction authorization ( p.l .

86-149 ) to req uire prior authorization of appropriations to procure planes , missiles , and ships , beginning in 1961 .

the committees hoped thereby to recapture a share of the control over defense programs exercised by the appropriations committees alone .

congress oversees the defense budget primarily through two yearly bills: the defense authorization and defense appropriations bills .

table 2 and table 4 present the department of defense ( dod ) authorization and appropriations bills from 1970 to 2018 .

the authorization bill establishes and organizes the agencies responsible for national defense , sets policies for the department , and authorizes the appropriations of funds in accordance with 10 u.s.c .

§114 .

the appropriations bill provides budget authority for military departments and defense agencies to draw funds from the treasury .

ideally , the authorization - appropriations process would proceed in an orderly sequence with each step of the process generating a part of the information trail .

all of these steps would be documented in the congressional record as well as in many other official documents of congress , in private publications , such as congressional quarterly weekly report and united states code congressional and administrative news ( usccan ) , and on congress.gov .

data in table 1 and table 3 are mostly from the congressional quarterly almanac .

these tables reflect an earlier authorization - appropriations process from 1961 to 1969 .

in the simplest case , the process begins with the president submitting his budget proposal ( initially formulated by dod and formally submitted by the president through the office of management and budget ) to the defense authorizing and appropriations committees .

then , for example , for the defense authorization bill , hearings are held by the appropriate house committees and subcommittees .

the bill is marked up and an authorization bill is reported out , usually with a written , numbered report .

this bill is debated in the house , amended or not as the case may be , and passed by the house with the vote noted in the congressional record .

this bill would then be sent to the senate , debated , and passed .

however , the senate can amend the house bill or report out its own bill , debate , amend , and pass it .

if the house and senate versions differ , the stage is set for reconciling differences .

this may be accomplished by a conference committee appointed by the leadership of each chamber .

this committee then negotiates a compromise bill that is reported to both houses .

votes on the conference agreement are then taken in both chambers .

if passed , it is sent to the president for his consideration and signature .

ideally , after the authorization bill is passed , the appropriations bill goes through this same process .

although conceptually a sequential process , authorization and appropriations bills can be considered at the same time or even passed in reverse order .

legislative text―and the associated bill number―come together for consideration on the floor in a variety of ways .

for instance , the senate can report out a bill , and then substitute the text of the senate bill for the text of the bill passed by the house while retaining the house bill number .

the house can also use this procedure .

a senate or house bill can also have part of the other chamber's bill inserted into it , or can be so heavily amended that it is unclear whether the underlying text originated in the senate or house bill .

other events can occur to render the tracking of a bill and its contents difficult .

bills are sometimes reported out without an accompanying committee report to provide context for the legislative language .

voice votes or unanimous consent agreements may be granted instead of recorded votes , rendering it impossible to determine which member voted for or against the bill or amendments offered during floor consideration .

in addition , there may be times when a fiscal year ends without the enactment of some appropriations bills .

under those circumstances , congress usually passes a continuing resolution ( cr ) , which grants a temporary extension of budget authority for a specified period of time and purpose .

crs also typically specify that the funds provided may be used only for activities funded in the previous fiscal year .

for more information on the components of a cr and the defense budget , see crs report r42647 , continuing resolutions: overview of components and recent practices , by james v. saturno and jessica tollestrup .

there are several types of votes: voice votes , teller votes , division votes , and unanimous consent votes , but only when there is a recorded vote will there be a vote number and vote tally in the congressional record .

the section below is based on "methods of voting in the house and senate: putting members' positions on the record," from the congressional quarterly's guide to congress , 6th ed .

 ( 2008 ) , pp .

582-583 .

division vote — those in favor or opposed stand , and the chair takes a head count: only vote totals are announced and there is no record of how individual members voted .

recorded vote — members vote electronically , each recorded vote is given a sequential number , and vote totals plus how each member voted are recorded in the congressional record .

teller vote — an older method in which members were counted as they passed between chair - appointed tellers for the "ayes" and "noes" ; only vote totals are announced and there is no record of how individual members voted .

unanimous consent vote — usually reserved for noncontroversial legislation .

voice vote — the presiding officer calls for the "ayes" and then the "noes," members shout in chorus on one side or the other , and the chair decides the result .

for more information on the process , see crs in focus if10515 , defense primer: the ndaa process , by valerie heitshusen and brendan w. mcgarry ; crs report rs20371 , overview of the authorization - appropriations process , by bill heniff jr. ; and crs report r42388 , the congressional appropriations process: an introduction , coordinated by james v. saturno .

