the united states congress is served by a group of young adults known as pages .

pages have been employed since the early congresses , and some members of congress have served as pages .

today , congressional pages include students who are juniors in high school and who may come from all areas of the united states and its territories .

the page system is formally provided for in law , although the rationale for the page service or for using high school students is not .

since the earliest accounts of pages , it has been widely noted in debates and writings within congress that pages provide needed messenger services: from the origin of the present government , in 1789 , to the present time , they [messengers] have been under the orders and resolutions of the house , and experience has attested to the necessity of their services .

the use of boys or pages , was introduced at a later period ; but from the first session of congress held at the city of washington [1800] , they have continued to be employed by the house , with the approbation of the house .

being a page provides a unique educational opportunity , affording young adults an opportunity to learn about congress , the legislative process , and to develop workplace and leadership skills .

over the years , there has been concern about having young pages serve congress .

in the 1800s and early 1900s , some house pages were as young as 10 and senate pages as young as 13 .

later , they were as old as 18 .

at various times , congressional actions related to employing pages have addressed the lack of supervised housing as well as pages' ages , tenure , selection , education , and management .

far - reaching reforms in the page system were implemented in 1982 and 1983 , following press reports of insufficient supervision , alleged sexual misconduct , and involvement in the trafficking of drugs on capitol hill .

most reports of misbehavior were later found to be unsubstantiated .

as a consequence of the allegations , however , both the house and senate for the first time provided supervised housing for their pages ; established separate page schools and took over the education of the pages , which had been provided under contract by the district of columbia school system ; and developed more educational and recreational opportunities for their pages .

in the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) , at the request of then house speaker nancy pelosi and republican leader john boehner , the house inspector general ( ig ) conducted an inquiry into the supervision and operation of the house page residence hall , and subsequently issued a confidential report recommending changes .

in 2008 , an independent study , conducted by consultants to the house , was conducted .

in response to the findings of those efforts , the house implemented new policies to enhance the safety and supervision of the pages and oversight of the page program .

these changes followed investigations of allegations related to the page program participants , including the exchange of inappropriate communications between a member of the house and former pages , and of misbehavior by a few pages in the 109 th and 110 th congresses .

a follow up review of the page program was carried out in the summer of 2010 by the same independent consultants .

according to house leaders , concerns raised in 2008 , including costs and the need for the program , remained .

in august 2011 , speaker john boehner and democratic leader nancy pelosi announced the termination of the house page program effective august 31 .

in a dear colleague letter , the leaders cited both changes in technology obviating the need for most page services , and the program's costs as reasons to discontinue the program .

in the 112 th congress , ( 2011-2012 ) , h.res .

397 , entitled reestablishing the house of representatives page program , was introduced by representative dan boren .

the resolution would have created an advisory panel to make recommendations for the operation of a reestablished page program .

the house page program would have been reestablished in the first school semester after the advisory panel submitted its recommendations to the committee on house administration .

membership of the nine - person advisory body would have been composed of three members of the house from the majority party of the house , three members of the house from the minority party , and three individuals who were not members and who had served as house pages .

the measure was referred to the committee on house administration , and no further action was taken .

pages serve principally as messengers .

they carry documents between the house and senate , members' offices , committees , and the library of congress .

they prepare the senate chamber for each day's business by distributing the congressional record and other documents related to the day's agenda , assist in the cloakrooms and chambers ; and when congress is in session , they sit near the dais where they may be summoned by members for assistance .

in the house , pages also previously raised and lowered the flag on the roof of the capitol .

there are 30 senate page positions , 16 for the majority party and 14 for the minority party .

the office of the sergeant at arms supervises the senate page program .

the senate page program consists of four quarters , two academic year sessions and two shorter summer sessions .

it is administered by the senate sergeant at arms , the senate page program director , and the principal of the senate page school .

senate pages are paid a stipend , and deductions are taken for taxes and residence hall fee , which includes a meal plan .

pages must pay their transportation costs to washington , dc , but their uniforms are supplied .

the uniforms consist of navy blue suits , white shirts , red and blue striped tie , dark socks , and black shoes .

the senate provides its pages education and supervised housing in the daniel webster page residence near the hart senate office building .

the senate page school is located in the lower level of webster hall .

pages who serve during the academic year are educated in this school , which is also accredited by the middle states association of colleges and schools .

the junior - year curriculum is geared toward college preparation and emphasis is given to the unique learning opportunities available in washington , dc .

early morning classes are held prior to the convening of the senate .

the house page program was administered by the office of the clerk , under the supervision of the house page board .

the board , established in statute , is composed of two members from each party , including the chair , as well as the clerk and the sergeant at arms of the house , a former house page , and the parent of a house page .

participants in the house page program typically served for one academic semester during the school year , or during a summer session .

house pages received a stipend for their services , and deductions were taken from their salaries for federal and state taxes , social security , and a residence hall fee , which included a meal plan .

the pages were required to live in the supervised house page dormitory near the capitol .

they were responsible for the cost of their uniforms — navy jackets , dark grey slacks or skirts , long sleeve white shirt , red and blue striped tie , and black shoes — and transportation to and from washington , dc .

during the school year , pages were educated in the house page school located in the thomas jefferson building of the library of congress .

the page school , which is accredited by the middle states association of colleges and schools , offered a junior - year high - school curriculum , college preparatory courses , and extracurricular and weekend activities .

classes were usually held five days a week , commencing at 6:45 a.m. , prior to the convening of the house .

