lying , or making a false statement , is a federal crime under a number of circumstances .

it is a federal crime to make a material false statement in a matter within the jurisdiction of a federal agency or department .

perjury is also a federal crime .

perjury is a false statement made under oath before a federal tribunal or official .

moreover , some false certifications are punishable as perjury by operation of a federal statute .

subornation of perjury is inducing someone else to commit perjury .

it , too , is a federal crime if the perjury induced is a federal crime .

finally , conspiracy to commit any these underlying crimes is also a separate federal crime .

moreover , a defendant under investigation or on trial for some other federal offense may find upon conviction his sentence for the underlying offense enhanced as a consequence of a false statement he made during the course of the investigation or trial .

this is an overview of federal law relating to the principal false statement and to the three primary perjury statutes .

the principal federal false statement statute , 18 u.s.c .

§ 1001 , proscribes false statements , concealment , or false documentation in any matter within the jurisdiction of any of the three branches of the federal government .

it applies generally within the executive branch .

within the judicial branch , it applies to all but presentations to the court by parties or their attorneys in judicial proceedings .

within the legislative branch , it applies to administrative matters such as procurement , as well as to "any investigations and reviews , conducted pursuant to the authority of any committee , subcommittee , commission , or office of the congress consistent with applicable rules of the house or senate. .

in outline form , section 1001 ( a ) states: i .

except as otherwise provided in this section , ii .

whoever , iii .

in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive , legislative , or judicial branch of the government of the united states , iv .

knowingly and willfully — v. a. falsifies , conceals , or covers up by any trick , scheme , or device a material fact ; b. makes any materially false , fictitious , or fraudulent statement or representation ; or c. makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any materially false , fictitious , or fraudulent statement or entry ; shall be fined under this title , imprisoned not more than 5 years or , if the offense involves international or domestic terrorism ( as defined in section 2331 ) , imprisoned not more than 8 years , or both .

if the matter relates to an offense under chapter 109a [sexual abuse] , 109b [sex offender registration] , 110 [sexual exploitation] , or 117 [transportation for illicit sexual purposes] , or section 1591 [sex trafficking] , then the term of imprisonment imposed under this section shall be not more than 8 years .

congress enacted section 1623 to avoid some of the common law technicalities embodied in the more comprehensive perjury provisions found in section 1621 and thus "to facilitate perjury prosecutions and thereby enhance the reliability of testimony before federal courts and grand juries. .

unlike section 1621 , section 1623 permits a conviction in the case of two mutually inconsistent declarations without requiring proof that one of them is false .

it recognizes a limited recantation defense .

it dispenses with the so - called two - witness rule .

and , it employs a "knowing" mens rea standard rather than the more demanding "willfully" standard used in section 1621 .

parsed into elements , section 1623 declares that: i. whoever ii .

a. under oath or b. in any i. declaration , ii .

certificate , iii .

verification , or iv .

statement under penalty of perjury as permitted under [section] 1746 of title 28 , united states code iii .

in any proceeding before or ancillary to a. any court or b. grand jury of the united states iv .

knowingly v. a. makes any false material declaration or b. makes or uses any other information , including any i. book , ii .

paper , iii .

document , iv .

record , v. recording , or vi .

other material , vi .

knowing the same to contain any false material declaration , shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years , or both .

in most cases , the courts abbreviate their description of the elements and state in one form or another that to prove perjury the government must establish that "the defendant ( 1 ) knowingly made a ( 2 ) false ( 3 ) material declaration ( 4 ) under oath ( 5 ) in a proceeding before or ancillary to any court or grand jury of the united states. .

section 1622 outlaws procuring or inducing another to commit perjury: "whoever procures another to commit any perjury is guilty of subornation of perjury , and shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than five years , or both. .

the crime consists of two elements – ( 1 ) an act of perjury committed by another ( 2 ) induced or procured by the defendant .

perjury under either section 1621 or section 1623 will support a conviction for subornation under section 1622 , but proof of the commission of an act of perjury is a necessary element of subornation .

although the authorities are exceptionally sparse , it appears that to suborn one must know that the induced statement is false and that at least to suborn under section 1621 one must also knowingly and willfully induce .

subornation is only infrequently prosecuted as such perhaps because of the ease with which it can now be prosecuted as an obstruction of justice under either 18 u.s.c .

§§ 1503 or 1512 which , unlike section 1622 , do not insist upon suborner success as a prerequisite to prosecution .

section 371 outlaws conspiring to commit another federal offense , including making a false statement in violation of section 1001 , perjury under sections 1621 and 1623 , and subornation of perjury under section 1622 .

as a general matter , conspiracy requires the agreement of two or more people to commit a federal crime and for one of the parties to commit some affirmative act in furtherance of the scheme .

conspiracy under section 371 is punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years .

conspiracy is a separate crime , and offenders may be punished for conspiracy , as well as for the commission of the crime that is the object of the offense , and for any crime committed in the foreseeable furtherance of the crime .

perjury , subornation of perjury , and false statements are each punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years .

they are also punishable by a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 if the defendant is an organization ) .

when the defendant is convicted of a crime other than perjury or false statements , however , perjury or false statements during the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing of the defendant for the underlying offense will often be treated as the basis for enhancing his sentence by operation of the obstruction of justice guideline of the u.s .

sentencing guidelines ( u.s.s.g .

§3c1.1 ) .

federal sentencing begins with , and is greatly influenced by , the calculation of the applicable sentencing range under the sentencing guidelines .

the guidelines assign federal felony offenses a base offense level to which they add levels for various aggravating factors .

obstruction of justice is one of those factors .

each of the final 43 offense levels is assigned to one of six sentencing ranges , depending on the extent of the defendant's past crime history .

for example , a final offense level of 15 means a sentencing range of from 18 to 24 months in prison for a first time offender ( criminal history category i ) and from 41 to 51 months for a defendant with a very extensive criminal record ( criminal history category vi ) .

two levels higher , at a final offense level of 17 , the range for first time offenders is 24 to 30 months ; and 51 to 63 months for the defendant with a very extensive prior record .

depending on the final offense level otherwise applicable to a particular crime , the impact of a 2-level increase spans from no impact at the lowest final offense levels to a difference of an additional 68 months at the highest levels .

section 3c1.1 instructs sentencing courts to add 2 offense levels in the case of an obstruction of justice: if ( 1 ) the defendant willfully obstructed or impeded , or attempted to obstruct or impede , the administration of justice with respect to the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing of the instant offense of conviction , and ( 2 ) the obstructive conduct related to ( a ) the defendant's offense of conviction and any relevant conduct ; or ( b ) a closely related offense , increase the offense level by 2 levels .

the accompanying commentary explains that the section "is not intended to punish a defendant for the exercise of a constitutional right. .

more specifically , a "defendant's denial of guilt ( other than a denial of guilt under oath that constitutes perjury ) , refusal to admit guilt or provide information to a probation officer , or refusal to enter a plea of guilty is not a basis for application of this provision. .

early on , the supreme court made it clear that an individual's sentence might be enhanced under section 3c1.1 , if he committed perjury during the course of his trial .

moreover , the examples provided elsewhere in the section's commentary and the cases applying the section confirm that it reaches perjurious statements in a number of judicial contexts and to false statements in a number of others .

the examples in the section's commentary cover conduct: ( b ) committing , suborning , or attempting to suborn perjury , including during the course of a civil proceeding if such perjury pertains to conduct that forms the basis of the offense of conviction ; ( f ) providing materially false information to a judge or magistrate ; ( g ) providing a materially false statement to a law enforcement officer that significantly obstructed or impeded the official investigation or prosecution of the instant offense ; ( h ) providing materially false information to a probation officer in respect to a presentence or other investigation for the court ; [and] ( i ) other conduct prohibited by obstruction of justice provisions under title 18 , united states code ( e.g .

 , 18 u.s.c .

§§1510 , 1511 ) .

the courts have concluded that a sentencing enhancement under the section is appropriate , for instance , when a defendant has ( 1 ) given perjurious testimony at his suppression hearing ; ( 2 ) made false statements to the probation officer for the presentence report ; ( 3 ) given perjurious , exculpatory testimony at the separate trial of his girl - friend ; ( 4 ) made false statements in connection with a probation officer's bail report ; ( 5 ) made false statements to the court in an attempt to change his guilty plea ; ( 6 ) made false statements to federal investigators ; ( 7 ) encouraged a witness to lie to the police or on the stand ; ( 8 ) made false statements to state investigators relating to conduct for which the defendant was ultimately convicted ; or ( 9 ) given preposterous , perjurious testimony during his own trial .

the lower federal appellate courts are divided over the question of whether an obstruction of justice enhancement may be based on a defendant's false statement of indigence in order to secure appointment of counsel .

when perjury provides the basis for a sentencing enhancement under the section , the court must find that the defendant willfully testified falsely with respect to a material matter .

thus , the court must find that "the defendant consciously act[ed] with the purpose of obstructing justice. .

when based upon a false statement not under oath , the statement must still be material , that is , it must "tend to influence or affect the issue under determination. .

even then , false identification at the time of arrest only warrants a sentencing enhancement under the section when the deception significantly hinders the investigation or prosecution .

