t he senate takes up business under procedures set in senate rules and by long - standing custom , thereby giving it flexibility in setting its floor agenda .

this report first discusses those processes or customs most often used by the senate and then discusses some procedures less often used to call up business .

under chamber rules , technically any senator may offer the necessary agenda - setting motions "to proceed to the consideration" of a bill , resolution , or item of executive business .

however , by long - established custom , in practice only the majority leader or his or her designee offer agenda - setting motions .

 ( see crs report rs21255 , motions to proceed to consider measures in the senate: who offers them ? .

 , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

items called up are often those on the senate's legislative or executive calendars , either reported by committee or , in the case of bills and joint resolutions , placed on the legislative calendar directly under rule xiv ( see crs report rs22309 , senate rule xiv procedure for placing measures directly on the senate calendar , by [author name scrubbed] ) .

motions to take up privileged items of business are not debatable and , hence , are usually taken up by unanimous consent .

among the items of privileged business are budget resolutions , reconciliation bills , conference reports , measures to resolve election contests , and measures to impose disciplinary sanctions against senators .

motions to go into executive session to consider a nomination , treaty , or resolution on the senate executive calendar are also privileged and non - debatable .

on the motion of any senator , a measure or matter can be made a special order of business at some future specified date .

such motions are very rarely used , because they are fully debatable and need a two - thirds vote for approval .

if there is objection to considering a resolution when it is submitted , the resolution is said to "go over , under the rule," and is placed on a special section of the calendar of business reserved for this purpose .

such resolutions are to be laid before the senate on the next legislative day during the morning business period ( described above ) , which would occur automatically under rule viii .

items pending at the end of morning business return to the calendar of business and can be called up later by a debatable motion or unanimous consent .

in current practice , however , few resolutions go "over , under the rule," and because ( as noted above ) the senate almost never engages in morning business created by the beginning of a new legislative day as called for under rule viii , those resolutions that do are essentially placed in a kind of parliamentary limbo .

they remain pending on the calendar of business , unreachable except by unanimous consent or by a rare morning hour created by operation of the rule .

executive resolutions that are placed on the executive calendar "over , under the rule" can be subsequently reached by unanimous consent or , as noted above , by non - debatable motion .

motions to discharge committees from the further consideration of any measure or matter ( for example , a nomination or treaty ) must lie over for one day , and debate on such a motion is not limited .

as such , three - fifths of all senators may need to vote for cloture in order for the chamber to reach a final vote on the motion .

 ( for more information on nomination procedures , see crs report rl31980 , senate consideration of presidential nominations: committee and floor procedure , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

if agreed to , a motion to discharge would place a measure or matter on the relevant chamber calendar .

