most civilian federal employees who were hired before 1984 are covered by the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) .

under csrs , employees do not pay social security taxes or earn social security benefits .

federal employees first hired in 1984 or later are covered by the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) .

all federal employees who are enrolled in fers pay social security taxes and earn social security benefits .

federal employees enrolled in either csrs or fers also may contribute to the thrift savings plan ( tsp ) ; however , only employees enrolled in fers are eligible for employer matching contributions to the tsp .

under both csrs and fers , the date of an employee's eligibility to retire with an annuity depends on age and years of service .

the amount of the retirement annuity is determined by three factors: ( 1 ) the number of years of service , ( 2 ) the accrual rate at which benefits are earned for each year of service , and ( 3 ) the salary base to which the accrual rate is applied .

the tsp is a defined contribution ( dc ) retirement plan similar to the 401 ( k ) plans provided by many private - sector employers .

the tsp is a key component of fers , especially for workers in the middle and upper ranges of the federal pay scale , who are unlikely to achieve adequate retirement income — as measured by the replacement rate — from social security and the fers basic annuity .

in 2015 , federal employees can contribute up to $18,000 to the tsp .

employees aged 50 and older can contribute an additional $6,000 .

these employee contributions may be made on a pre - tax basis , in which case neither the contributions nor investment earnings that accrue to the plan are taxed until the money is withdrawn .

alternatively , p.l .

111-31 authorized a qualified roth contribution option to the tsp .

under a roth contribution option , employee salary deferrals into a retirement plan are made with after - tax income .

qualified distributions from the roth tsp plan option — generally , distributions taken five or more years after the participant's first roth contribution and after the age of 59½ — are tax - free .

for all federal workers under fers , the employing agencies contribute to the tsp an amount equal to 1% of each employee's base pay , whether or not the employee contributes anything to the plan .

in addition , employees enrolled in fers can receive employer matching contributions equal to 4% of pay , according to the schedule shown in table 2 .

federal workers covered by csrs also may contribute to the tsp , but they receive no matching contributions from their employing agencies .

tsp participants are immediately vested in their contributions to the plan , all federal matching contributions , and any interest , dividends , or capital gains attributable to those contributions .

participants are fully vested in the 1% agency automatic contribution to the tsp after three years ( two years for congressional employees and executive branch political appointees ) .

both csrs and fers require participants to contribute toward the cost of their future pensions through a payroll tax .

under csrs , employees contribute 7.0% of base pay to the civil service retirement and disability fund ( csrdf ) .

under fers , employees first hired before 2013 contribute 0.8% of pay to the csrdf and they also pay social security taxes ( 6.2% on salary up to the maximum taxable wage base of $118,500 in 2015 ) .

fers employees first hired in 2013 contribute 3.1% of pay to the csrdf as well as social security taxes .

fers employees first hired after 2013 contribute 4.4% of pay to the csrdf as well as social security taxes .

participants in csrs are not covered by social security .

see table 4 for a summary of fers employee contribution rates by date of hire .

members of congress contribute 8.0% of salary to the csrdf if covered by csrs ; 1.3% of salary to the csrdf if under fers and first covered prior to 2013 ; 3.1% of salary to the csrdf if under fers and first covered in 2013 ; or 4.4% of salary to the csrdf if under fers and first covered after 2013 .

all members of congress pay social security taxes , regardless of whether they are under csrs or fers .

as of september 30 , 2013 , the csrdf had net assets of $844.6 billion available for benefit payments under both csrs and fers .

at the same time , the civil service trust fund had an unfunded actuarial liability of $785.0 billion , with $751.4 billion in unfunded liability attributable to csrs and $33.6 billion in unfunded liability attributable to fers .

federal law has never required that employee and agency contributions must equal the present value of benefits that employees accrue under the csrs .

in contrast , the fers act requires that the benefits accrued each year by employees must be fully funded by contributions from employees and their employing agencies .

although the csrdf has an unfunded liability , it is not in danger of becoming insolvent .

according to the projections of opm's actuaries , the assets of the csrdf will continue to grow over the next 75 years .

the fund's assets are projected to reach $1.1 trillion in 2020 , $2.2 trillion in 2040 , $5.0 trillion in 2060 , and $9.6 trillion in 2080 .

actuarial projections indicate that the csrdf will be able to meet its financial obligations in perpetuity .

according to opm , "the total assets of the csrdf , including both csrs and fers , continue to grow throughout the term of the projection , and ultimately reach a level of about 5.3 times payroll , or about 20 times the level of annual benefit outlays. .

one reason that the csrdf will not exhaust its resources is that all federal employees hired since 1984 are enrolled in fers .

by law , the benefits that employees earn under fers must be fully funded by the sum of employer and employee contributions and interest earnings .

the csrdf is similar to the social security trust fund in that 100% of the monies deposited must be used to purchase special - issue u.s. treasury bonds .

this exchange between the trust fund and the treasury does not result in revenues or outlays for the federal government .

it is an intra - governmental transfer , which has no effect on the size of the government's budget surplus or deficit .

federal trust funds are not a "store of wealth" like private pension funds .

the assets of the civil service retirement trust fund are u.s. treasury bonds that function solely as a record of available budget authority .

the bonds cannot be sold by the trust fund to the general public in exchange for cash .

they can only be returned to the treasury , which recognizes each bond as representing an equivalent dollar - value of budget authority to be used for the payment of benefits to federal retirees and their survivors .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) has stated that these [trust fund] balances are available for future benefit payments and other trust fund expenditures , but only in a bookkeeping sense .

the holdings of the trust funds are not assets of the government as a whole that can be drawn down in the future to fund benefits .

instead , they are claims on the treasury .

from a cash perspective , when trust fund holdings are redeemed to authorize the payment of benefits , the department of the treasury finances the expenditure in the same way as any other federal expenditure — by using current receipts or by borrowing from the public .

the existence of large trust fund balances , therefore , does not , by itself , increase the government's ability to pay benefits .

put differently , these trust fund balances are assets of the program agencies and corresponding liabilities of the treasury , netting to zero for the government as a whole .

government trust funds , however , can ease the burden of future benefit payments if an increase in the trust fund balance represents a net increase in national saving .

again , quoting omb: from an economic standpoint , the government is able to prefund benefits only by increasing saving and investment in the economy as a whole .

this can be fully accomplished only by simultaneously running trust fund surpluses equal to the actuarial present value of the accumulating benefits while maintaining an unchanged federal fund deficit , so that the trust fund surplus reduces the unified budget deficit or increases the unified budget surplus .

this would reduce federal borrowing by the amount of the trust funds surplus and increase the amount of national saving available to finance investment .

as long as the increase in government saving is not offset by a reduction in private saving , greater investment would increase future national income , which would yield greater tax revenue to support the benefits .

many state and local government pension funds invest in stocks , bonds , mortgages , real estate , and other private assets .

if congress were to permit the csrdf to acquire assets other than u.s. treasury bonds — such as the stocks and bonds issued by private corporations — these assets could be sold to the public for cash as pension liabilities come due .

this would represent a major change in public policy that would have important effects on the federal budget and on private businesses that would , in effect , be partly owned by an agency of the federal government .

among the possible drawbacks of allowing the csrdf to invest in private assets are that the stocks and bonds purchased by the trust fund would displace purchases of these assets by private citizens , so that while civil service retirement benefits would be prefunded , it would be at the cost of reducing the amount of private - sector assets held by private citizens .

in a scenario of "full displacement," there would be no net increase in the amount of saving and investment in the economy , just a reallocation of assets in which the government would own more private - sector stocks and bonds and private investors would hold more treasury bonds .

a second issue that would have to be considered if the trust fund were to purchase private investment securities would be the fund's management and investment practices .

it is unclear who would make the investment decisions , and what the acceptable level of investment risk for the funds would be .

the most fundamental risk is that poor investment choices would result in the trust fund losing value over time .

another question would be how the fund would decide what assets to purchase .

deciding what would constitute an appropriate investment for a fund that consists mainly of monies provided by taxpayers could be controversial .

not all companies , industries , or countries would be seen by the public as appropriate places to invest these funds .

in short , the question of investing trust fund assets in securities other than u.s. treasury bonds is one that would deserve close and careful consideration of all the possible ramifications .

allowing the civil service retirement trust fund to invest in private - sector securities also would have implications for the federal budget .

currently , the trust fund is credited by the treasury with agency contributions on behalf of covered employees , and it receives revenue in the form of employee contributions .

agency contributions are intra - governmental transfers , and have no effect on the size of the government's annual budget deficit or surplus .

employee contributions , however , are revenues of the u.s. government .

as it now operates , the only outlays of the trust fund are payments to annuitants and relatively minor outlays for administrative expenses .

if the trust fund were to purchase private assets such as corporate stocks and bonds rather than u.s. treasury bonds , there would be an immediate outlay of funds .

this outlay by the trust fund would be paid for in part by employee contributions that would be diverted from the general fund of the treasury .

the remainder of the purchase , financed by agency contributions , would replace an intra - governmental transfer with a direct outlay of federal funds .

because the treasury would no longer receive employee contributions toward csrs and fers as revenue , it would have to borrow an equal amount from the public .

consequently , without an offsetting reduction in outlays elsewhere in the budget or an increase in revenues of other sources , the net effect of these transactions would be an increase in the government's budget deficit ( or a decrease in the budget surplus ) .

if the budget accounting period extended over a long enough time , these transactions would cancel one another out because the long - term effect would merely move some outlays from the future , where they would have occurred as payments to annuitants , to the present , where they would occur partly as outlays to purchase assets and partly as a reduction in revenues that currently go to the general fund of the treasury .

