trade is one of the more enduring issues in contemporary u.s. - latin america relations .

historically , growth in u.s. trade with latin america has outpaced that of all other regions , and over the last 15 years , the united states has signed reciprocal free trade agreements ( ftas ) with 11 latin american countries and implemented with nine of them .

nonetheless , a hemisphere - wide free trade areas of the americas ( ftaa ) has eluded the region , and there appears to be little interest in pursuing the current u.s. fta model by those countries that have yet to sign on to one .

under these circumstances , the future for deepening regional economic integration is uncertain .

this report provides a summary to the u.s. - latin american trade relationship , looking primarily at trade data and trends , and highlights some current policy options for enhancing u.s. - latin american trade agreements .

latin american countries have made noted progress in trade liberalization over the past three decades , reducing tariffs significantly and entering into multiple subregional agreements of their own .

early latin american trade agreements ( 1960s ) , however , were inward looking , defensive in nature , exclusive of industrialized countries , and so minimally successful in leading to lasting regional integration and facilitating development .

agreements struck more recently , under the rubric of the "new regionalism," have gone farther , cultivated by the desire to integrate more fully , and by the growing belief that trade liberalization can be a cornerstone for promoting structural reform , development , and international competitiveness .

this development in thinking presented an opportunity for the united states , which has supported deeper regional integration , in part because it has been widely viewed as beneficial for both economic and foreign policy reasons .

the united states has implemented comprehensive bilateral or plurilateral reciprocal trade agreements with most of its important trade partners in latin america .

these include the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) , the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) , and bilateral ftas with chile and peru .

ftas with panama and colombia have been signed but not implemented , pending congressional action .

for the united states , reciprocal ftas liberalize trade in u.s. goods and services in a region with declining , but still relatively high applied tariff rates .

in many cases , these same countries already had preferential access to the u.s. market under unilateral arrangements such as the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) , the caribbean basin initiative ( cbi ) , or the andean trade preference act ( atpa ) , so moving to a reciprocal agreement opened markets for u.s. goods as well .

it has also been argued that progress made at the regional level can provide incentives to "sustain" multilateral negotiations at the world trade organization ( wto ) , although the disappointing pace of the doha development round may point to the limits of this influence .

ftas with latin america also support u.s. foreign policy , which has historically viewed much of the region as a strategic "backyard. .

enhancing social stability through trade - led growth and development has been one long - term goal of ftas , and thereby more broadly supportive of u.s. regional security goals .

as for the latin american countries , economic gains provide the overriding rationale for entering into an fta with the united states .

the united states is by far their largest export market and the primary investor in the region , particularly in mexico and the caribbean basin region ( central america , panama , and the caribbean islands ) .

for these countries , moving to a reciprocal fta provides permanent rules of trade that do not require periodic reauthorization by the u.s. congress , as do the unilateral preferential arrangements .

this feature of ftas and its rules - based framework provides a greater incentive for foreign investors and gives the latin american countries more control over their trade relationship with the united states .

many see ftas as anchors to broader economic reform and providing greater opportunity for production - sharing technology transfer that can improve economic competitiveness .

lower costs of imports from the united states are another tangible benefit .

u.s. - latin american ftas , however , have also been criticized from various perspectives .

many economists are skeptical of their benefits given the discriminatory , complicated , and at times inefficient trading network they create .

latin americans point to other problems like asymmetrical negotiation power , where the united states has been able to unilaterally limit the scope of discussion , for example , by excluding agricultural subsidies and antidumping policies , and limiting access to key import sensitive products such as sugar and apparel .

the united states has also had increasing success in forcing accommodation on issues not addressed in the multilateral arena such as labor and environment provisions .

in the united states , many have criticized these agreements for not going far enough on these same issues and also risking the possibility of increasing job losses and lower wages .

trade liberalization also creates adjustment , if not distributional issues in some cases that generally lead to the call for complementary domestic policies .

the ftaa encountered resistance in part because it represented an extension of the same trade model used by the united states in bilateral agreements .

many countries south of the caribbean basin have been reluctant to enter into such a deal because it does not meet their primary negotiation objectives .

brazil , argentina , and venezuela are less compelled to capitulate to u.s. demands because they are far less dependent on the u.s. economy than countries in the caribbean basin , do not rely on u.s. regional unilateral preferential arrangements ( eg , the andean trade preference act or the caribbean basin initiative ) , and would have to redefine their subregional trade pacts .

failure to find accommodation on agricultural trade , in particular , presented one insurmountable obstacle .

in short , in light of the failure to conclude an ftaa , and given increasing skepticism over the u.s. fta model , the next step in western hemisphere economic integration is ripe for discussion .

latin america is far from the largest u.s. regional trade partner ( see figure 1 for u.s. direction of trade ) , but it has long been one of the fastest - growing ones .

between 1998 and 2009 , total u.s. merchandise trade ( exports plus imports ) with latin america grew by 82% compared to 72% for asia ( driven largely by china ) , 51% for the european union , 221% for africa , and 64% for the world ( individual country data appear in appendix a and appendix b . ) .

only trade with africa has grown faster , and this represents growth from a very small base and variations in the price and volume of a single product , crude oil , which represents three - quarters of u.s. imports from the region .

within the latin american region , trade trends reflect mexico's historically dominant position as the largest u.s. trade partner .

in 2009 , u.s. trade worldwide declined sharply as it had in the second half of 2008 in response to the deep recession that followed on the heels of the 2007 global financial crisis .

in 2009 , u.s. exports to the world fell by 18.0% after rising by 11.8% in 2008 .

among the larger u.s. trade partners , exports fell by 21.6% to canada , 21.5% to japan , 18.8% to the eu - 27 , but only 0.3% to china .

u.s. exports to latin america fell in tandem with the world , declining by 17.6% .

by major latin america trade partner , exports fell by 14.9% to mexico , 20.6% to brazil , 25.3% to argentina , 30.6% to honduras , and 22.3% to chile .

of note , exports to mexico fell on average less than many other countries in the region .

these trends reflect collapsed demand commensurate with the worldwide recession , including major u.s. exports to the region such as machinery , computers , aircraft engines and parts , and refined petroleum products .

falling prices and selective use of protectionist policies compounded the falloff in trade in some cases .

on the import side , u.s. demand for foreign goods worldwide fell by 25.9% in 2009 compared to an increase of 7.3% in 2008 .

among the larger u.s. trade partners , imports fell 33.4% from canada , 12.3% from china , 23.3% from the eu - 27 , 18.4% from south korea , and 31.2% from japan .

imports from latin america declined 24.2% on average and by 45.3% from venezuela , 43.6% from costa rica , 32.8% from argentina , 41.1% from ecuador , 27.6% from peru , 13.7% from colombia , and 39.2% from mexico .

those countries exporting commodities such as crude petroleum , agricultural products , and precious stones experienced the largest declines .

mexico composed 11.7% of total u.s. merchandise trade ( exports plus imports ) in 2009 and is the largest latin american trade partner , accounting for 58% of the region's trade with the united states .

these trends point to a long history of economic integration between the two countries , in part the result of their deliberate trade liberalization efforts , including the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) .

by contrast , the rest of latin america together makes up only 8.3% of u.s. trade , leaving significant room for growth .

brazil , for example , has the largest economy in latin america and is the second - largest latin american trade partner of the united states , but accounts for only 10.4% of u.s. trade with latin america , or only 18% that of mexico .

in the united states , total merchandise trade ( goods ) has become an increasingly important component of the economy , growing from 8.0% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) in 1970 to 18.3% in 2009 , down from 23.6% in 2008 .

latin america's growing importance as a u.s. trade partner is a key aspect of this trend .

since the 1980s , many latin american countries have adopted trade liberalization as part of broader economic reform programs .

average latin american import tariffs declined from 45% in 1985 to 9.3% by 2002 , although the rates varied among countries .

trade reform , however , has not been embraced with equal vigor by all countries , and u.s. exports are not all treated equally under various liberalization schemes .

also , trade reform has stalled or even reversed in some countries when faced with economic instability or changing political philosophy .

in addition to tariff rates , which have generally fallen throughout latin america , differences among individual countries in achieving economic integration with the united states may be seen in other trends .

two simple measures of trade openness appear in table 1 and point to cases where trade liberalization may be more apparent than in others .

for example , mexico , costa rica , and chile are considered among the early and more successful reformers of trade policy .

for each in 2008 , total merchandise trade exceeded 50% of gdp .

by contrast , in two countries historically associated with incomplete trade reforms , total trade accounted for a much smaller 26% of gdp in brazil , and 39% in argentina .

the trade - to - gdp ratio , however , may reflect other than trade policy factors .

the ratio can be smaller for those countries with large domestic markets that are less trade dependent .

this may be the case for brazil , which has a large domestic manufacturing base .

conversely , the ratio may be larger for small economies that are relatively more trade dependent , such as the dominican republic , which as part of its pursuit of trade liberalization , has also developed a manufacturing export base tightly linked to the united states .

still , the lower trade - to - gdp ratio for brazil is telling .

the per capita dollar value of goods a country imports from the united states is another particular measure of trade openness ( table 1 ) .

brazil and argentina increased their per capita dollar value of u.s. imports from 1996 to 2008 , but to only a fraction of that for mexico , costa rica , chile , and the dominican republic .

mexico's high figure again reflects an evolving trade liberalization policy dating to the mid - 1980s and its historical ties with the u.s. economy .

costa rica's high per capita consumption of u.s. goods reflects a similar relationship that has seen enormous growth in recent years , including strong intra - industry trade in integrated circuits .

brazil and argentina , by contrast , have a more diversified trade relationship with the world .

the low number for u.s. imports also points to their higher restrictions on trade with the united states and other countries , in part reflecting both a tradition of industrial policy and a tendency toward defensive trade policy , in part the result of the regional customs union , mercosur .

differences in income can also be an important factor explaining variations in consumption of u.s. imports , but per capita gdp data shown in table 1 suggest that they do not stand out in this case .

the trade data suggest that there may be room for growth in trade between south america and the united states .

trade policy changes could provide some of the basis for growth in u.s. - south american trade , but they may not be immediately huge given south america's historically small interest in the united states and the limited size of its markets .

still , many economists believe that lowering barriers to u.s. exports and guaranteeing market access may generate long - term trade and investment opportunities , which in turn could lead to higher growth in productivity and output , with both producer and consumer benefits .

similarly , the prospect for even greater access to the large u.s. market presents attractive opportunities for south american countries , as well .

the united states and latin america have pursued trade liberalization through multilateral , regional , and bilateral negotiations , with mixed results .

in part this reflects divergent priorities that have been difficult to fully reconcile .

for many latin american countries , reducing barriers to agricultural trade is top of the list for a successful agreement .

this goal includes reducing market access barriers ( peak tariffs and tariff rate quotas — trqs ) , domestic u.s. subsidies , and nontariff barriers ( administrative rules , antidumping provisions ) .

although there are many other issues , agriculture policy has played a big part in slowing progress in the world trade organization ( wto ) doha development round and halting the free trade area of the americas ( ftaa ) .

the united states has made clear its unwillingness to address most agricultural and antidumping issues in a regional agreement like the ftaa to preserve its bargaining leverage in the wto against other subsidizing countries such as the european union and japan .

latin american counties have their own sensitive issues and a particular concern in some countries for easing its subsistence agricultural sectors slowly toward trade liberalization .

in addition to market access , the united states has focused its trade negotiating goals on areas where it is most competitive such as services trade ( eg , financial , tourism , technology , professional ) ; intellectual property rights ( ipr ) ; government procurement ; and investment .

not surprisingly , these are areas where many latin american countries are more reluctant to negotiate .

hence , there is a near reversal of priorities that has slowed the progress of comprehensive agreements at the multilateral and regional levels , reflecting inherent differences between many developed and developing countries .

the result in the western hemisphere has been the proliferation of reciprocal bilateral and plurilateral agreements .

the united states has implemented ftas with mexico , central america , the dominican republic , chile , and peru , but congress has not acted on the proposed ftas with panama or colombia , despite changes agreed to even after the formal negotiations concluded .

currently , congressional reticence awaits further commitments in areas that fall outside the negotiated text of the ftas , such as tax law in panama and human rights improvements in colombia , raising questions for some over the ability of the united states to consummate trade negotiations .

the prospects are limited at best for exploring reciprocal ftas with brazil , argentina , ecuador , bolivia , and venezuela .

brazil , as the major regional economy not in a unilateral preferential arrangement with the united states , has abandoned the ftaa model and moved ahead separately by adding associate members to mercosur , supporting venezuela's accession to mercosur as a full member , and leading in the formation of broader economic and political integration pacts in south america .

venezuela's president hugo chávez has taken a decidedly more confrontational approach in establishing the bolivarian alternative to the americas ( alba ) , enticing cuba , nicaragua , bolivia , dominica , and honduras to join with subsidized oil trade .

although these are neither deep nor comprehensive trade arrangements , they do signal a political will to consolidate regional bargaining interests in juxtaposition to the u.s. - designed ftaa .

three clear challenges emerge from this picture .

first , brazil and the united states have demonstrated a prolonged reluctance to move off their respective positions , which bodes poorly for resurrecting the ftaa .

the addition of venezuela and possibly other countries with less than sympathetic attitudes toward the united states as full mercosur members could solidify this standoff .

nationalizations of key industries and other efforts to increase the role of the state in managing the economies of venezuela , bolivia , and ecuador also do not augur well for broadening support for market - based trade solutions .

second , multiple ftas , by definition , promote an inefficient and cumbersome trading system with each fta having its own rules of origin ( to deter non - member transshipment of goods ) and related customs administration and enforcement requirements that can complicate trade and investment decisions .

it is not without reason , therefore , that many interest groups wish to find a way to rationalize such a convoluted system .

third , latin america is expanding its trade to other countries in the world .

china , in particular , has increased its trade and investment relationship with the region .

from 2000 to 2009 , total trade has grown by a factor of 10 , and investment has poured into the region .

in both cases , china is in search of long - term , reliable sources of basic commodities .

in 2009 , over 70% of latin american exports to china were in basic ores , copper , grains , and mineral fuels .

while this trade structure is currently lucrative , it does nothing to diversify latin america's exports into more value added goods , and leaves the fortunes of these countries to the often volatile commodities markets .

reconciling the disparate trade arrangements in the western hemisphere will be difficult and perhaps impossible in the absence of a complementary multilateral solution .

for example , conventional wisdom argues that without advancement in agricultural issues at the wto , action on a comprehensive ftaa ( or something like it ) is unlikely .

further , a less comprehensive ftaa has so far been rejected and offers a far less compelling alternative to a multilateral agreement on economic grounds .

therefore , the ftaa may not emerge in the near future , despite the logical solution that a hemispheric - wide agreement presents to improving the flow of trade ( and investment ) over existing arrangements .

without a hemispheric - wide solution and given the limitations to further expansion of u.s. bilateral ftas , alternatives are being debated on how to deepen hemispheric trade relations .

one emerging line of thinking calls for reform of the u.s. fta template , including reopening existing ftas to revise and deepen labor and environment chapters , among others .

the evolving nature of commitments to these disciplines continues , as evident in congressional insistence on revising bilateral agreements already negotiated , as was the case with peru , colombia , panama , and south korea .

the consensus from latin america countries , however , appears to be that such a task would be too difficult , could lead to a wholesale renegotiation of an fta , and has little to offer those countries that have already implemented agreements with less stringent provisions .

another option is to move incrementally , where possible , toward harmonization or convergence of the vast array of trade arrangements in the western hemisphere , which may be more widely acceptable at some point .

one train of thought suggests that progress might be made by working with administrative solutions in trade agreements , without opening them up for renegotiation .

one example would be to expand rules of origin and cumulation provisions incrementally to broaden the allowable movement of goods from and through countries with reasonably similar agreements .

an incremental administrative approach would allow broader integration with relative ease in trade disciplines where there is fundamental agreement .

in the area of trade agreement implementation , another critical issue in the u.s. congress , some latin american countries have advocated increasing trade - for - aid and technical assistance .

this would provide capacity building and help overcome supply - side constraints in areas such as port and customs operations modernization , infrastructure investment , technology enhancement , and development of common standards in general .

these are often major constraints to the more fluid movement of goods in latin american countries .

it is uncertain if any of these alternatives will lead to a new chapter in trade relations between the united states and latin america .

for one , they may be difficult to implement and monitor , but nonetheless could provide marginal benefits in light of the apparent hiatus in moving toward a broad and comprehensive hemispheric trade agreement .

in the meantime , trade remains foundational to good u.s. - latin america relations , an important consideration in the contemplation of future u.s. trade policy .

appendix a. u.s .

merchandise exports to latin america and the caribbean , 1998-2009 appendix b. u.s .

merchandise imports from latin america and the caribbean , 1998-200 .

