lying , or making a false statement , is a federal crime under a number of circumstances .

it is a federal crime to make a material false statement in a matter within the jurisdiction of a federal agency or department .

perjury is also a federal crime .

perjury is a false statement made under oath before a federal tribunal or official .

moreover , some false certifications are punishable as perjury by operation of a federal statute .

subornation of perjury is inducing someone else to commit perjury .

it too is a federal crime if the perjury induced is a federal crime .

finally , conspiracy to commit any of these underlying crimes is also a separate federal crime .

moreover , a defendant under investigation or on trial for some other federal offense may find upon conviction his sentence for the underlying offense enhanced as a consequence of a false statement he made during the course of the investigation or trial .

this is an overview of federal law relating to the principal false statement and to the three primary perjury statutes .

the principal federal false statement statute , 18 u.s.c .

§ 1001 , proscribes false statements , concealment , or false documentation in any matter within the jurisdiction of any of the three branches of the federal government .

it applies generally within the executive branch .

within the judicial branch , it applies to all but presentations to the court by parties or their attorneys in judicial proceedings .

within the legislative branch , it applies to administrative matters such as procurement , as well as to "any investigations and reviews , conducted pursuant to the authority of any committee , subcommittee , commission , or office of the congress consistent with applicable rules of the house or senate. .

in outline form , section 1001 ( a ) states the following: i .

except as otherwise provided in this section ; ii .

whoever ; iii .

in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive , legislative , or judicial branch of the government of the united states ; iv .

knowingly and willfully ; v. a. falsifies , conceals , or covers up by any trick , scheme , or device a material fact ; b. makes any materially false , fictitious , or fraudulent statement or representation ; or c .

makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any materially false , fictitious , or fraudulent statement or entry ; shall be fined under this title , imprisoned not more than 5 years or , if the offense involves international or domestic terrorism ( as defined in section 2331 ) , imprisoned not more than 8 years , or both .

if the matter relates to an offense under chapter 109a [sexual abuse] , 109b [sex offender registration] , 110 [sexual exploitation] , or 117 [transportation for illicit sexual purposes] , or section 1591 [sex trafficking] , then the term of imprisonment imposed under this section shall be not more than 8 years .

section 1622 outlaws procuring or inducing another to commit perjury: "whoever procures another to commit any perjury is guilty of subornation of perjury , and shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than five years , or both. .

the crime consists of two elements — ( 1 ) an act of perjury committed by another ( 2 ) induced or procured by the defendant .

perjury under either section 1621 or section 1623 will support a conviction for subornation under section 1622 , but proof of the commission of an act of perjury is a necessary element of subornation .

although the authorities are exceptionally sparse , it appears that to suborn one must know that the induced statement is false and that at least to suborn under section 1621 one must also knowingly and willfully induce .

subornation is only infrequently prosecuted as such perhaps because of the ease with which it can now be prosecuted as an obstruction of justice under either 18 u.s.c .

§§ 1503 or 1512 which , unlike section 1622 , do not insist upon suborner success as a prerequisite to prosecution .

section 371 outlaws conspiring to commit another federal offense , including making a false statement in violation of section 1001 , perjury under sections 1621 and 1623 , and subornation of perjury under section 1622 .

as a general matter , conspiracy requires the agreement of two or more people to commit a federal crime and for one of the parties to commit some affirmative act in furtherance of the scheme .

conspiracy under section 371 is punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years .

conspiracy is a separate crime , and offenders may be punished for conspiracy , as well as for the commission of the crime that is the object of the offense , and for any crime committed in the foreseeable furtherance of the crime .

perjury , subornation of perjury , and false statements are each punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years .

they are also punishable by a fine of not more than $250,000 ( not more than $500,000 if the defendant is an organization ) .

when the defendant is convicted of a crime other than perjury or false statements , however , perjury or false statements during the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing of the defendant for the underlying offense will often be treated as the basis for enhancing his sentence by operation of the obstruction of justice guideline of the u.s .

sentencing guidelines ( u.s.s.g .

§ 3c1.1 ) .

federal sentencing begins with , and is greatly influenced by , the calculation of the applicable sentencing range under the sentencing guidelines .

the guidelines assign federal felony offenses a base offense level to which they add levels for various aggravating factors .

obstruction of justice is one of those factors .

each of the final 43 offense levels is assigned to one of six sentencing ranges , depending on the extent of the defendant's past crime history .

section 3c1.1 provides that "if ( 1 ) the defendant willfully obstructed or impeded , or attempted to obstruct or impede , the administration of justice with respect to the investigation , prosecution , or sentencing of the instant offense of conviction , and ( 2 ) the obstructive conduct related to ( a ) the defendant's offense of conviction and any relevant conduct ; or ( b ) a closely related offense , increase the offense level by 2 levels. .

the accompanying commentary explains that the section "is not intended to punish a defendant for the exercise of a constitutional right. .

more specifically , a "defendant's denial of guilt ( other than a denial of guilt under oath that constitutes perjury ) , refusal to admit guilt or provide information to a probation officer , or refusal to enter a plea of guilty is not a basis for application of this provision. .

early on , the supreme court made it clear that an individual's sentence might be enhanced under section 3c1.1 , if he committed perjury during the course of his trial .

moreover , the examples provided elsewhere in the section's commentary and the cases applying the section confirm that it reaches perjurious statements in a number of judicial contexts and to false statements in a number of others .

when perjury provides the basis for a sentencing enhancement under the section , the court must find that the defendant willfully testified falsely with respect to a material matter .

thus , the court must find that "the defendant consciously act[ed] with the purpose of obstructing justice. .

when based upon a false statement not under oath , the statement must still be material , that is , it must "tend to influence or affect the issue under determination. .

even then , false identification at the time of arrest only warrants a sentencing enhancement under the section when the deception significantly hinders the investigation or prosecution .

