hypoxia refers to a depressed concentration of dissolved oxygen in water .

while definitions vary somewhat by region , it is generally agreed that hypoxia in a marine environment occurs seasonally when dissolved oxygen levels fall below 2-3 milligrams per liter .

normal dissolved oxygen concentrations in nearshore marine waters range between 5 and 8 milligrams per liter , and many fish species begin having respiratory difficulties at concentrations below 5 milligrams per liter .

in extremely low oxygen environments , less tolerant marine animals cannot survive and either leave the area or die .

mortality is especially likely for sedentary species .

in addition , spawning areas and other essential habitat can be destroyed by the lack of oxygen .

if these conditions persist , a so - called "dead zone" may develop in which little marine life exists .

the recovery of marine ecosystems following a hypoxic event has not been extensively studied .

decreased concentrations of dissolved oxygen result in part from natural eutrophication when nutrients ( eg , nitrogen and phosphorus ) and sunlight stimulate algal growth ( eg , algae , seaweed , and phytoplankton ) , increasing the amount of organic matter in an aquatic ecosystem over decades and centuries .

as organisms die and sink to the bottom , they are consumed ( decomposed ) by oxygen - dependent bacteria , depleting the water of oxygen .

when this eutrophication is extensive and persistent , bottom waters may become hypoxic , or even anoxic ( no dissolved oxygen ) , while surface waters can be completely normal and full of life .

hypoxia is more likely to occur in coastal waters where the water column is stratified ( i.e. , layered ) because of differences in temperature or salinity or both .

marine dead zones become most noticeable when and where natural eutrophication has been accelerated by human - influenced increases in nutrient loads .

hypoxia often develops as a result of upwelled ocean waters , particularly along the western coast of the americas .

in many instances , cool , nutrient - rich , deep marine waters rise along the coastal margin and support massive algal blooms that lead to hypoxia .

in other instances , upwelled deep water is simply devoid of oxygen .

eutrophication as a result of human activities usually results from non - point sources of nutrients ( eg , runoff from lawns and various agricultural activities including fertilizer use and livestock feedlots ) , point - source discharge from sewage plants , and emissions from vehicles , power plants , and other industrial sources .

hypoxic zones frequently occur in coastal areas where rivers enter the ocean ( eg , estuaries ) .

rivers deliver fresh waters that are rich in nutrients to the saltier estuaries and coastal oceans .

the fresh water is less dense than the salt water and typically flows across the top of the sea water .

the fresh surface water effectively caps the more dense , saline bottom waters , retarding mixing , creating a two - layer system , and promoting hypoxia development in the lower , more saline waters .

in the northern gulf of mexico , the greatest algal growth in surface waters occurs about a month after maximum river discharge , with hypoxic bottom water developing a month later .

hypoxia is more likely to occur in estuaries with high nutrient loading and low flushing ( i.e. , low freshwater turnover ) .

human activities that increase nutrient loading can increase the intensity , spatial extent , and duration of hypoxic events .

storms and tides may mix the hypoxic bottom water and the aerated surface water , dissipating the hypoxia .

although the extent of effects of hypoxic events on u.s. coastal ecosystems is still uncertain , the phenomenon is of increasing concern in coastal areas .

several federal agencies are involved in analyzing the problem , including the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

legislation was enacted by the 105 th congress to provide additional authority and funding for research and monitoring to address these concerns .

this authority was extended by the 108 th congress .

hypoxic episodes have been recorded in all parts of the world , notably in partially enclosed seas and basins where vertical mixing is minimal , such as the gulf of mexico , chesapeake bay , the new york bight , the baltic sea , and the adriatic sea .

in march 2004 , the u.n .

environment program's ( unep's ) global environment outlook ( geo ) year book 2003 reported 146 dead zones where marine life could not be supported due to depleted oxygen levels .

in 2006 , unep's global programme of action for the protection of the marine environment from land - based activities reported that the frequency and intensity of coastal dead zones is rapidly increasing and could reach 200 sites when a full list of newly identified sites is released in early 2007 .

hypoxia has become more frequent and widespread in shallow coastal and estuarine areas .

in addition , permanently hypoxic water masses ( i.e. , oxygen minimum zones ) occur in the open ocean , affecting large seafloor surface areas along the continental margins of the eastern pacific , indian , and western atlantic oceans .

about 21% to 43% of the area of the united states' estuaries have experienced a hypoxic event ; more than half of the affected area is in the mississippi / atchafalaya river plume .

in the mid - atlantic region , 13 of 22 estuaries have experienced hypoxic / anoxic events .

of these , the long island sound , chesapeake bay , choptank river , and the new york bight experience the most serious annual episodes .

in the south atlantic region , hypoxic / anoxic episodes are generally brief , with nearly two - thirds of this region's 21 estuaries experiencing some hypoxia / anoxia .

the gulf of mexico region experiences the highest rate of hypoxic / anoxic events , with almost 85% of this region's 38 estuaries experiencing episodes of hypoxia ( including the mississippi / atchafalaya river plume ) .

the north atlantic region is not as prone to hypoxic / anoxic events due to the generally low nutrient input ( the result of lower population density ) and high tidal flushing .

however , areas adjacent to high population density ( eg , cape cod bay and massachusetts bay ) do experience oxygen depletion .

in the pacific region , hypoxia also occurs near population centers ( eg , san diego bay , newport bay , alamitos bay ) or in areas of limited circulation , even where water temperatures are cold ( eg , hood canal , whidbey basin / skagit bay ) .

since a temporary , yet severe , hypoxic event could result in significant mortality or injury to marine mammals , fish , and other aquatic species , many have deemed better understanding and consistent monitoring of hypoxic phenomena necessary .

noaa initiated the nutrient enhanced coastal ocean productivity ( necop ) program in 1989 to study the effects of nutrient discharges on u.s. coastal waters .

this study found a clear link between nutrient input , enhanced primary production ( i.e. , algal and plant growth ) , and hypoxic events in the northern gulf of mexico .

in response to a january 1995 petition from the sierra club legal defense fund ( currently known as earthjustice legal defense fund ) on behalf of 18 environmental , social justice , and fishermen's organizations , the gulf of mexico program held a conference in december 1995 to outline the issue and identify potential actions .

following that conference , robert perciasepe , assistant epa administrator for water , convened an interagency group of senior administration officials ( the "principals group" ) to discuss potential policy actions and related science needs .

subsequently , this "principals group" created a mississippi river / gulf of mexico watershed nutrient task force .

additionally , the white house office of science and technology policy's committee on environment and natural resources ( cenr ) conducted a hypoxia science assessment at the request of epa .

the cenr assessment was peer - reviewed , made available for public comment , and submitted to the task force to assist in developing policy recommendations and a strategy for addressing hypoxia in the northern gulf of mexico .

in response to an integrated scientific assessment of hypoxia in the northern gulf of mexico by the multi - agency watershed nutrient task force , a plan of action for addressing hypoxia was released in january 2001 .

this plan's environmental objective is to reduce the five - year running average of the dead zone's area to 5,000 square kilometers or less by the year 2015 .

estimates based on water - quality measurements and streamflow records indicate that a 40% reduction in total nitrogen flux to the gulf is necessary to return to average loads comparable to those during 1955-1970 .

model simulations suggest that , short of this 40% reduction , nutrient load reductions of about 20% - 30% would result in a 15% - 50% increase in dissolved oxygen concentrations in bottom waters .

strategies selected focus on encouraging voluntary , practical , and cost - effective actions ; using existing programs , including existing state and federal regulatory mechanisms ; and following adaptive management .

a reassessment of progress on implementing this action plan was initiated in 2005 .

a key consideration is the level and duration of the necessary reduction in excess nutrients from watersheds .

many agricultural lands have been saturated with nutrients for many years , and it may take a long time to "cycle out" excess nitrogen and phosphorus , even if application rates are reduced .

while some believe this problem may have no fast solutions and any management regime considered will need to recognize that progress or improvement may not be apparent for years or even decades , others suggest that improved agricultural practices in efficient application of chemical fertilizers and prevention of soil erosion could yield immediate and measurable benefits .

one model suggests that a 12% to 14% reduction in the use of fertilizer on croplands in the mississippi river basin would reduce the net anthropogenic nitrogen inputs by about 30% , without any loss in crop production .

various policy options for modifying agriculture practices continue to be discussed .

because nonpoint sources are major contributors to the problem at the mouth of the mississippi river system , many believe the clean water act is the appropriate legal framework for addressing future nutrient inputs .

under §319 of the clean water act , louisiana and other states have initiated nonpoint - source control programs .

these programs seek to combine local , state , and federal agency resources to address pollution from nonpoint sources within each state .

to effectively address concerns , however , nonpoint - source programs would need to be encouraged , funded , and implemented throughout the mississippi river watershed .

under §303 of the clean water act , states must identify water - quality - limited segments of their waters that are not meeting standards , and then establish total maximum daily loads ( tmdls ) for each listed water and each pollutant ( eg , nutrients ) that is not meeting current water quality standards .

in addition , agricultural research and educational outreach / assistance to farmers might complement regulatory efforts .

congress took note of the hypoxia problem in 1997 when the conference report on fy1998 department of the interior appropriations ( h.rept .

105-337 ) directed the usgs to give priority attention to hypoxia in its fy1999 budget .

near the end of the 105 th congress , provisions of the harmful algal bloom and hypoxia research and control act of 1998 were incorporated into the coast guard authorization act of 1998 .

this measure was signed into law as p.l .

105-383 on november 13 , 1998 ; title vi authorized appropriations through noaa to conduct research , monitoring , education , and management activities for the prevention , reduction , and control of hypoxia , harmful algal blooms , pfiesteria , and other aquatic toxins .

in 2004 , title i of p.l .

108-456 , the harmful algal bloom and hypoxia amendments act of 2004 , expanded this authority and reauthorized appropriations through fy2008 .

legislation has been introduced in the 110 th congress to reauthorize and amend the harmful algal bloom and hypoxia research and control act .

hypoxia research is regularly funded through appropriations to the national ocean service — part of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration in the department of commerce — in their extramural research account under national centers for coastal ocean science .

for fy2008 , noaa has requested $8.9 million for extramural research grants related to harmful algal bloom and hypoxia , including forecasting .

in the last few years , the u.s. department of agriculture's cooperative state research , education , and extension service has provided a special research grant of around $220,000 annually to iowa state university's leopold center for sustainable agriculture for a project to define and implement new methods and practices in farming that reduce impacts on water quality and the hypoxia problem in the gulf of mexico .

in the last few years , the environ - mental protection agency's environmental programs and management account has provided a specific authorization of around $125,000 annually for the missouri department of agriculture's hypoxia education and stewardship project .

this effort seeks to educate missouri producers about hypoxia and encourage use of practices that will reduce the amount of nitrogen lost through leaching and / or evaporation .

the epa has also funded research on gulf of mexico hypoxia through its gulf breeze laboratory .

