an important aspect of u.s. efforts to improve economic competitiveness is the existence of a capable scientific and technological workforce .

concern has been expressed about the future ability of the u.s. science and engineering base to generate the technological advances needed to maintain economic growth .

some discussions have centered on the quality of science and mathematics undergraduate education and training .

the design and structure of the scientific curriculum are thought to discourage a number of highly qualified students from entering and remaining in the disciplines .

other discussions have focused on the scientific knowledge of those students entering other disciplines .

even students pursuing nonscientific and nonmathematical specialties will require basic knowledge of scientific and technological applications and mathematical reasoning in order to adapt to constant changes in the labor market .

precollege science and mathematics instruction also has an important relationship to the future supply of u.s. scientific and technical personnel .

a basic science and mathematics education is considered necessary not only for those who will enter science as majors , but for all citizens to understand scientific and technical issues that affect their lives .

however , several indicators of the performance of u.s. students in science and mathematics education at the precollege level reveal a mixed picture of successes and shortcomings .

still other indicators show that the science and mathematics curriculum at the precollege level is unfocused and that many science and mathematics teachers lack a major or minor in the subject area being taught .

reform efforts at improving precollege science and mathematics education have included the development of recommended national standards .

such standards describe what children should know , when they should know it , and how to assess what they know .

these standards emphasize inquiry based education as being the most effective in retaining the interest of all students .

while many states and school districts have created new science and mathematics standards that to some degree are drawn from standards of the national council of teachers of mathematics and the national research council , adoption and implementation of the standards at the local school level where there is often limited resources and unprepared teachers has proven to be problematic .

the change from a labor - based manufacturing to a knowledge - based manufacturing and service economy demands certain skills of our citizenry .

the national science foundation ( nsf ) projects that in the increasingly changing context for science and technology , a workforce trained in the sciences and engineering is necessary for continued economic growth .

a may 2007 report of the department of education states that: there is increasing concern about u.s. economic competitiveness , particularly the future ability of the nation's education institutions to produce citizens literate in stem concepts and to produce future scientists , engineers , mathematicians , and technologists .

such experts are needed to maintain u.s. preeminence in science , technology , engineering and mathematics .

while other countries around the world strive to improve their own education systems and to expand their economies , the u.s. will have to work even harder in the coming years to maintain its competitive edge .

in this report , selected science and education issues are presented , along with a summary of findings from various studies .

the issues discussed include precollege science and mathematics concerns ; improving undergraduate and graduate education ; demographics and the science and engineering talent pool ; foreign science and engineering students ; and congressional activity .

for expanded discussion of science and mathematics education issues see crs report rl34539 , the u.s. science and technology workforce , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rl33434 , science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education: background , federal policy , and legislative action , by [author name scrubbed] .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

precollege ( k - 12 ) science and mathematics instruction has an important relationship to the future supply of u.s. scientific and technological personnel .

the technological demands of the workforce are increasing exponentially .

a basic science and mathematics education is necessary not only for those who will enter science as majors , but for all citizens to understand scientific and technical issues that affect their lives .

in addition , scientific and technical skills are a requirement for an increasingly wide range of occupations such as health care , banking , insurance , and energy production .

whether individuals are in the service sector , manufacturing , government , or management , many believe that some level of scientific literacy is required .

the term "reform" is repeated throughout discussions of science education at the precollege level , covering such issues as: school curriculum and the quality of science instruction , student interest in science , the shortage of qualified teachers , teacher training and retraining , student achievement on science and mathematics measures , and the participation of minorities and women in science .

the u.s. educational system has a long history of attempted education reforms .

one particular report that received considerable attention was released in 1983 by the department of education ( ed ) .

the report , a nation at risk , attacked the school system , declaring that u.s. schools were sinking under a "rising tide of mediocrity," partly as a result of a shortage of qualified teachers in science , mathematics , and other essential disciplines .

more than 25 years after the report , there is some debate as to whether or not our educational system is still "at risk. .

reforms in science and mathematics education have focused on both what to teach and how to teach it .

a 1998 publication of the american association for the advancement of science ( aaas ) , blueprints for reform - science , mathematics , and technology education , presented goals for science , mathematics , and technology literacy .

the goals offered multidisciplinary instructions in the real world , structured so students would use the discovery process to study issues that are multidimensional , to arrive at alternative approaches , and to be able to anticipate both positive and negative consequences of their choices .

in 2000 , the national council of teachers of mathematics ( nctm ) released a revised principles and standards for school mathematics , which described how students should be taught to solve non - routine problems in meaningful context .

the nctm standards promoted the policy of students learning through induction rather than memorization , directing the instructional process on inquiry as opposed to the traditional tell - and - test approach , and promoting assessment methods that are open - ended instead of machine - scoreable .

more recently , a 2005 report of the fordham institute states that "while state standards are very much in flux , the nation , in its entirety , is neither making progress nor losing ground when it comes to its expectations for what students should learn in science. .

the ongoing discussions of reform in science education stressed the importance of inquiry - based instruction as the most beneficial in assisting students to think critically , to work independently or cooperatively , and to solve problems as they encounter them in different and novel situations .

in 2002 , the national research council released its publication , investigating the influence of standards , a framework for research in mathematics , science , and technology education .

the report examined two primary questions: ( 1 ) how has the system responded to the introduction of nationally developed mathematics , science , and technology standards ? , and ( 2 ) what are the consequences for student learning ? .

the report offered guideposts for determining the influence of nationally developed science , mathematics , and technology standards and evaluates the significance of the influence on student learning , on teachers and pedagogy , and on the education system as a whole .

a 2007 publication of the national academies , taking science to school , states that there are four recommended goals of science education .

they are to: 1. know , use , and interpret scientific explanations of the natural world ; 2. generate and evaluate scientific evidence and explanations ; 3. understand the nature and development of scientific knowledge ; and 4. participate productively in scientific practices and discourse .

it has been found that many science instructors , at the precollege and the college level , do not focus on all of the recommended goals .

bruce alberts , editor - in - chief , science , states that: "[a]ll four types of science understanding are critical not only to a good science education but also to the basic education of everyone in the modern world. .

in the 21 st century , global competition and rapid advances in science and technology will require a workforce that is increasingly more scientifically and technically proficient .

the bureau of labor statistics reports that science and engineering occupations are projected to grow by 21.4% from 2004 to 2014 , compared to a growth of 13% in all occupations during the same time period .

it is anticipated that approximately 65% of the growth in science and engineering occupations will be in the computer - related occupations .

faster than average growth is expected in the life sciences , social sciences , and the science and engineering - related occupations of science manager .

in testimony before the house science committee , daniel l. goroff , vice president for academic affairs , dean of faculty , harvey mudd college , stated that: with less than 6% of the world's population , the united states cannot expect to dominate science and technology in the future as it did during the second half of the last century when we enjoyed a massively disproportionate share of the world's stem [science , technology , engineering , and mathematics] resources .

we must invest more the resources we do have , encourage those resources to produce economically useful innovations , and organize the stem enterprise by working with diverse groups to make sure that innovations developed here or overseas produce prosperity and progress for all .

there are few in the scientific community who argue about the effect of national demographics on the future science and engineering workforce .

in the 21 st century , a larger proportion of the u.s. population will be composed of minorities — blacks , hispanics , and native americans , with the fastest growing minority group being hispanics .

as a group , these minorities traditionally have been underrepresented in the science and engineering disciplines compared to their fraction of the total population .

these minorities take fewer high - level science and mathematics courses in high school ; earn fewer undergraduate and graduate degrees in science and engineering ; and are less likely to be employed in science and engineering positions than white males .

data for 2006 reveal that while blacks , hispanics , and native americans / alaskan natives as a whole comprise more than 29.5% of the population , and earn , as a whole , 16.0% of the bachelor degrees , 11.3% of the masters degrees , and 8.5% of the doctorate degrees in science and engineering .

nsf data show that between 2000 and 2006 , all racial / ethnic groups , except for whites , either increased their share of earned bachelor and degrees in science and engineering or remained level .

blacks were awarded 8.3% of the bachelors degrees in both 2000 and in 2006 .

hispanics increased their share of earned degrees from 7.0% in 2000 to 7.7% in 2006 .

while native americans / alaskan natives increased their proportion , it remained at less than 1.0% .

asian / pacific islanders proportion of bachelors' degrees increased from 8.9% in 2000 to 9.3% in 2006 .

for foreign students , the proportion was approximately 3.8% in both 2000 and 2006 .

the decrease in earned bachelors degrees by whites was from 67.8% in 2000 to 64.7% in 2006 .

at the master's level , blacks were awarded 6.6% of the degrees in science and engineering in 2006 , up from the 5.7% in 2000 .

the proportion of master's degrees received by hispanics increased from 3.9% in 2000 to 4.7% in 2006 .

asian / pacific islanders comprised approximately 7.3% of the masters degrees awarded in 2000 and 7.2% in 2006 .

for foreign students on temporary visas , there was a slight decrease from 25.9% in 2000 to 25.6% in 2006 .

native americans' increased slightly but remained at less than 1.0% between 2000 and 2006 .

again , whites reported a decrease in their proportion of earned degrees , dropping from 52.1% in 2000 to 47.9% in 2006 .

an analysis of the data for earned degrees at the doctoral level revealed that blacks registered a slight decrease at this level , from 2.7% of the awards in 2000 to 2.5% in 2006 .

the degrees earned by hispanics remained almost level , 2.8% in 2000 and 2.9% in 2006 .

as at the other two degree levels , native americans' proportion remained at less than 1% .

asian / pacific islanders reported a decrease in earned degrees , from 6.6% in 2000 to 5.9% in 2006 .

whites also reported a decrease in earned degrees , from 51.8% in 2000 to 42.4% in 2006 .

doctoral degrees awarded to foreign students increased from 29.5% in 2000 to 38.6% in 2006 .

while minorities have increased their share of degrees awarded in the sciences , poor preparation in science and mathematics is said to be a major factor limiting the appeal of science and engineering to even larger numbers of these groups .

a large number of blacks , hispanics , and native americans lack access to many of the more rigorous college preparatory courses .

enrollment in college preparatory track or courses offers a student a better chance at being accepted at a college through her / his performance on the scholastic aptitude test ( sat ) or american college testing ( act ) , and a better chance at success in college .

despite gains in the past 10 years , the average scores made by blacks , hispanics , and native americans , who take both the sat and the act continue to fall behind the average scores of whites and asian students who take the test .

in addition to recruitment as a problem for greater minority participation in science and engineering , retention of minorities in the educational pipeline , once recruited , also is of concern .

 ( attrition rates for blacks , hispanics , and native americans are higher than for whites or asians ) .

currently , these underrepresented minority groups are reporting increased enrollments in colleges and universities and in their share of science and engineering degrees .

however , there is concern that some of the programs in the universities to attract minorities to the sciences have come under attack as a result of the limitations currently imposed on affirmative action in higher education .

in an effort to avoid the threat of litigation or complaints , many institutions no longer target programs solely to minority groups or use race - based eligibility criteria in awarding fellowships or participation in academic enrichment programs .

these programs that were formerly race - exclusive , have been opened to all students "... to serv[e] the broader and more abstract goal of promoting campus diversity. .

most institutions have renamed their "minority" offices and programs as "diversity" or "multicultural" offices and programs .

women are also found to be underrepresented in selected science and engineering disciplines .

although enrollment in rigorous course work and advanced placement classes in high school has increased for women in more than 10 years , there is still a need to strengthen the course taking and persistence of women all along the educational pipeline .

data reveal that in 2005 , women were awarded approximately 50.5% of the undergraduate degrees in science and engineering , a slight decrease from 50.8% in 2002 .

the number of women who persist in the science and engineering disciplines to the graduate level shows a decline .

in 2005 , 39.5% of the doctorate degrees in science and engineering were awarded to women , almost level with the 39.2% in 2002 .

disaggregated data find that these awards were concentrated in selected disciplines .

in 2005 , women were awarded 22.5% of the doctorate degrees in engineering , 26.7% in the physical sciences , and 19.8% in computer sciences .

the proportion for these awards earned by women in 2002 were 17.5% , 26.6% , and 20.6% , respectively .

in the social and behavioral sciences , women earned 55.0% of the doctorates in 2005 , an increase from the 54.4% in 2002 .

there was even more significant participation by women in psychology .

women were awarded 68.0% of the doctorates in psychology in 2005 , and 66.7% in 2002 .

shirley ann jackson , president , rensselaer polytechnic institute , states that in the "altered environment" resulting from the supreme court decisions , the nation is challenged more than ever to confront the changing demographics .

blacks , hispanics , and women , groups underrepresented in the science , engineering , and technical disciplines , comprise more than 66% of the entire workforce .

it is expected that this "new majority" will replace the impending retiring scientific and engineering workforce which is largely white and male .

jackson notes that: [w]e are experiencing pressure to replace the graying science and engineering workforce with new talent — educated young scientists and engineers who will make the discoveries and innovations which have paid off so handsomely , to date... .

while the recent supreme court decisions uphold diversity , they force us to come at things in a different way .

we must come up with solutions for developing science and engineering talent — solutions that address the new and coming realities of the underrepresented minority becoming the underrepresented majority .

the increased presence of foreign students in graduate science and engineering programs has been and continues to be of concern to some in the scientific community .

enrollment of u.s. citizens in graduate science and engineering programs has not kept pace with that of foreign students in those programs .

nsf data reveal found that first - time , full - time science and engineering graduate enrollment of foreign students in science and engineering disciplines increased by approximately 16.0% from 2005 to 2006 .

the increase for u.s. citizens and permanent resident students during this same academic year was slightly more than 1.0% .

in addition to the number of foreign students in graduate science and engineering programs , a significant number of university faculty in the scientific disciplines are foreign , and foreign doctorates are employed in large numbers by industry .

nsf data reveal that in 2005 , the foreign student population earned approximately 34.7% of the doctorate degrees in the sciences and approximately 63.1% of the doctorate degrees in engineering .

in 2005 , foreign students on temporary resident visas earned 20.6% of the doctorates in the sciences , and 48.6% of the doctorates in engineering .

the participation rates in 2004 were 18.9% and 48.8% , respectively .

in 2005 , permanent resident status students earned 3.8% of the doctorates in the sciences and 4.4% of the doctorates in engineering , an increase over the 2004 levels of 3.7% and 4.2% , respectively .

trend data for science and engineering degrees for the years 1996-2005 reveal that of the non - u.s. citizen population , temporary resident status students consistently have earned the majority of the doctorate degrees .

there are divergent views in the scientific and academic community about the effects of a significant foreign presence in graduate science and engineering programs .

some argue that u.s. universities benefit from a large foreign citizen enrollment by helping to meet the needs of the university and , for those students who remain in the united states , the nation's economy .

foreign students generate three distinct types of measurable costs and benefits .

first , 13 percent of foreign students remain in the united states , permanently increasing the number of skilled workers in the labor force .

second , foreign students , while enrolled in schools , are an important part of the workforce at those institutions , particularly at large research universities .

they help teach large undergraduate classes , provide research assistance to the faculty , and make up an important fraction of the bench workers in scientific labs .

finally , many foreign students pay tuition , and those revenues may be an important source of income for educational institutions .

some argue that the influx of immigrant scientists and engineers has resulted in depressed job opportunities , lowered wages , and declining working conditions for u.s. scientific personnel .

while many businesses , especially high - tech companies , have recently downsized , the federal government issued thousands of h - 1b visas to foreign workers .

there are those in the scientific and technical community who contend that an over - reliance on h - 1b visa workers to fill high - tech positions has weakened opportunities for the u.s. workforce .

many u.s. workers argue that a number of the available positions are being filled by "less - expensive foreign labor. .

those critical of the influx of immigrant scientists have advocated placing restrictions on the hiring of foreign skilled employees in addition to enforcing the existing laws designed to protect workers .

those in support of the h - 1b program maintain that there is no "clear evidence" that foreign workers displace u.s. workers in comparable positions and that it is necessary to hire foreign workers to fill needed positions , even during periods of slow economic growth .

the debate on the presence of foreign students in graduate science and engineering programs and the workforce intensified following the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 .

it has been reported that foreign students in the united states are encountering "a progressively more inhospitable environment. .

concerns have been expressed about certain foreign students receiving education and training in sensitive areas .

there has been increased discussion about the access of foreign scientists and engineers to research and development ( r&d ) related to chemical and biological weapons .

also , there is discussion of the added scrutiny of foreign students from countries that sponsor terrorism .

the academic community is concerned that the more stringent requirements of foreign students may have a continued impact on enrollments in colleges and universities .

others contend that a possible reduction in the immigration of foreign scientists may affect negatively on the competitiveness of u.s. industry and compromise commitments made in long - standing international cooperative agreements .

on august 9 , 2007 , president bush signed into law p.l .

110 - 69 , the america competes act ( h.r .

2272 ) .

the legislation was directed at increasing research investment , improving economic competitiveness , developing an innovation infrastructure , and strengthening and expanding science and mathematics programs at all points on the educational pipeline .

this legislation included components of other competitiveness bills introduced during the 110 th congress .

the competes act authorized $33.6 billion for fy2008 through fy2010 for science , mathematics , engineering , and technology programs across the federal government .

among other things , it directed the nsf to expand the integrative graduate education and research traineeship and the graduate research fellowship programs , and to establish a clearinghouse of programs related to improving the professional science master's degree .

to address the need to expand the participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences , the competes act supported a program for mentoring to women interested in pursing degrees in science , mathematics , and engineering .

in addition , it required the nsf to establish teacher institutes that are focused on science , technology , engineering , and mathematics .

these are to be summer institutes and are to provide professional development for teachers at the precollege level teaching in high - need subjects and in high - need schools .

legislation during the 111 th congress includes h.r .

1709 , stem education coordination act of 2009 .

this bill would establish a committee under the national science and technology council with the responsibility of coordinating stem activities and programs for all federal agencies .

the committee would provide a five - year stem education strategic plan for the participating agencies that includes annual and long - term objectives , and the metrics used to assess progress in obtaining the objectives .

in addition , the committee would provide a description for the role of each agency in supporting programs and activities designed to achieve the objectives .

h.r .

461 , 10,000 trained by 2010 act , would authorize funding for competitive grants to generate innovative approaches in the health care information fields .

the bill would establish or improve undergraduate and master's degree health care information programs , attract students to such programs , and provide students with discipline - related experiences in the private sector or at the federal level .

h.r .

1144 , fulfilling the potential of women in academic science and engineering act , would , among other things , increase awareness of and overcome gender bias in academic science and engineering through research and training .

the bill would develop a uniform policy for each federal science agency to conduct workshops directed at educating program officers , grant review panel members , and others about methods that reduce the effects of gender biases in evaluation of research grants .

other policies to be explored would include those of hiring , tenure , and promotion practices , and the selection for honors determined primarily on the recipient's research record .

h.r .

1791 , stopping trained in america phds from leaving the economy act of 2009 ( staple act ) would exempt from the numerical limits on h - 1b visas , foreign students who have earned a doctorate in a scientific or technical discipline from a u.s. institution .

in addition , these degree earners in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics would be admitted for permanent residence .

oversight by the 111 th congress may touch on some of the following questions: can our system of education and training achieve its stated goal of being first in science and mathematics ? .

can underrepresented minorities be encouraged to pursue scientific careers in larger numbers ? .

can the u.s. continue to produce successive generations of scientists , engineers , and technicians to meet the demands of the nation's changing economy and workplace ? .

