the rules and practices of the house of representatives governing quorums and voting on the floor are closely intertwined , and derive from two provisions of article i of the constitution .

regarding quorums , clause 1 of section 5 states in part that "a majority of each [house] shall constitute a quorum to do business ; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day , and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members , in such manner , and under such penalties as each house may provide. .

regarding voting , clause 3 of the same section provides in part that "the yeas and nays of the members of either house on any question shall , at the desire of one fifth of those present , be entered on the journal. .

this report discusses how the house now interprets and implements these two constitutional provisions .

it focuses on the most important rules and the most common practices ; it does not attempt to cover all the precedents the house has established or all the procedures that may be invoked—for example , the procedures for calling the roll instead of using the electronic voting system to decide a question or establish the presence of a quorum .

this report also assumes a familiarity with some other aspects of the house's floor procedures .

the constitution's quorum requirement quoted above seems to make it necessary for a simple majority of the house's members , or a minimum of 218 representatives if there are no vacancies in the house , to be present on the floor whenever the house conducts business .

as any observer of the house soon notices , however , sometimes only a handful of members are present during house debates .

in fact , it is rather unusual for as many as 218 members to be present on the floor at the same time unless a vote or quorum call is being conducted using the house's electronic voting system .

there appears to be an inconsistency , therefore , between an apparently unambiguous constitutional requirement and the well - established and well - accepted practices of the house .

how is this inconsistency to be explained ? .

first , the house transacts much of its business on the floor by resolving itself into the committee of the whole—formally , the committee of the whole house on the state of the union .

the primary reason for doing so is that the rules governing debate and amendment in committee of the whole are more flexible than those that apply when the house is meeting "in the house. .

resolving into committee of the whole is also convenient for another reason .

the committee of the whole is a committee that the house has created in its rules , just as the house has created various standing committees .

although the committee of the whole differs from other house committees in that all representatives are members of it and it meets on the house floor , it still remains a committee of the house .

therefore , a meeting of the committee of the whole is not a meeting of the house itself , so the constitutional quorum requirement for the house does not apply in committee of the whole .

instead , the house is free to set in its rules whatever quorum requirement it chooses for meetings of the committee of the whole .

clause 6 ( a ) of house rule xviii provides that a "quorum of a committee of the whole house on the state of the union is 100 members," not the majority of house members that constitutes a quorum of the house .

second , whether the house is meeting as the house or in committee of the whole , a quorum is always presumed to be present unless and until its absence is demonstrated .

reasonably enough , the house presumes that it is complying with the constitution or its own rules , as the case may be .

furthermore , neither the speaker nor the chair of the committee of the whole is empowered to take the initiative to ensure that this presumption is correct .

at no time may the speaker or the chair interrupt the proceedings on the floor because he or she observes that the necessary quorum is not present or because he or she decides to count those present to determine whether the applicable quorum requirement is being met .

instead , the speaker or chair responds to an assertion that a member makes from the floor that a quorum is not present ( or less often , when a member is recognized to move a call of the house ) .

a quorum is always presumed to be present unless a member challenges this presumption from the floor , and the house's standing rules severely limit when he or she may do so .

many of the details of these rules are discussed later in this report .

to summarize them here , there is a critical linkage between the house's quorum and voting procedures: about the only times that a member has a right to make a point of order that a quorum is not present is when a vote is taking place .

in a sense , the house in its rules has adopted a definition of business for purposes of the constitutional quorum requirement that is limited to voting .

if a majority of all representatives actually had to be in the chamber from the opening gavel to the adjournment of each daily session , it would become practically impossible for members to satisfy all their various responsibilities and for the house to do its work in a timely fashion .

either the constitution or the house's rules require that certain kinds of questions be decided by record votes that are almost always conducted by use of the house's electronic voting system .

first , the constitution mandates that any vote to override a presidential veto "shall be determined by yeas and nays" ( article i , section 7 , clause 2 ) .

second , under clause 10 of rule xx , the "yeas and nays shall be considered as ordered when the speaker puts the question on passage of a bill or joint resolution , or on adoption of a conference report , making general appropriations , or on final adoption of a concurrent resolution on the budget or conference report thereon. .

and third , clause 12 ( a ) ( 2 ) of rule xxii provides for a record vote on any motion to authorize house managers to close the meetings of any conference committee .

in all other cases , the basic procedures for voting in the house are laid out in house rules i and xx .

the manner in which questions are put to a vote is governed by clause 6 of rule i , on the duties of the speaker: the speaker shall put a question in this form: "those in favor ( of the question ) , say 'aye .

'" ; and after the affirmative voice is expressed , "those opposed , say 'no.'" .

after a vote by voice under this clause , the speaker may use such voting procedures as may be invoked under rule xx .

clause 1 of rule xx then lays out the basic procedures for securing division and record votes: ( a ) the house shall divide after the speaker has put a question to a vote by voice as provided in clause 6 of rule i if the speaker is in doubt or division is demanded .

those in favor of the question shall first rise from their seats to be counted , and then those opposed .

 ( b ) if a member , delegate , or resident commissioner requests a recorded vote , and that request is supported by at least one - fifth of a quorum , the vote shall be taken by electronic device unless the speaker invokes another procedure for recording votes provided in this rule .

a recorded vote taken in the house under this paragraph shall be considered a vote by the yeas and nays .

 ( c ) in case of a tie vote , a question shall be lost .

whether in the house or in committee of the whole , every question , except the few noted above , is first put to a voice vote .

the chair instructs those who favor the question to call out "aye," and then those who oppose it to call out "no. .

the chair then is expected to state that , in his or her opinion , "the ayes [or the noes] appear to have it," and to pause before banging the gavel and announcing that "the ayes [or noes] do have it and the bill is [or is not] passed" ( or the motion is agreed to , or whatever the case may be ) .

if no one challenges the chair's statement , his or her announcement is conclusive , and the question is decided .

furthermore , the vote is considered valid even if only a few members actually voted .

a quorum is presumed to have been present , regardless of how many may have actually participated in the voice vote .

after the chair announces his or her opinion as to the outcome of a voice vote , any member , delegate , or resident commissioner has a right to demand a division vote , although they rarely do this in practice .

even less common , the chair may call for a division vote when a voice vote leaves him or her in doubt .

when a division vote is demanded , the chair directs all those in favor of the question to stand and to remain standing until he or she counts them ; then in like manner , the chair counts those who stand in opposition to the question .

the chair then announces the result , and the question is decided .

as is true of a voice vote , the positions of individual members in a division vote are not recorded , and a division vote is valid even if less than a quorum was present to participate in it , unless the vote is challenged for that reason .

again , the presumption is that a quorum is present on the floor when the vote takes place even if not all of those members choose to take part in the vote .

both voice votes and division votes involve only the members who happen to be on or very near the floor at the time a vote takes place .

no time is provided for members to come to the floor from their offices or committee rooms .

as a result , a small number of members can determine the outcome of either kind of vote , and that outcome may not be the same as it would be if most or all members participated .

before the final result of either a voice vote or a division vote is announced , therefore , any member , delegate , or resident commissioner may request a record vote using the house's electronic voting system .

during this kind of vote , members usually have 15 minutes or more to come to the floor and record their votes , and the vote of each member is recorded individually and printed in the congressional record .

the house uses its electronic voting system for taking what are actually several different kinds of votes .

they are indistinguishable from each other in how they are conducted , but not in how they are ordered .

the key rule governing attempts to secure the presence of a majority of representatives on the floor during a meeting of the house is clause 7 of rule xx , which states ( a ) the speaker may not entertain a point of order that a quorum is not present unless a question has been put to a vote .

 ( b ) subject to subparagraph ( c ) the speaker may recognize a member , delegate , or resident commissioner to move a call of the house at any time .

when a quorum is established pursuant to a call of the house , further proceedings under the call shall be considered as dispensed with unless the speaker recognizes for a motion to compel attendance of members under clause 5 ( b ) .

 ( c ) a call of the house shall not be in order after the previous question is ordered unless the speaker determines by actual count that a quorum is not present .

under subparagraph ( a ) , a member only has the right to invoke the constitutional quorum requirement when a vote is taking place .

at that time , any representative "may object to the vote on the ground that a quorum is not present and make a point of order that a quorum is not present. .

at any other time , the equivalent of a quorum call may take place only at the discretion of the speaker , when he or she recognizes a member "to move a call of the house. .

in the former case , the speaker responds to the point of order by counting to determine whether a quorum is present .

if it is , the point of order is overruled and no quorum call ensues ; if it is not , the point of order is sustained , and an automatic roll call vote is ordered , taken by electronic device .

in the latter case ( subparagraph ( b ) ) , a member makes a motion for a call of the house , prompting what is in effect a quorum call to secure the presence of members , regardless of whether or not a quorum was present when it began .

note that the purpose of a quorum call under subparagraph ( a ) , or a call of the house under subparagraph ( b ) , is to secure the presence of a quorum , not to require the attendance of all the members of the house .

subparagraph ( b ) provides that , once a quorum responds to a call of the house , "further proceedings under the call"—which would be efforts by the sergeant at arms to secure the attendance of all the remaining members—"shall be considered as dispensed with" unless the speaker decides to entertain a motion for that purpose .

similarly , clause 6 ( b ) of rule xx , quoted earlier , provides for the same "further proceedings" to be dispensed with after a quorum call pursuant to subparagraph ( a ) .

the corresponding rule governing quorums and quorum calls in committee of the whole is clause 6 of rule xviii .

it is this rule that ( 1 ) sets the quorum in committee of the whole at 100 members , delegates , and the resident commissioner ; ( 2 ) authorizes notice quorum calls at the discretion of the chair ; and ( 3 ) provides for two - minute votes on amendments following regular quorum calls , again at the chair's discretion .

in addition , the same rule controls when a point of order that a quorum is not present can be made in committee of the whole .

 ( calls of the house are not permitted in committee of the whole. ) .

in brief , the rule states that the chair need not permit a point of order of no quorum to be made during general debate , and once a quorum in committee of the whole has been established on any day , a point of order of no quorum may be made only when "the chair has put the pending proposition to a vote. .

in other words , no member has a right to insist on the presence of a quorum during general debate .

there is a right to make one point of order of no quorum if it is made during the amending process that follows general debate but only ( 1 ) if there was no quorum call during general debate and ( 2 ) if this point of order is made before there has been a recorded vote on an amendment or motion during that day's sitting .

once a quorum call or recorded vote has taken place in committee of the whole on any day , a member has the right to make a point of order that a quorum is not present only when the committee is in the process of voting .

in the unlikely event that a majority of the house fails either to respond to a quorum call or to participate in an electronic vote , the house's failure to comply with the constitutional quorum requirement is demonstrated .

consequently , the house cannot resume legislative business until the presence of a quorum is recorded .

the house has only two options: one is to adjourn ; the other is to take steps necessary to secure the attendance of a quorum .

in most cases , the house can be expected to adopt the second of these options by invoking clause 5 ( a ) of rule xx .

this clause provides in part that , "in the absence of a quorum , a majority comprising at least 15 members , which may include the speaker , may compel the attendance of absent members. .

in this instance , the house can act without a quorum being present because the constitutional provision quoted at the beginning of this report authorizes it to do so .

that provision states that , in the absence of a quorum , "a smaller number may adjourn from day to day , and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members , in such manner , and under such penalties as each house may provide. .

the situation and options in committee of the whole are comparable .

"where the chair has announced the absence of a quorum in committee of the whole , no further business may be conducted until a quorum is established or the committee rises. .

for much the same reason that the constitution authorizes the house to adjourn without a quorum being present , clause 6 ( d ) of house rule xviii states that "a quorum is not required in the committee of the whole house on the state of the union for adoption of a motion that the committee rise. .

however , a quorum is necessary to adopt a motion that the committee rise and report a measure for final passage in the house .

article i , section 5 , clause 1 of the constitution states that "a majority of each [house] shall constitute a quorum to do business. .

a quorum has long been defined as a majority of the whole number of the house , and the whole number of the house has long been viewed as the number of members elected , sworn , and living .

whenever the death , resignation , disqualification , or expulsion of a member results in a vacancy , the whole number of the house is adjusted .

in the event of a catastrophe , however , it may not be immediately known whether a member is alive or dead , thereby making it impossible to adjust the whole number of members .

furthermore , if a member is incapacitated but living , or unharmed but unable to attend the proceedings of the house , he or she would still count toward the whole number used to determine a quorum .

missing , injured , and stranded members are still "elected , sworn , and living. .

if many such members are affected , and the congress needs to act , this situation could prove problematic because it may be impossible to establish a quorum .

in order to address this issue , in 2005 the house modified clause 5 of rule xx to prepare for a catastrophic event that leaves a large number of members missing , incapacitated , or incapable of attending the proceedings of the house .

the rule establishes a method for establishing a "provisional quorum" in the case of a catastrophic event .

this method did not provide a new means for determining the whole number of the house ; on the contrary , it is a method to be used provisionally until a quorum can be constituted by a majority of the whole number of the house .

under the rule , if the house is without a majority of members elected , sworn , and living due to catastrophic circumstances , then a quorum shall be a majority of the "provisional number" of the house .

in general , every representative is expected to vote on every question , but house rules make an exception for the speaker .

under clause 7 of rule i , the speaker "is not required to vote in ordinary legislative proceedings , except when such vote would be decisive or when the house is engaged in voting by ballot. .

although this rule does not prevent speakers from voting , they usually do not .

every other member "shall vote on each question put , unless having a direct personal or pecuniary interest in the event of such question" ( rule iii , clause 1 ) .

each representative is expected to apply this clause to himself or herself .

the house parliamentarian observes that "it has been found impracticable to enforce the provision requiring every member to vote. .

also , in recent practice , "the speaker has held that the member and not the chair should determine" whether a representative has "a direct personal or pecuniary interest" in the outcome of a vote ; "the speaker has denied the speaker's own power to deprive a member of the constitutional right to vote. .

in the same vein , clause 10 of rule xxiii , the code of official conduct , states that a member , delegate , or resident commissioner who has been convicted of a crime for which he or she may be sentenced to two years or more in prison "should refrain" from voting in the house or in committee of the whole .

voting is an individual right and responsibility that cannot be delegated or exercised by anyone else .

in response to concerns about the possibility of "ghost voting," in which a member would be recorded as having voted even when there was evidence that he or she could not have done so , the house voted in 1981 to add what is now clause 2 of rule iii: ( a ) a member may not authorize any other person to cast the vote of such member or record the presence of such member in the house or the committee of the whole house on the state of the union .

 ( b ) no other person may cast a member's vote or record a member's presence in the house or the committee of the whole house on the state of the union .

all questions are to be decided on the house floor by simple majority vote unless some constitutional provision or house rule provides otherwise .

a simple majority vote is defined as at least one - half - plus - one of the members voting , provided that a quorum is present ; clause 1 ( c ) of rule xx provides that "in case of a tie vote , a question shall be lost. .

the constitution requires a two - thirds vote of the members voting for various purposes: to expel a member , to override a presidential veto , to propose a constitutional amendment , to remove political disabilities ( now obsolete ) , and to determine that a president remains disabled .

in addition , for other purposes house rules require the support of either two - thirds or three - fifths of the members voting: two - thirds: to agree to a motion to suspend the rules ( clause 1 ( a ) of rule xv ) , two - thirds: to agree to a motion to dispense with the call of the private calendar ( clause 5 ( a ) of rule xv ) , and two - thirds: to consider a special rule on the same day the rules committee reports it ( clause 6 ( a ) of rule xiii ) .

