in each of the past four fiscal years , congress has directed the administration to reduce the size of the department of defense ( dod ) acquisition workforce — the dod employees who participate in the development and procurement of weapons and equipment for the military services .

in the fy1996 defense authorization act , congress directed the administration to reduce the workforce by 15,000 people by october 1 , 1996 , and by a total of 25 percent ( compared to the 1995 figure ) over a period of five years .

the act also required the secretary of defense to report to congress on ways to restructure functions among dod's acquisition departments and agencies .

in the fy1997 defense authorization act , congress directed the administration to reduce the workforce by an additional 15,000 people by october 1 , 1997 , and stipulated that this reduction was to be in the form of actual acquisition personnel , not just acquisition positions .

in the fy1998 defense authorization act , congress directed the administration to reduce the workforce by an additional 25,000 people by september 30 , 1998 , but permitted the secretary of defense to waive a portion of this reduction if her certifies to congress by june 1 , 1998 that such reductions would adversely impact military readiness and acquisition efficiency .

the act also required dod to submit a report to congress by april 1 , 1998 that provides a plan for future acquisition policy , including future opportunities to restructure and streamline dod's acquisition organizations , workforce and infrastructure .

in the fy1999 defense authorization act , congress directed the administration to reduce the workforce by 25,000 acquisition personnel by october 1 , 1999 , lowering it to 12,500 personnel if the secretary of defense certifies that such a reduction would cause an adverse effect on military readiness or management of the acquisition system .

these mandates to reduce the size of the dod acquisition workforce reflected congress' view that the workforce has not been downsized enough — that reductions continue to lag in proportion to the decline in the size of the overall defense budget , in general , and the acquisition portion of the defense budget , in particular .

as a result , according to this view , dod has spent more than is necessary to administer its acquisition programs .

reducing the workforce has been viewed as a necessary requirement for eliminating wasteful spending , and providing dod with increased funding for other priorities .

congressional interest in reducing the size and associated costs of the dod acquisition workforce has been energized by certain outside reports .

the may 1995 report of the dod commission on roles and missions , for example , noted that while private - sector defense contractors had undertaken large - scale reorganizations adjusting to a reduced level of defense spending , little corresponding reduction had been made in the number of dod acquisition organizations or personnel .

congress and dod are presently at odds over the need for further reductions in the defense acquisition workforce .

dod now believes that it has exceeded its congressional mandates to reduce the acquisition workforce , and that further acquisition personnel reductions will have an adverse impact .

this concern was expressed in a 1997 report to congress , required by the fy1996 defense authorization act .

dod stated that , in fy1996 , it had reduced the acquisition workforce by 23,802 personnel ( military / civilian , excluding certain depot trade skill personnel ) employed by or assigned to its acquisition organizations — 8,802 more than mandated by congress for that year .

dod stated that without the depot skill - trades exemption , it reduced personnel in acquisition organizations by 30,377 in fy1996 .

in its report , dod estimated a two - year reduction by the end of fy1997 , of over 56,000 people — a 13.2 percent reduction .

dod's current position is that mandated acquisition personnel reductions have undercut its effort to manage the acquisition workforce , and have adversely impacted military readiness .

in appeals to the fy 1999 defense authorization bill , dod asked congress to reconsider house section 901 which requires that , by october 1 , 2001 , dod would phase - in reductions of an additional 70,000 defense acquisition personnel .

dod believed that section 901 excluded about 80,000 civilian personnel performing acquisition functions at depot maintenance depots .

in its appeal , dod strongly opposed these reductions , having stated that "personnel cuts enacted outside the manpower planning , programming and budgeting system are inconsistent with cost - effective management and will require reductions - in - force separations , creating associated unprogrammed separation costs. .

in the past , the general accounting office ( gao ) has examined issues facing dod's acquisition workforce .

in a 1995 report , before congressionally - mandated personnel reductions began , gao concluded that "even with declines in both the defense procurement budget and the civilian workforce since 1990 , the number of acquisition organizations remains relatively constant. .

a 1997 gao report , using data from the defense manpower data center , stated that for the period ending march 31 , 1997 , dod reduced its acquisition workforce from the 1995 baseline by 50,334 full - time equivalent personnel ( ftes ) , or 20,223 more than required by congress .

in 1998 , the house national security committee asked gao to review dod's progress in achieving a 25-percent reduction in the acquisition organizations' workforce , examine the potential savings associated with such reductions , determine the status of dod efforts to redefine the acquisition workforce , and examine dod's efforts to restructure acquisition organizations .

gao concluded that: dod has been reducing its acquisition workforce at a faster rate than its overall workforce and is on schedule to accomplish a 25-percent reduction by the fiscal year 2000 .

however , potential savings from these reductions cannot be precisely tracked in dod's budget .

in addition , some of the potential savings from acquisition workforce reductions may be offset by other anticipated costs .

such costs include those for contracting with private entities for some services previously performed by government personnel ( i.e. , substituting one workforce for another .

such conflicting opinions on the size of the defense acquisition workforce , and the potential savings to be achieved , stem from an inability to define it .

over the past three years , as congress and the administration have debated the future of the defense acquisition workforce , policymakers have sought to answer the basic question: what , precisely , is the dod acquisition workforce ? .

how many people are in it , where in dod are they located , and what , exactly , are their functions ? .

there is no commonly accepted definition of the dod acquisition workforce .

this has led to confusing and contentious discussions about the workforce , its size and composition , the significance of reductions dod has made , and the potential impact of carrying out further reductions .

in the wake of the jefferson solutions report and legislation in the fy 1998 and fy 1999 defense authorization bills , congress will confront a number of important issues regarding the defense acquisition workforce , including the following .

congress will determine , perhaps through the oversight process , if dod has met both the "letter of the law" and the "spirit of the law" as described in section 912 ( c ) of the fy1998 defense authorization act , or section 931 of the fy 1999 defense authorization act .

notably , dod leaders , who have called for a "revolution in business affairs," have been legislatively required to explore innovative and significant changes to make its acquisition process more efficient .

this includes exploring potential overlap and duplication of processes within dod's acquisition organizations , in the various defense agencies and military services ( listed in appendix d ) .

ultimately , it is congress that will decide if such changes have been undertaken and , if so , whether the size and composition of the acquisition workforce have been adjusted appropriately .

u.s. congress .

general accounting office .

defense acquisition organizations: status of workforce reductions .

report to the chairman , committee on national security , house of representatives .

gao / nsiad - 98-161 .

june 1998 , 20 pages .

department of defense .

actions to accelerate the movement to the new workforce vision .

a report to congress .

april 1 , 1998 .

19 p. — report of the commission on roles and missions of the armed forces .

washington , 1995 .

may 1995 .

 — right - sizing the dod acquisition workforce ( section 906 report ) .

a report to congress .

january 28 , 1997 .

36 p. general accounting office .

defense acquisition organizations: reductions in civilian and military workforce .

gao / nsiad - 98-36r dod workforce reductions .

washington , 1997 .

october 1997 .

8 p. jefferson solutions .

commissioned by the department of defense .

review of the department of defense acquisition workforce , daswo1-97-1847 .

washington , 1997 .

september 1997 .

55 p. appendix a .

title ix , subtitle b - additional reductions in defense acquisition workforce sec .

912 .

defense acquisition workforce .

 ( a ) reduction of defense acquisition workforce ( 1 ) the secretary of defense shall accomplish reductions in defense acquisition personnel positions during fiscal year 1998 so that the total number of such personnel as of october 1 , 1998 , is less than the total number of such personnel as of october 1 , 1997 , by at least the applicable number determined under paragraph ( 2 ) .

 ( 2 ) ( a ) the applicable number for purposes of paragraph ( 1 ) is 25,000 .

however , the secretary of defense may specify a lower number , which may not be less than 10,000 , as the applicable number for purposes of paragraph ( 1 ) if the secretary determines , and certifies to congress not later than june 1 , 1998 , that an applicable number greater than the number specified by the secretary would be inconsistent with the cost - effective management of the defense acquisition system to obtain best value equipment and would adversely affect military readiness .

 ( b ) the secretary shall include with such a certification a detailed explanation of each of the matters certified .

 ( c ) the authority of the secretary under subparagraph ( a ) may only be delegated to the deputy secretary of defense .

 ( 3 ) for purposes of this subsection , the term `defense acquisition personnel' means military and civilian personnel ( other than civilian personnel who are employed at a maintenance depot ) who are assigned to , or employed in , acquisition organizations of the department of defense ( as specified in department of defense instruction numbered 5000.58 dated january 14 , 1992 ) .

 ( b ) report on specific acquisition positions previously eliminated - not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of defense shall submit to congress a report on reductions in the defense acquisition workforce made since fiscal year 1989 .

the report shall show aggregate reductions by fiscal year and shall show for each fiscal year reductions identified by specific job title , classification , or position .

the report shall also identify those reductions carried out pursuant to law ( and how the secretary implemented any statutory requirement for such reductions , including definition of the workforce subject to the reduction ) and those reductions carried out as a result of base closures and realignments under the so - called brac process .

the secretary shall include in the report a definition of the term 'defense acquisition workforce' that is to be applied uniformly throughout the department of defense .

 ( c ) implementation plan to streamline and improve acquisition organizations ( 1 ) not later than april 1 , 1998 , the secretary of defense shall submit to congress a report containing a plan to streamline the acquisition organizations , workforce , and infrastructure of the department of defense .

the secretary shall include with the report a detailed discussion of the recommendations of the secretary based on the review under subsection ( d ) and the assessment of the task force on defense reform pursuant to subsection ( e ) , together with a request for the enactment of any legislative changes necessary for implementation of the plan .

the secretary shall include in the report the results of the review under subsection ( d ) and the independent assessment of the task force on defense reform pursuant to subsection ( e ) .

 ( 2 ) in carrying out this subsection and subsection ( d ) , the secretary of defense shall formally consult with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , the director of program analysis and evaluation , the under secretary of defense ( comptroller ) , and the under secretary for acquisition and technology .

 ( d ) review of acquisition organizations and functions - the secretary of defense shall conduct a review of the organizations and functions of the department of defense acquisition activities and of the personnel required to carry out those functions .

the review shall identify the following: ( 1 ) opportunities for cross - service , cross - functional arrangements within the military services and defense agencies .

 ( 2 ) specific areas of overlap , duplication , and redundancy among the various acquisition organizations .

 ( 3 ) opportunities to further streamline acquisition processes .

 ( 4 ) benefits of an enhanced joint requirements oversight council in the acquisition process .

 ( 5 ) alternative consolidation options for acquisition organizations .

 ( 6 ) alternative methods for performing industry oversight and quality assurance .

 ( 7 ) alternative options to shorten the procurement cycle .

 ( 8 ) alternative acquisition infrastructure reduction options within current authorities .

 ( 9 ) alternative organizational arrangements that capitalize on core acquisition competencies among the military services and defense agencies .

 ( 10 ) future acquisition personnel requirements of the department .

 ( 11 ) adequacy of the program , plans , and budgeting system in fulfilling current and future acquisition needs of the department .

 ( 12 ) effect of technology and advanced management tools in the future acquisition system .

 ( 13 ) applicability of more flexible alternative approaches to the current civil service system for the acquisition workforce .

 ( 14 ) adequacy of department of defense instruction numbered 5000.58 dated january 14 , 1992 .

appendix b .

title ix , subtitle a - further reductions in defense acquisition and support workforce sec .

931 .

further reductions in defense acquisition and support workforce .

 ( a ) reduction of defense acquisition and support workforce - the secretary of defense shall accomplish reductions in defense acquisition and support personnel positions during fiscal year 1999 so that the total number of such personnel as of october 1 , 1999 , is less than the total number of such personnel as of october 1 , 1998 , by at least the applicable number determined under subsection ( b ) required reduction ( 1 ) the applicable number for purposes of subsection ( a ) is 25,000 .

however , the secretary of defense may specify a lower number , which may not be less than 12,500 , as the applicable number for purposes of subsection ( a ) if the secretary determines , and certifies to congress not later than may 1 , 1999 , that an applicable number greater than the number specified by the secretary would be inconsistent with the cost - effective management of the defense acquisition system to obtain best value equipment and with ensuring military readiness .

 ( 2 ) the secretary shall include with such a certification a report setting forth a detailed explanation of each of the matters certified .

the report shall include ( a ) a detailed explanation of all matters incorporated in the secretary's determination ; ( b ) a definition of the components of the defense acquisition and support positions ; and ( c ) the allocation of the reductions under this section among the occupational elements of those positions .

 ( 3 ) the authority of the secretary under paragraph ( 1 ) may only be delegated to the deputy secretary of defense .

 ( c ) limitation on reduction of core acquisition workforce - the secretary shall implement this section so that the core defense acquisition workforce identified by the secretary in the report submitted pursuant to section 912 ( b ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 1998 ( public law 105-85 ; 111 stat .

1860 ) is reduced proportionally no more than the other occupational elements included as defense acquisition and support positions in that report .

 ( d ) defense acquisition and support personnel defined - for purposes of this section , the term `defense acquisition and support personnel' means military and civilian personnel ( other than civilian personnel who are employed at a maintenance depot ) who are assigned to , or employed in , acquisition organizations of the department of defense ( as specified in department of defense instruction numbered 5000.58 dated january 14 , 1992 ) , and any other organizations which the secretary may determine to have a predominantly acquisition mission .

appendix c. acquisition position categories f. procedures 1 .

acquisition functions , position categories , career fields and position category descriptions are as follows: a .

acquisition functions , career fields , and position categories .

there are seven acquisition functions , 12 career fields , and 14 position categories in the dod acquisition education , training , and career development program , as depicted in the chart below .

each function consists of a career field ( s ) and a position category ( ies ) .

two position categories , program management oversight and education , training , and career development are not career fields and therefore do not have separate education , training and experience standards specified in dod 5000.52-m ( reference ( g ) ) .

personnel in these positions will come from the other career fields and must meet those career development requirements .

one position category , education , training , and career development , does not belong in any of the seven functions .

personnel in this position category may belong in either an acquisition or a non - acquisition function .

appendix d. dod acquisition organizations army army acquisition executive army information systems command army materiel command army strategic defense command navy assistant secretary of navy for research , development and acquisition office of the chief of naval research naval air systems command naval facilities engineering command navy program executive officer / direct reporting program manager organization naval sea systems command navy strategic systems program office naval supply systems command space and naval warfare systems command marine corps u.s. marine corps research , development and acquisition command air force office of the assistant secretary of air force for acquisition air force materiel command air force program executive organization department of defense - wide office of the under secretary of defense ( acquisition & technology ) ballistic missile defense office defense logistics agency u.s. special operations command , acquisition center ( soac ) .

