"'extradition' is the formal surrender of a person by a state to another state for prosecution or punishment. .

extradition to or from the united states is a creature of treaty .

the united states has extradition treaties with over a hundred of the nations of the world , although there are many with which the united states has no extradition treaty .

international terrorism and drug trafficking have made extradition an increasingly important law enforcement tool .

although extradition as we know it is of relatively recent origins , its roots can be traced to antiquity .

scholars have identified procedures akin to extradition scattered throughout history dating as far back as the time of moses .

by 1776 , a notion had evolved to the effect that "every state was obliged to grant extradition freely and without qualification or restriction , or to punish a wrongdoer itself," and the absence of intricate extradition procedures has been attributed to the predominance of this simple principle of international law .

whether by practice's failure to follow principle or by the natural evolution of the principle , modern extradition treaties and practices began to emerge in this country and elsewhere by the middle 18 th and early 19 th centuries .

the first u.s. extradition treaty consisted of a single terse article in jay's treaty of 1794 with great britain .

its brevity notwithstanding , the article contained several of the basic features of contemporary extradition pacts: it is further agreed , that his majesty and the united states , on mutual requisitions , by them respectively , or by their respective ministers or officers authorized to make the same , will deliver up to justice all persons , who , being charged with murder or forgery , committed within the jurisdiction of the other , provided that this shall only be done on such evidence of criminality , as , according to the laws of the place , where the fugitive or person so charged shall be found , would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial , if the offence had there been committed .

the expense of such apprehension and delivery shall be borne and defrayed , by those who make the requisition and receive the fugitive .

since then , the united states has relied almost exclusively upon bilateral agreements as a basis for extradition .

however , the united states has entered into several multilateral agreements that may also provide legal authority for extradition .

such agreements take two forms .

one form is a multilateral agreement that exclusively concerns extradition .

the united states is currently a party to two such agreements: the 1933 montevideo convention on extradition , which apparently has never served as a basis for extradition , and the extradition agreement between the united states and the european union , which entered into force in february 2010 .

the provisions of the u.s. - eu extradition treaty are implemented via bilateral instruments concluded between the united states and each eu member state .

these instruments amend or replace any provisions contained in earlier treaties between the united states and individual eu member states that conflict with the requirements of the multilateral agreement .

the united states is also a party to several multilateral agreements that generally aim to deter and punish transnational criminal activity or serious human rights abuses , including by imposing an obligation upon signatories to prosecute or extradite persons who engage in specified conduct .

although these agreements are not themselves extradition treaties , they often contain provisions stating that specified acts shall be treated as extraditable offenses in any extradition treaty between parties .

extradition treaties are in the nature of a contract , and by operation of international law , [a] state party to an extradition treaty is obligated to comply with the request of another state party to that treaty to arrest and deliver a person duly shown to be sought by that state ( a ) for trial on a charge of having committed a crime covered by the treaty within the jurisdiction of the requesting state , or ( b ) for punishment after conviction of such a crime and flight from that state , provided that none of the grounds for refusal to extradite set forth in [the treaty] is applicable .

subject to a contrary treaty provision , federal law defines the mechanism by which the united states honors its extradition treaty obligations .

although some countries will extradite in the absence of an applicable treaty as a matter of comity , it was long believed that the united states could only grant an extradition request if it could claim coverage under an existing extradition treaty .

dicta in several court cases indicated that this requirement , however , was one of congressional choice rather than constitutional requirement .

the constitution provides that the judicial power of the united states extends to certain cases and controversies .

historically , this has led to discomfort whenever an effort is made to insert the federal courts in the midst of an executive or legislative process , such as the issuance of purely advisory opinions .

the fact that extradition turns on the discretion of the secretary of state following judicial certification has led to the suggestion that the procedure established by the extradition statute is constitutionally offensive to this separation of powers .

first broached by a district court in the district of columbia , subsequent courts have rejected the suggestion in large measure under the view that much like the issuance of a search or arrest warrant , the task is compatible with tasks constitutionally assigned to the judiciary .

a foreign country usually begins the extradition process with a request submitted to the state department sometimes including the documentation required by the treaty .

when a requesting nation is concerned that the fugitive will take flight before it has time to make a formal request , it may informally ask for extradition and provisional arrest with the assurance that the full complement of necessary documentation will follow .

in either case , the secretary of state , at his discretion , may forward the matter to the department of justice to begin the procedure for the arrest of the fugitive "to the end that the evidence of criminality may be heard and considered. .

the united states attorneys' manual encapsulates the justice department's participation thereafter in these words: 1 .

oia [office of international affairs] reviews ... requests for sufficiency and forwards appropriate ones to the district [where the fugitive is found] .

2 .

the assistant united states attorney assigned to the case obtains a warrant and the fugitive is arrested and brought before the magistrate judge or the district judge .

3 .

the government opposes bond in extradition cases .

4 .

a hearing under 18 u.s.c .

ยง3184 is scheduled to determine whether the fugitive is extraditable .

if the court finds the fugitive to be extraditable , it enters an order of extraditability and certifies the record to the secretary of state , who decides whether to surrender the fugitive to the requesting government .

in some cases a fugitive may waive the hearing process .

5 .

oia notifies the foreign government and arranges for the transfer of the fugitive to the agents appointed by the requesting country to receive him or her .

although the order following the extradition hearing is not appealable ( by either the fugitive or the government ) , the fugitive may petition for a writ of habeas corpus as soon as the order is issued .

the district court's decision on the writ is subject to appeal , and extradition may be stayed if the court so orders .

the laws of the country of refuge and the applicable extradition treaty govern extradition back to the united states of a fugitive located overseas .

the request for extradition comes from the department of state whether extradition is sought for trial in federal or state court or for execution of a criminal sentence under federal or state law .

the justice department's office of international affairs must approve requests for extradition of fugitives from federal charges or convictions and may be asked to review requests from state prosecutors before they are considered by the state department .

provisions in the united states attorneys' manual and the corresponding justice department's criminal resource manual sections supplement treaty instructions on the procedures to be followed in order to forward a request to the state department and thereafter .

the first step is to determine whether the fugitive is extraditable .

the justice department's checklist for determining extraditability begins with an identification of the country in which the fugitive has taken refuge .

if the united states has no extradition treaty with the country of refuge , extradition is not a likely option .

when there is a treaty , extradition is an option only if the treaty permits extradition .

common impediments include citizenship , dual criminality , statutes of limitation , and capital punishment issues .

many treaties permit a country to refuse to extradite its citizens even in the case of dual citizenship .

as for dual criminality , whether the crime of conviction or the crime charged is an extraditable offense will depend upon the nature of the crime and where it was committed .

if the applicable treaty lists extraditable offenses , the crime must be on the list .

if the applicable treaty insists only upon dual criminality , the underlying misconduct must be a crime under the laws of both the united states and the country of refuge .

where the crime was committed matters ; some treaties will permit extradition only if the offense was committed within the geographical confines of the united states .

timing also matters .

the speedy trial features of u.s. law require a good faith effort to bring to trial a fugitive who is within the government's reach .

furthermore , the lapse of time or speedy trial component of the applicable extradition treaty may preclude extradition if prosecution would be barred by a statute of limitations in the country of refuge .

some treaties prohibit extradition for capital offenses ; more often they permit it but only with the assurance that a sentence of death will not be executed .

prosecutors may request provisional arrest of a fugitive without waiting for the final preparation of the documentation required for a formal extradition request , if there is a risk of flight and if the treaty permits it .

the justice department encourages judicious use of provisional arrest because of the pressures that may attend it .

the criminal resource manual contains the form for collection of the information that must accompany either a federal or state prosecutor's application for a justice department request for provisional arrest .

although treaty requirements vary , the justice department suggests that prosecutors supply formal documentation in the form of an original and four copies of a prosecutor's affidavit describing the facts of the case , including dates , names , docket numbers and citations , and preferably executed before a judge or magistrate ( particularly if extradition is sought from a civil law country ) copies of the statutes the fugitive is said to have violated , the statutes governing the penalties that may be imposed upon conviction , and the applicable statute of limitations if the fugitive has been convicted and sentenced: identification evidence ; certified documentation of conviction , sentence , and the amount of time served and remaining to be served ; copies of the statutes of conviction ; and a statement that the service of the remaining sentence is not barred by a statute of limitations if the fugitive is being sought for prosecution or sentencing: certified copies of the arrest warrant ( preferably signed by the court or a magistrate ) and of the indictment or complaint if the fugitive is being sought for prosecution or sentencing: evidence of the identity of the individual sought ( fingerprints / photographs ) and of the evidence upon which the charges are based and of the fugitive's guilt in the form of witness affidavits ( preferably avoiding the use grand jury transcripts and , particularly in the case of extradition from a common law country , the use of hearsay ) .

if the justice department approves the application for extradition , the request and documentation are forwarded to the state department , translated if necessary , and with state department approval forwarded through diplomatic channels to the country from which extradition is being sought .

the treaty issue most likely to arise after extradition and the fugitive's return to this country is whether the fugitive was surrendered subject to any limitations such as those posed by the doctrine of specialty .

the existence of an extradition treaty does not preclude the united states acquiring personal jurisdiction over a fugitive by other means , unless the treaty expressly provides otherwise .

waiver or "simplified" treaty provisions allow a fugitive to consent to extradition without the benefit of an extradition hearing .

although not universal , the provisions constitute the least controversial of the alternatives to extradition .

the removal of aliens under immigration law has traditionally been considered a practice distinct from extradition .

unlike extradition , the legal justification for removing an alien via deportation or denial of entry is not so he can answer charges against him in the receiving state ; rather , it is because the removing country has sovereign authority to determine which nonnationals may enter or remain within its borders , and the alien has failed to fulfill the legal criteria allowing noncitizens to enter , remain in , or pass in transit through the sovereign's territory .

whether by a process similar to deportation or by simple expulsion , the united states has had some success encouraging other countries to surrender fugitives other than their own nationals without requiring recourse to extradition .

ordinarily , u.s. immigration procedures , on the other hand , have been less accommodating and have been called into play only when extradition has been found wanting .

they tend to be time consuming and usually can be used only in lieu of extradition when the fugitive is an alien .

moreover , they frequently require the united states to deposit the alien in a country other than one that seeks his or her extradition .

yet in a few instances where an alien has been naturalized by deception or where the procedures available against alien terrorists come into play , denaturalization or deportation may be considered an attractive alternative or supplement to extradition proceedings .

although less frequently employed by the united states , "irregular rendition" is a familiar alternative to extradition .

an alternative of last resort , it involves kidnaping or deceit and generally has been reserved for terrorists , drug traffickers , and the like .

kidnaping a defendant overseas and returning him to the united states for trial does not deprive american courts of jurisdiction unless an applicable extradition treaty explicitly calls for that result .

nor does it ordinarily expose the united states to liability under the federal tort claims act or individuals involved in the abduction to liability under the alien tort statute .

the individuals involved in the abduction , however , may face foreign prosecution , or at least be the subject of a foreign extradition request .

moreover , the effort may strain diplomatic relations with the country from which the fugitive is lured or abducted .

besides receiving persons through irregular rendition , the united states has also rendered persons to other countries over the years , via the central intelligence agency and various law enforcement agencies .

during the george w. bush administration , there was controversy over the use of renditions by the united states , particularly with regard to the alleged transfer of suspected terrorists to countries known to employ harsh interrogation techniques that may rise to the level of torture .

little publicly available information from government sources exists regarding the nature and frequency of u.s. renditions to countries believed to practice torture , or the nature of any assurances obtained from them before rendering persons to their custody .

it appears that most , if not all , cases in which the united states has irregularly rendered persons have involved the transfer of noncitizens seized outside the united states , perhaps because persons within the united states ( and u.s. citizens outside the country ) are provided procedural protections against being summarily transferred to another country under federal statute and the constitution .

the legal limitations against the rendition of noncitizens seized outside the united states are much more limited , though it would be a violation of both cat and u.s. criminal law for a u.s. official to conspire to commit torture via rendition .

a final alternative when extradition for trial in the united states is not available , is trial within the country of refuge .

the alternative exists primarily when a u.s. request for extradition has been refused because of the fugitive's nationality and / or when the crime occurred under circumstances that permit prosecution by either country for the same misconduct .

the alternative can be cumbersome and expensive and may be contrary to u.s. policy objectives .

appendix a .

countries with which the united states has a bilateral extradition treaty appendix b .

countries with which the united states has no bilateral extradition treat .

