the americans with disabilities act , ada , 42 u.s.c .

§§12101 et seq . , has often been described as the most sweeping nondiscrimination legislation since the civil rights act of 1964 .

it provides broad nondiscrimination protection in employment , public services , public accommodations and services operated by private entities , transportation , and telecommunications for individuals with disabilities .

as stated in the act , its purpose is "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. .

enacted on july 26 , 1990 , the majority of the ada's provisions took effect in 1992 .

the ada amendments act , p.l .

110-325 , was enacted on september 25 , 2008 , to respond to a series of supreme court decisions that had interpreted the definition of disability narrowly .

the supreme court has decided 20 ada cases .

in the most recent supreme court decision , united states v. georgia , the court held that title ii of the ada created a private cause of action for damages against the states for conduct that actually violated the fourteenth amendment .

however , the court did not reach the issue of whether the eleventh amendment permits a prisoner to secure money damages from a state for state actions that violate the ada but not the constitution .

in addition , the supreme court decided arbaugh v. y .

& h corp. , a case under title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , which has implications for the ada's prohibition of discrimination where employers employ 15 or more employees .

on december 7 , 2007 , the supreme court granted certiorari in huber v. wal - mart stores , to determine whether an individual with a disability who cannot perform her current job must be reassigned to a vacant , equivalent position without competing with other workers .

however , the court dismissed the petition since the case was settled prior to oral argument .

currently , there is a split in the circuits on this accommodation issue , and in light of the court's dismissal of the case , there will continue to be divergent views .

before examining the provisions of the ada and these cases , it is important to briefly note the ada's historical antecedents .

a federal statutory provision which existed prior to the ada , section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , prohibits discrimination against an otherwise qualified individual with a disability , solely on the basis of the disability , in any program or activity that receives federal financial assistance , the executive agencies or the u.s .

postal service .

many of the concepts used in the ada originated in section 504 and its interpretations ; however , there is one major difference .

while section 504's prohibition against discrimination is tied to the receipt of federal financial assistance , the ada also covers entities not receiving such funds .

in addition , the federal executive agencies and the u.s .

postal service are covered under section 504 , not the ada .

the ada contains a specific provision stating that except as otherwise provided in the act , nothing in the act shall be construed to apply a lesser standard than the standards applied under title v of the rehabilitation act ( which includes section 504 ) or the regulations issued by federal agencies pursuant to such title .

the ada is a civil rights statute ; it does not provide grant funds to help entities comply with its requirements .

it does include a section on technical assistance which authorizes grants and awards for the purpose of technical assistance such as the dissemination of information about rights under the ada and techniques for effective compliance .

however , there are tax code provisions which may assist certain businesses or individuals .

the eleventh amendment states: "the judicial power of the united states shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity , commenced or prosecuted against one of the united states by citizens of another state , or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state. .

the supreme court has found that the eleventh amendment cannot be abrogated by the use of article i powers but that section 5 of the fourteenth amendment can be used for abrogation in certain circumstances .

section 5 of the fourteenth amendment states: "the congress shall have the power to enforce , by appropriate legislation , the provisions of this article. .

the circumstances where section 5 of the fourteenth amendment can be used to abrogate the eleventh amendment were discussed in the supreme court decisions in college savings bank v. florida prepaid postsecondary educ .

expense board , florida prepaid postsecondary educ .

expense board v. college savings bank , and kimel v. florida board of regents .

they reiterated the principle that the congress may abrogate state immunity from suit under the fourteenth amendment and found that there were three conditions necessary for successful abrogation .

congressional power is limited to the enactment of "appropriate" legislation to enforce the substantive provisions of the fourteenth amendment .

the legislation must be remedial in nature .

there must be a "congruence and proportionality" between the injury to be prevented and the means adopted to that end .

the ada uses both the fourteenth amendment and the commerce clause of the constitution as its constitutional basis .

it also specifically abrogates state immunity under the eleventh amendment .

the ada , then , is clear regarding its attempt to abrogate state immunity ; the issue is whether the other elements of a successful abrogation are present .

the supreme court in garrett v. university of alabama found that they were not with regard to title i while in tennessee v. lane the court upheld title ii as it applies to the access to courts .

most recently , the supreme court in united states v. georgia , held that title ii of the ada created a private cause of action for damages against the states for conduct that actually violates the fourteenth amendment .

however , the court did not reach the issue of whether the eleventh amendment permits a prisoner to secure money damages from a state for state actions that violate the ada but not the constitution .

title iv of the ada amends title ii of the communications act of 1934 by adding a section providing that the federal communications commission shall ensure that interstate and intrastate telecommunications relay services are available , to the extent possible and in the most efficient manner , to hearing impaired and speech impaired individuals .

any television public service announcement that is produced or funded in whole or part by any agency or instrumentality of the federal government shall include closed captioning of the verbal content of the announcement .

the fcc is given enforcement authority with certain exceptions .

changes in the ada's statutory language to address the issue of vexatious law suits have been proposed since the 106 th congress .

proponents of such legislation have argued that notification requirements would help prevent the filing of suits designed to generate money for plaintiffs and law firms .

those opposed to the legislation have argued that it would undermine enforcement of the ada and that vexatious suits are best dealt with by state bar disciplinary procedures or by the courts .

on march 2 , 2011 , representative hunter introduced h.r .

881 , the ada notification act of 2011 .

h.r .

881 would add provisions to the remedies and procedures of title iii of the ada requiring a plaintiff to provide notice of an alleged violation to the defendant by registered mail .

if such notice is not provided , the bill would eliminate state or federal court jurisdiction for the action .

