following world war ii , nations throughout the world , led by the united states and several other developed countries , sought to establish an open and nondiscriminatory trading system with the goal of raising the economic well - being of all countries .

aware of the role of trade barriers in contributing to the economic depression in the 1930s , and the military aggression that rose following the depression , the countries that met to discuss the new trading system saw open trade as essential for economic stability and peace .

the intent of these negotiators was to establish an international trade organization ( ito ) , which would address not only trade barriers but other issues indirectly related to trade , including employment , investment , restrictive business practices , and commodity agreements .

the ito was to be a united nations specialized agency , but the ito treaty was not approved by the united states and a few other signatories and never went into effect .

instead , a provisional agreement on tariffs and trade rules , called the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) was reached and went into effect in 1948 .

this provisional gatt became the principal set of rules governing international trade for the next 47 years .

the gatt established trade principles that continue to be applied today .

among the most important of these principles was nondiscrimination with regard to the treatment of trade in goods among countries .

the most - favored - nation principle , article i of the gatt , states that any advantage given by a contracting party to a product of another country must be extended unconditionally to a like product of all other contracting parties .

a second rule of nondiscrimination is national treatment , the principle that imported and domestic goods should be treated equally .

although nondiscrimination is a cornerstone of the gatt , some exceptions are allowed .

for example , customs unions , free - trade areas , and special treatment for developing countries are permitted .

another principle is the open and fair application of any trade barriers .

tariffs were the most common and visible form of trade barrier at the time the gatt was established .

tariffs are "bound," or set at maximum levels , and not to increase above the negotiated level .

in general , quantitative restrictions such as quotas were not allowed , since tariffs were much easier to identify and to eventually reduce .

the gatt also included a forum and process for countries to follow in trying to resolve disputes .

the dispute process allowed countries to consult with each other and if that was not successful , a country could ask that a panel hear the complaint .

although the panel's decision was not enforceable , the panel report carried some force of opinion and encouraged countries to work toward an agreeable resolution .

one of the gatt's chief purposes was the reduction of barriers to trade .

with this goal in mind , gatt contracting parties met periodically to negotiate further reduction of tariffs and other trade barriers and changes to gatt rules .

these negotiations were called "rounds. .

early rounds dealt only with tariff reductions , but later rounds also included nontariff barriers to trade .

the most recent round , the uruguay round , lasted from 1986 to 1994 and included the most encompassing set of negotiations in the history of the gatt .

on the agenda was reform of the existing gatt system , as well as expansion of rules to cover new areas such as services trade and the trade aspects of intellectual property rights ( copyrights , trademarks , and patents ) .

the agreements that resulted from the uruguay round also contained a built - in agenda requiring that further negotiations on agriculture , services , intellectual property rights , and government procurement begin by the year 2000 .

one of the most important changes that came about from the uruguay round was the establishment of a new trade structure , the world trade organization ( wto ) , which incorporated the many changes reached during the uruguay round: the former gatt with its newly negotiated reforms , bodies to oversee the new trade agreements , a stronger dispute resolution procedure , a regular review of members' trade policies , and many other committees and councils .

in contrast to the gatt , the wto was created as a permanent structure , with "members" instead of "contracting parties. .

the wto went into effect on january 1 , 1995 .

there are 150 members of the wto , representing over 95% of world trade , 31 observer governments ( most of which have applied for membership in the wto ) , and seven international organization observers .

members and observers are listed in appendix a .

all decisions are made by member countries , and decisions are usually by consensus .

the wto is located in geneva , switzerland .

the wto secretariat assists member countries and numbered 625 in 2007 .

the wto budget for the year 2007 is 182.0 million swiss francs ( chf ) , or about $151.7 million ( 1.20 chf = $1 , average for 2007 ) .

countries contribute according to their share of world trade , based on trade in goods , services and intellectual property rights .

decisions within the wto are made by members , not staff , and they are made by consensus , not by formal vote .

the highest level body in the wto is the ministerial conference , which is the body of political representatives ( trade ministers ) from each member country .

 ( see the wto structure in appendix b . ) .

the ministerial conference examines current programs and sets the agenda for future work .

it must meet at least every two years .

the wto's director - general is pascal lamy of france , whose three - year term began on september 1 , 2005 .

the first meeting of the ministerial conference was held in singapore on december 9-13 , 1996 .

at that meeting , trade ministers reviewed the work of the wto , since its establishment and agreed on a work schedule for the next few years .

they also approved an action plan for least - developed countries , and many members entered into an agreement to eliminate tariffs on information technology products by the year 2000 .

the second meeting of the ministerial conference was held in geneva on may 18 and 20 , 1998 .

again , it reviewed the work of the wto and approved a future work program .

it called for an examination of issues related to global electronic commerce and started preparations for the next meeting .

the third ministerial conference was held in seattle on november 29-december 3 , 1999 .

that meeting was intended to review an agenda for a new round of trade negotiations , but trade ministers could not reach agreement and suspended their work .

the wto director - general was directed to consult with delegations and discuss ways in which countries might bridge remaining differences .

known as the "battle at seattle," the ministerial was characterized by street violence and anti - globalization protesters .

the fourth ministerial conference was held in doha , qatar on november 9-14 , 2001 .

at that meeting , trade ministers agreed to launch a new round of multilateral trade negotiations , called the doha development agenda , and set a deadline for final agreements of january 1 , 2005 .

they established a work program for the new round and agreed to consider numerous developing - country issues .

the fifth ministerial conference was held september 10-14 , 2003 , in cancun , mexico .

according to the ministerial declaration released two years earlier in doha , qatar , the fifth ministerial conference was intended to "...take stock of progress in the negotiations , provide any necessary political guidance , and take decisions as necessary. .

many trade ministers at the cancun ministerial attempted to reach a framework to guide the remaining negotiations of the new round , but they could not resolve major differences , and the negotiations stalled .

the sixth ministerial conference was held in hong kong on december 13-18,2005 .

although an original goal of the ministerial was to agree on a package of modalities for the ongoing doha development agenda ( dda ) round of trade negotiations , this aim was dropped and members agreed to some modest advancements in agriculture , industrial tariffs , and duty and quota - free access for least developed countries .

the body that oversees the day - to - day operations of the wto is the general council , which consists of a representative from each member country .

the council generally meets monthly and provides a forum for countries to discuss a range of trade matters .

the u.s. delegate to the general council is the deputy u.s. trade representative in geneva .

the general council also meets in two other , unique capacities .

one is the trade policy review mechanism ( tprm ) .

the tprm was established under the uruguay round agreements to allow closer monitoring of national trade policies of member countries .

the four countries with the largest shares of world trade are reviewed every two years , the next 16 largest traders are reviewed every four years , and other countries are reviewed every six years , although least - developed countries might be reviewed less frequently .

the trade reviews provide information on a country's trade policies and comment on whether a country is pursuing market - opening or market - restrictive policies .

this public examination is a mild form of pressure for a country to avoid practices that discourage trade .

the general council also meets in the capacity of the dispute settlement body ( dsb ) .

the uruguay round agreements greatly strengthened the process for settlement of disputes .

the first stage of the process is consultation between the governments involved .

if consultation is not successful , the complainant may ask the dsb to establish a dispute panel .

the dispute panel hears the case and reports back to the dsb .

if the complaint is upheld , the respondent must either change its practice or negotiate an agreeable resolution .

otherwise , the complainant may request that the dsb authorize suspension of obligations , thereby giving permission for the complainant to retaliate .

for example , a complainant may receive permission to increase tariffs against a respondent country that disregards a decision by the dsb .

permission is automatic unless unanimously disapproved .

procedures are clearly set out with specific timetables at each stage .

more specialized work is done in three major bodies under the general council .

one of these is the council for trade in goods , under which committees work on a number of trade areas .

one committee works on trade in agriculture .

another committee oversees the related topic of sanitary and phytosanitary measures , which are measures that pertain respectively to animal and plant health and safety .

some committees monitor practices that are considered "unfair" if not implemented in accordance with wto rules ( antidumping , subsidies and countervailing measures ) .

other committees examine practices that are not necessarily "unfair" but could be trade - distorting nonetheless ( rules of origin , safeguards , technical barriers , customs valuation , and import licensing ) .

one committee works on the relatively new area of trade - related investment measures , and another addresses market access issues ( tariffs and nontariff measures ) .

also under the council for trade in goods is the information technology agreement committee .

a second major body under the general council is the council for trade in services , which oversees the uruguay round agreement on trade in services .

the uruguay round services agreement has three parts .

the first part lists basic principles that countries agree to observe , including national treatment , most - favored - nation treatment , and transparency ( open information about relevant laws and regulations ) .

the second part contains four annexes with rules on: ( 1 ) the movement of persons who provide services , ( 2 ) financial services , ( 3 ) telecommunications , and ( 4 ) air transport services .

the third part is a schedule of country commitments .

these commitments are bound and cannot be reduced in scope , much like the tariff levels on goods , which cannot be increased once they are bound .

the service commitments may include exceptions to the national treatment and most - favored - nation principles , if countries included these exceptions when they originally negotiated the commitments .

the council for trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) is the third major body under the general council .

the trips council monitors the agreement on intellectual property rights reached during the uruguay round and supervises members' compliance .

the trips agreement has three parts .

the first part outlines basic principles that countries must observe , including national treatment and most - favored - nation treatment .

the second part establishes standards for the different types of intellectual property rights such as patents , trademarks , copyrights , industrial designs , and geographical indications ( eg , "champagne" indicates a wine from a specific region ) , and ensures minimum lengths of time for protections .

the third part of the agreement establishes enforcement processes .

in addition to the bodies discussed above , there are many other committees and working groups under the general council .

for example , there are working groups on trade , debt , and finance and on trade and transfer of technology .

there are committees on plurilateral agreements , which are not signed by all wto members , on civil aircraft and on government procurement .

the committee on trade and development often works with other international institutions on special concerns of countries in development .

working parties on accession meet with applicant countries to identify changes that are necessary to bring the applicant's trade regime into line with wto rules and principles .

the uruguay round also established a committee on trade and environment .

congressional debate involving the wto has focused on several major issues .

these concern: ( 1 ) achievement of u.s. trade goals through a multilateral forum ; ( 2 ) assurance of u.s. sovereignty in trade decisions ; ( 3 ) the wto dispute process and u.s. interests ; ( 4 ) traditional and nontraditional topics in the wto ; and ( 5 ) the congressional role in u.s. participation in the wto .

1 .

to what extent are u.s. trade goals achieved through the wto ' s multilateral forum , compared to other means such as bilateral or regional trade agreements or unilateral action ? .

the wto has many benefits for the united states: it provides the only multilateral dispute mechanism for international trade , administers rules to discourage discrimination , and ensures greater security on how trade will be conducted .

however , some criticize the wto as slow - moving and cumbersome because of its large membership , varied national interests , and consensus - based decisionmaking .

one alternative is to pursue u.s. goals through another multilateral body .

for example , the united states and other ( mostly developed ) countries have pursued negotiations on shipbuilding and investment in the organization for economic cooperation and development , but with mixed success .

another option is to pursue trade benefits through regional or bilateral agreements .

these agreements can offer benefits to u.s. exporters and are easier to negotiate .

however , some contend that regional and bilateral agreements create trade diversion and may distract the united states and other countries from potentially greater benefits from multilateral negotiations .

2 .

can the united states maintain its sovereignty as a member of the wto ? .

some critics of the wto have raised the question of whether the united states will lose its sovereignty as a member of the wto .

as a member , the united states does commit to act in accordance with the rules of the multilateral body .

article xvi ( 4 ) of the agreement establishing the world trade agreement , states , "each member shall ensure the conformity of its laws , regulations and administrative procedures with its obligations as provided in the annexed agreements. .

those annexed agreements are the agreements reached during the uruguay round covering trade in goods , trade in services , intellectual property rights , dispute settlement , and other trade areas .

the wto , however , cannot force members to adhere to their obligations .

the united states and any other wto member may act in its own national interest .

the wto recognizes certain allowable exceptions such as national security .

however , any multilateral institution is only as strong as its members' adherence to the institution's rules .

if the united states or another member country chooses to take unilateral action contrary to wto rules , that action may weaken the institution .

it is a decision for u.s. policymakers whether the discipline imposed by the wto is an acceptable cost for the benefits of an open trading system .

3 .

are u.s. interests served through the wto dispute process ? .

the united states realizes several benefits from the existence of a multilateral forum for trade disputes .

such a forum in general allows countries to peacefully resolve disputes without having to resort to more drastic measures .

the wto dispute process presents a clear , understandable set of rules to be followed , and the process is nondiscriminatory among countries .

the united states has been relatively successful in using the process as a complainant .

as of october 2006 , the u.s. trade representative reports that 24 cases were resolved to u.s. satisfaction without litigation ; 26 cases were won by the united states on core issues ; in 4 cases the united states did not prevail on core issues ; and 24 other cases were in panel stage , in consultation , or monitoring progress or otherwise inactive .

there are many complaints about the wto dispute settlement process .

in some cases , countries have not adhered to dispute panels' findings .

an example is the u.s. complaint against european union ( eu ) trade restrictions on imports of beef produced with hormones .

critics say that some cases are filed for political , not economic , reasons .

for example , some analysts say that the eu took no action for years against a u.s. tax benefit for exports ( the foreign sales corporation ) , but then filed a challenge after a u.s. win in another case .

finally , the united states as defendant has lost several cases involving trade remedies , and this has led some members of congress to charge that the wto dispute panels are assuming too much authority in interpreting trade agreements .

the united states has not done well as a respondent .

as of october 2006 , the united states won 14 cases on core issues but did not prevail in 30 cases , while 17 cases were resolved without completing litigation , 10 cases were in the litigation or appellate stage , and 22 cases were either in pre - litigation consultation stage or inactive .

4 .

should the wto cover traditional trade issues only , or should it be broadened to include nontraditional issues such as labor and the environment ? .

the gatt agreement first established rules only on border measures ( tariffs and quotas ) and later added rules on certain internal practices that clearly had direct effects on trade in goods ( eg , subsidies , government procurement ) .

the uruguay round agreements further expanded trade rules to cover new areas such as trade in services and intellectual property rights .

u.s. businesses generally want the wto to refrain from extending beyond these traditionally trade - related issues , because they argue that the greatest export opportunities will be achieved only if negotiators focus on trade barriers and do not include social factors .

many groups , however , argue that the wto should be expanded to include non - traditional topics .

two topics that have been at the center of current trade debate are labor and the environment .

labor groups argue that many countries exploit workers , including children , to produce low - cost products for foreign markets .

environmental groups want more consideration of the environmental effects of the production of goods for trade included under wto rules .

recently , there has been discussion about the possible role of the wto in enforcing potential future climate change obligations .

there is strong disagreement domestically on traditional and nontraditional topics in trade negotiations .

internationally , countries hold a wide range of positions on this question .

5 .

what is the role of congress in how the united states participates in the wto ? .

although the executive branch maintains a staff in geneva and conducts trade negotiations in the wto , congress has an important role in how the united states participates in the wto through its constitutional authority over the conduct of foreign commerce .

in trade promotion authority ( tpa ) legislation ( p.l .

10 7 - 210 ) that approved expedited procedures for legislation to implement trade agreements passed in 2002 , congress prescribed trade objectives for u.s. negotiators and required the executive branch to consult with it .

during negotiations , congress maintains oversight , and the congressional oversight group , which was established under p.l .

107-210 , has an active advisory role .

once an implementing bill has been introduced , congress decides whether or not to approve those legislative changes necessary to implement the trade agreement .

the current tpa legislation expired in july 2007 , and congress may renew or extend tpa if a doha round agreement is reached .

congress may also consider changes to u.s. trade laws in response to possible adverse rulings under wto dispute settlement procedures .

the congressional role described above has evolved to help coordinate and streamline activities of the executive and legislative branches on trade matters , but this role is continually debated and reevaluated .

many of those involved in the debate question whether this executive - legislative relationship is still useful or appropriate .

the administration has called for greater authority in trade negotiations , saying that the need for repeated reauthorization of trade promotion authority interrupts u.s. trade policy and keeps the united states from participating in trade negotiations .

however , many members assert that congress has given up too much of its constitutional role and should have a stronger hand in trade policy formulation and in oversight of trade negotiations .

periodically , congress also has the opportunity to vote to withdraw from the wto .

under the uruguay round agreements act ( p.l .

103- 4 65 ) , the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) must submit to the congress every five years a report that analyzes the costs and benefits of continued u.s. participation in the wto .

once congress receives this comprehensive report , any member of congress may introduce a joint resolution withdrawing congressional approval of the agreement establishing the wto .

this report was issued in 2005 on the tenth anniversary of u.s. accession to the wto , and house members considered a joint resolution ( h.j .

r es .

27 ) to withdraw congressional approval of the agreement establishing the wto .

the house ways and means committee reported the resolution adversely on may 26 , 2005 , and the full house disapproved the resolution by a vote of 338-86 on june 9 , 2005 .

debate on the resolution offered members an opportunity to examine the costs and benefits of wto participation and examine other aspects of wto membership .

appendix a. wto members ( as of january 2008 ) appendix b. wto structure all wto members may participate in all councils , committees , etc. , except appellate body , dispute settlement panels , textiles monitoring body , and plurilateral committees .

the negotiations mandated by the doha declaration take place in the trade negotiations committee and its subsidiaries .

