the department of defense ( dod ) has a long history of relying on contractors to support troops during wartime and expeditionary operations .

generally , from the revolutionary war through the vietnam war , contractors provided traditional logistical support such as medical care , transportation , and engineering to u.s. armed forces .

since the end of the cold war there has been a significant increase in contractors supporting u.s. troops – in terms of the number and percentage of contractors , and the type of work being performed ( figure 1 ) .

according to dod , post - cold war budget reductions resulted in significant cuts to military logistical and support personnel , requiring dod to hire contractors to "fill the gap. .

the number of dod contractors in iraq is significant .

according to dod , as of july 1 , 2008 , there were 200,000 dod contractors in iraq and afghanistan , compared to 180,000 uniformed military personnel .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that from 2003 through 2007 , dod obligated $54 billion for contractors working in iraq .

these contractors not only provide traditional logistical support — such as delivering food and providing weapons maintenance — but also provide critical front - line combat support that puts them directly on the battlefield .

such front - line support includes interrogating prisoners , working as translators for combat units , providing security for convoys traveling through the battle space , and providing security for forward operating bases ( figure 2 ) .

projecting into the future , a senior dod official said that civilian contractors may make up 50% of all dod personnel deployed in future overseas operations .

unless a policy decision is made to expand the military , many analysts argue that the large - scale use of contractors will remain a fixture of the military's force structure for the foreseeable future .

this raises questions about dod's capacity to manage contractors in the field during such operations .

dod has an established acquisition workforce , consisting of military and civilian personnel who are responsible for acquiring goods and services for the military .

however , while a number of contracting officers and other acquisition officials are in iraq , most of dod's acquisition workforce is generally not deployed or embedded with the military during expeditionary operations .

as the number of contractors in the area of operations has increased , the operational force — the service men and women in the field — increasingly rely on , interact with , and are responsible for managing contractors .

yet , a number of military commanders and service members have indicated they did not get adequate information regarding the extent of contractor support in iraq and did not receive enough pre - deployment training to prepare them to manage or work with contractors .

one dod official has pointed out that the military does not have an adequate infrastructure to effectively execute and manage contractors in iraq .

and last year , an army commission produced the gansler report , which found that contacting officer representatives ( cors ) responsible for managing contractors are generally drawn from combat units and receive "little , if any , training" on how to work with contractors .

this finding confirms what many analysts have argued: that deployed military personnel are not sufficiently trained or prepared to manage contractors in an area of operations .

given the critical role contractors are playing in supporting military operations and the billions of dollars dod spends on contractors , the ability of the operational force to manage and oversee contractors has become increasingly important .

poor contract management can lead to troops not receiving needed support and the wasteful spending of billions of dollars .

a lack of effective contractor management can even undermine the credibility and effectiveness of the u.s. military .

for example , according to an army investigative report , a lack of good contractor surveillance at abu ghraib prison contributed to fostering a permissive environment in which prisoner abuses took place .

many observers believe that the fallout from abu ghraib and other incidents , such as the shooting of iraqi civilians by private security contractors hired by the united states government , have hurt the credibility of the u.s. military and undermined efforts in iraq .

a number of experts believe that the military needs to improve the operational force's management of and coordination with contractors in the area of operations .

these experts have argued that increased training and education is necessary for non - acquisition personnel throughout the military .

the gansler report stated that the army needs to train operational commanders on the important role contracting plays , as well as on their responsibilities in the process .

the report called for including courses in the curricula on contractors in expeditionary operations at command schools ( eg , the war college and sergeant majors academy ) and other officer educational programs .

echoing the gansler report , an official at the u.s. army materiel command wrote that "contractor logistics support must be integrated into doctrine and taught at every level of professional schooling in each component. .

the calls for more robust training are not new .

for example , in 2003 , gao testified before the house armed services committee , subcommittee on readiness , stating "[t]he lack of contract training for commanders , senior personnel , and some contracting officers' representatives can adversely affect the effectiveness of the use of contractors in deployed locations .

without training , many commanders , senior military personnel , and contracting officers' representatives are not aware of their roles and responsibilities in dealing with contractors. .

in early 2008 , congress amended the law ( 10 u.s.c .

2333 , as amended ) and mandated training for non - acquisition military personnel filling positions with contracting responsibilities during expeditionary operations .

the statute was aimed to ensure that the military is prepared to deal with contracting responsibilities during contingency and other operations .

the amendment also ( 1 ) mandated the incorporation of contractors and contract operations into mission readiness exercises ; ( 2 ) directed the secretary of defense and the secretary of the army to evaluate all recommendations in the gansler report and submit a report to the congressional defense committees describing their plans for implementing applicable report recommendations ; and ( 3 ) and required the gao to submit to congress a report analyzing the extent to which dod is complying with this amended section ( 2333 ) of title x .

in addition , congress appropriated $2,500,000 for the joint contingency contract support office and $2,000,000 for military non - contracting officer training to implement this program .

according to title x of the united states code , military services are generally responsible for training military forces .

as such , some argue that it is the charge of the military services to implement training aimed at improving contractor coordination and management .

others argue that the use of contractors during expeditionary operations cuts across military branches and to be successful , training initiatives should be spearheaded by dod and then propagated throughout the individual services .

according to senior military officials , while there is not yet a unified strategy among the various dod departments on how to train and educate non - acquisition personnel to work with and manage contractors , a number of initiatives are underway .

some of these initiatives are described below .

the national defense authorization act of fy2008 ( h.r .

4986 / p.l .

110-181 ) required dod , and especially the army , to train military personnel who are outside the acquisition workforce but are expected to have acquisition responsibility , and to incorporate contractors and contract operations into mission exercises .

as outlined above , dod has initiated a number of steps to comply with p.l .

110-181 , including developing doctrine , developing a concept of operations , planning and introducing educational courses into the curricula of non - acquisition military personnel , and incorporating contractor support scenarios into mission - ready and other exercises .

congress may wish to consider requiring officer and / or enlisted performance evaluations to include commentary and / or grade evaluation of contractor management .

on the one hand , including a contractor management narrative as part of a performance evaluation could help ensure attention is given to this issue .

however , it should be recognized that contract support is not relevant for all military personnel , and elements of contract support could also fall under other evaluation factors , such as personnel , management .

alternatively , congress could consider requiring performance evaluations for military personnel whose mission involves or substantially relies on contractor support .

another option would be to amend the performance evaluation guidelines to stipulate specifically that contractor management be part of the discussion of personnel management or other related factors .

such a requirement would be similar to section 527 of the fy2009 duncan hunter national defense authorization act ( p.l .

110-417 ) which requires the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff to submit to congress a report outlining the joint education courses available throughout the dod .

such a report could help congress execute its oversight function .

such a report could help accomplish two goals: it can ( 1 ) help congress chart the military's progress in preparing the operational force to work with contractors during expeditionary operations and ( 2 ) help dod maintain focus on this issue .

dod has stated as far back as 2004 that it would explore creating training courses on contracting for mid - and senior - level service schools .

however , some analysts would argue that dod failed to follow through adequately on creating additional training on contract support until congress mandated training for appropriate non - acquisition military personnel .

as described in this report , dod has recently taken a number of concrete steps to improve how the operational force works with contractors and has incorporated contractors and contract operations into mission - readiness and other exercises .

analysts argue that only sustained congressional attention can help ensure that the desired results will be achieved .

