on january 18 , 2007 , california governor arnold schwarzenegger issued an executive order directing the california environmental protection agency to establish a low carbon fuel standard ( lcfs ) .

the executive order requires the state of california to reduce the carbon intensity of fuels in the state by 10% by 2020 .

in october 2008 , the california air resources board ( arb ) released draft implementing regulations , and updated that draft in december 2008 .

this was one of many actions taken by california in response to california assembly bill ab32 , which also requires arb to adopt rules and regulations to achieve the maximum feasible and cost - effective reductions in greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

if finalized , the california lcfs would require fuel suppliers to reduce the expected lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions from motor fuels , based on fuels' energy content .

in this way , the greenhouse gas intensity of transportation fuels would decrease , regardless of the growth in transportation or fuel demand .

several bills were introduced in the 110 th congress to establish a similar national lcfs .

these bills varied based on their target dates and required reductions ; some were stand - alone bills , while others were proposed as part of more comprehensive greenhouse gas legislation .

none were adopted ; one was discussed on the senate floor .

motor fuels face significant regulatory requirements at the state and federal levels for fuel quality , content of toxic materials , expected criteria pollutant emissions , and other properties .

the establishment of a low carbon fuel standard — at either the state or federal level — would add another major regulatory requirement .

further , a federal requirement would likely be far more challenging for fuel providers since , under a state standard , low - carbon fuels would likely be shipped to the regulated states from unregulated states , while a federal standard could not be met by this sort of product shifting .

this report analyzes the draft california standards , and discusses how those standards might work , given that the draft regulations leave many details to be decided later .

next , the report analyzes federal lcfs legislation proposed in the 110 th congress .

finally , the report analyzes what effects an lcfs might have on state and national fuel supplies .

transportation is a key source of greenhouse gas emissions both nationally and worldwide .

in 2006 , transportation represented roughly 33% of total u.s. carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions , and roughly 26% of total ghg emissions .

of those emissions , combustion of gasoline and diesel fuel in passenger vehicles , trucks , and non - road engines account for nearly 90% of total transportation emissions — the remainder is mostly the use of jet fuel in aviation .

transportation ghg emissions are essentially a function of total vehicle miles traveled ( vmt ) , the fuel economy of the vehicle , the carbon content of the fuel , and the rate of release of non - fuel - related emissions ( eg , air conditioner refrigerant ) : to reduce transportation ghg emissions generally requires at least one of four approaches: 1. decrease total vehicle miles traveled ; 2. increase the efficiency of fuel consumption ; 3. decrease the carbon content of transportation fuel ; and / or 4. decrease the rate of release of non - fuel - related emissions .

a low carbon fuel standard would aim to reduce the carbon content variable in the above equation .

there are two basic ways to reduce the carbon intensity of fuels .

the first method would be to switch to direct fuel substitutes or blending components with lower carbon content .

for example , biofuels with lower lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions could be blended directly into gasoline and diesel fuel .

the second method would be to switch from petroleum - based fuels to other alternatives , such as natural gas , hydrogen , or electricity .

regardless of the approach taken to reduce the carbon intensity of a fuel , the full lifecycle emissions of the replacement fuel must be considered .

otherwise , vehicle ghg emissions could simply be shifted to another location , and could lead to a net increase in emissions .

for example , an electric vehicle has zero greenhouse gas emissions , but there can be significant emissions upstream at the electric power plant , especially if coal is the primary fuel .

therefore , all direct and indirect emissions from every step in the production process and use of a fuel should be considered , to the extent possible .

these steps vary widely among fuels , and even among different feedstocks for the same fuel .

for petroleum fuels , potential emissions can come from: petroleum extraction ; transport of crude oil to the refinery ; refining ; distribution of refined fuel ; final combustion .

for electricity produced from coal , potential emissions include coal mining and transport , and burning the coal at the power plant .

while the lifecycle emissions from wind electricity may be negligible , they could include the production and installation of wind turbines .

perhaps the most involved and varied fuel lifecycles are those for biofuels .

potential emissions may come from: fertilizer production and use ; use of farm equipment to plant and harvest feedstocks ; feedstock transport ; refining and / or conversion ; fuel distribution ; and combustion .

however , some or all of these emissions may be offset by the growth cycle of the feedstock plant , which required carbon dioxide .

a key question is the effect of indirect emissions , which may result from changes in current practices .

for example , if higher biofuel use leads to increased corn production , that may displace soybean production .

if virgin land is then used to grow soybeans , the potential release of carbon from that virgin land may be significant .

valuing the emissions of each step in a fuel's lifecycle is key to the development of a low carbon fuel standard .

however , in many cases there is little or no consensus on the amount of emissions from each step , especially where biofuels are concerned .

key questions remain over how to value emissions from land use change , especially indirect land use change , or whether indirect changes should be considered at all .

on september 27 , 2006 , california governor arnold schwarzenegger signed assembly bill ab32 , which , among other provisions , requires the california air resources board ( arb ) of the california environmental protection agency ( cal - epa ) to "adopt rules and regulations in an open public process to achieve the maximum technologically feasible and cost - effective greenhouse gas emission reductions from sources or categories of sources. .

as part of that requirement , on january 18 , 2007 , governor schwarzenegger issued an executive order directing cal - epa to establish a low carbon fuel standard , reducing the carbon intensity of transportation fuels by at least 10% by 2020 .

in response to that executive order , arb established four lcfs working groups , held public workshops and meetings , and compiled detailed background information .

on october 10 , 2008 , arb released draft regulations for the program ; on december 1 , 2008 , arb released an updated draft .

arb plans to have the rule adopted and implemented by 2010 .

the draft rule would require fuel providers to achieve a set average ghg emissions level — which would decrease each year — on an energy - equivalent basis ( see table 1 ) .

the draft essentially sets up two average requirements , one for gasoline and one for diesel fuel .

all fuels that substitute for gasoline would be calculated in the gasoline average ; all diesel substitutes would be calculated in the diesel average .

for example , natural gas or electricity used for passenger cars would be counted in the gasoline average .

any over - compliance with the annual standard would generate credits for the fuel provider — credits that could be used by that provider to meet other requirements ( eg , transferred from the gasoline average to the diesel average ) , banked for future use , or traded to other fuel providers .

in the 110 th congress , seven bills were introduced to establish a low carbon fuel standard similar to california's ( see table 2 ) .

these seven bills were h.r .

2215 ( inslee ) , h.r .

2809 ( inslee ) , h.r .

6186 ( markey ) , h.r .

7284 ( lewis ) , s. 1324 ( obama ) , s. 2191 ( lieberman ) , and s. 3036 ( boxer ) .

of these bills , s. 2191 was reported out of committee , and s. 3036 was discussed on the senate floor .

a substitute to s. 3036 , s.amdt .

4825 , would also have established an lcfs .

in most cases , these bills would have established the overall requirements of the program , but left the details to epa .

key differences between these proposals include the stringency of the emissions reduction ( i.e. , percent reduction required ) , the timeframe for that reduction , and the fuels covered by the program .

the more stringent proposals would require deeper cuts earlier , and include more fuels in the mandate .

the establishment of a low carbon fuel standard could significantly affect fuel supplies and fuel prices .

however , the details of any program are key to determining those effects .

the stringency , scope , time frame , and flexibility of the program would determine its ultimate effects on both fuel markets and greenhouse gas emissions .

california has not officially proposed regulations for its program , but instead has released drafts of possible regulations .

the development of those rules could inform policymakers looking to establish a federal lcfs .

however , the scope of a federal program — requiring compliance nationwide — would likely affect the fuel system in ways not comparable to california's experience .

if more low - carbon fuel is needed in california , supply can be shifted from other parts of the country not under an lcfs .

if more low - carbon fuel is needed nationwide , higher production and / or imports would be necessary .

if the requirements of a low carbon fuel standard get ahead of the necessary supply , conventional fuel supply would need to be curtailed , or the program would need to be delayed .

it is likely that the proposals with later time frames would be less disruptive to the fuel supply .

