according to the estimates by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , some 11.4 million unauthorized immigrants were living in the united states in 2012 .

the pew research center's unauthorized alien population estimate for 2012 was 11.2 million , which included some 8.1 million unauthorized workers in the u.s. civilian workforce .

it is widely believed that most unauthorized aliens enter and remain in the united states in order to work .

six years ago , in 2009 , dhs issued new guidance on immigration - related worksite enforcement — the enforcement of prohibitions on the employment of unauthorized aliens in the united states .

in the words of dhs at the time , the 2009 guidance "reflects a renewed department - wide focus targeting criminal aliens and employers who cultivate illegal workplaces by breaking the country's laws and knowingly hiring illegal workers. .

under this guidance , promoting compliance also has taken on a larger role in dhs's worksite enforcements efforts .

questions arise as to how rigorous and effective dhs's worksite enforcement efforts are and have been in past years .

the department maintains data on several measures that can be used to examine the performance of its worksite enforcement program .

enforcement activity by the department of labor ( dol ) is also relevant to a discussion of federal efforts to address unauthorized employment .

dol , which is responsible for enforcing minimum wage , overtime pay , and related requirements , focuses a significant percentage of its enforcement resources on low - wage industries that employ large numbers of immigrant — and presumably large numbers of unauthorized — workers .

section 274a of the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) prohibits employers from employing individuals who they know are not authorized to work .

more specifically , the ina section 274a provisions , sometimes referred to as employer sanctions , make it unlawful for an employer to knowingly hire , recruit or refer for a fee , or continue to employ an alien who is not authorized to be so employed .

these provisions also make it unlawful for an employer to hire an individual for employment without examining documents to verify the new hire's identity and work eligibility , and completing and retaining verification forms , known as i - 9 forms .

these verification procedures , commonly referred to as the i - 9 process or the i - 9 requirements , are separate from the largely voluntary e - verify electronic employment eligibility verification system , which is administered by dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) .

enforcement of the prohibitions on unauthorized employment in ina section 274a — or worksite enforcement — has been the job of dhs's u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) since 2003 .

worksite enforcement is one component of ice's responsibility to enforce federal immigration laws within the united states , known as interior enforcement .

employers violating the ina section 274a prohibitions on unlawful employment may be subject to civil and / or criminal penalties .

the federal government's approach to immigration - related worksite enforcement has changed over the years .

in 1999 , for example , the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) unveiled an interior enforcement strategy , which , as explained by an ins official at the time , gave priority in the area of worksite enforcement to two types of cases: ( 1 ) criminal employer cases , in which there was a pattern or practice of knowingly employing unauthorized workers , and ( 2 ) cases of employers who abused their workers and who violated multiple laws .

in the aftermath of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , interior enforcement priorities again shifted .

resources were redirected from traditional program areas , including worksite enforcement , to national security - related investigations , and the primary focus of worksite enforcement became removal of unauthorized workers from critical infrastructure facilities such as airports and military bases .

under the worksite enforcement guidance issued in 2009 , homeland security remains a primary concern of ice's worksite enforcement program .

as described by ice: "investigations involving national security , public safety or those associated with our critical infrastructure and key resources sectors receive top priority. .

according to ice , the agency also prioritizes criminally prosecuting employers who "utilize unauthorized workers as a business model," "mistreat their workers," or "engage in human smuggling or trafficking," among other violations .

in recent years , ice also has placed "increased emphasis on compliance and outreach" in conducting worksite enforcement .

it has increased its use of inspections , or audits , of business owners' i - 9 records ( see above ) to determine whether they are in compliance with employment eligibility verification laws and regulations .

in addition , the agency promotes the ice mutual agreement between government and employers ( image ) program as a way to reduce unauthorized employment .

while the authority to enforce the ina employer sanctions provisions rests with dhs , ina section 274a does grant dol the authority to review i - 9 verification forms ( see above ) .

under ina section 274a ( b ) ( 3 ) , employers must make completed i - 9 forms available to dol officers for inspection .

dol has separate authority to enforce federal labor laws , including the fair labor standards act ( flsa ) , which establishes minimum wage , overtime pay , youth employment , and other standards .

the wage and hour division ( whd ) of the dol employment standards administration ( esa ) administers and enforces the flsa with respect to private sector workers , state and local government employees , and certain federal employees .

historically , dol officials have been cautious about delving into questions of work authorization in their labor standards investigations because of concerns that it "might impede their ability to gain the trust of illegal aliens who may be the victims of labor violations and potential witnesses against employers. .

dol and dhs signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) on worksite enforcement in march 2011 that delineates the enforcement roles of each agency and the ways in which they will work together to further their respective missions .

the mou summarizes the importance of enforcing worksite - related labor and immigration laws , as follows: effective enforcement of labor law is essential to ensure proper wages and working conditions for all covered workers regardless of immigration status .

effective enforcement of immigration law is essential to protect the employment rights of lawful u.s. workers , whether citizen or non - citizen , and to reduce the incentive for illegal migration to the united states .

the mou seeks to avoid conflicts in the worksite enforcement activities of dol and dhs .

as part of the mou , ice agrees not to conduct civil worksite enforcement activities at a worksite that is the subject of an existing dol investigation of a labor dispute , except as specified .

a labor dispute is defined in the mou as a dispute between employees and managers / owners over employee rights , including the right to be paid the minimum wage , a promised or contracted wage , or overtime ; the right to work in a safe workplace ; and the right not to be subject to unlawful discrimination .

under the mou , ice can conduct worksite enforcement activities during a pending labor dispute in certain circumstances , such as when the director of ice determines that the enforcement activity is independently necessary to further an investigation concerning national security , the protection of critical infrastructure , or other federal crimes .

ice and dol also agree as part of the mou to work together to prevent manipulation of the enforcement process .

to this end , ice agrees to act to "thwart attempts by other parties to manipulate its worksite enforcement activities for illicit or improper purposes. .

dol agrees to assist ice in these efforts by sharing relevant information .

the data provided here on final orders , administrative fines , administrative and criminal arrests , criminal indictments and prosecutions , and criminal fines offer a way to assess dhs's worksite enforcement strategy over the years and in its current form .

more broadly , it can be argued that the ultimate test for any approach to worksite enforcement by dhs or dol is whether it helps reduce the size of the unauthorized labor force in the united states .

