iran ratified the nuclear nonproliferation treaty ( npt ) in 1970 .

article iii of the treaty requires non - nuclear - weapon states - parties to accept comprehensive international atomic energy agency ( iaea ) safeguards ; tehran concluded a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the iaea in 1974 .

in 2002 , the agency began investigating allegations that iran had conducted clandestine nuclear activities ; the iaea ultimately reported that some of these activities had violated tehran's safeguards agreement .

following more than three years of investigation , the iaea board of governors referred the matter to the u.n. security council in february 2006 .

since then , the council adopted six resolutions requiring iran to take steps to alleviate international concerns about its nuclear program .

this report provides a brief overview of iran's nuclear program and describes the legal basis for the actions taken by the iaea board and the security council .

for more detailed information about iran's nuclear program , see crs report rl34544 , iran's nuclear program: status , by paul k. kerr .

for more information about the july 2015 joint comprehensive plan of action ( jcpoa ) concerning iran's nuclear program , see crs report r43333 , iran nuclear agreement , by kenneth katzman and paul k. kerr .

the legal authority for the actions taken by the iaea board of governors and the u.n. security council is found in both the iaea statute and the u.n. charter .

the following sections discuss the relevant portions of those documents .

whether iran has violated the npt is unclear .

the treaty does not contain a mechanism for determining that a state - party has violated its obligations .

moreover , there does not appear to be a formal procedure for determining such violations .

an npt review conference would , however , be one venue for npt states - parties to make such a determination .

the u.n. security council has never declared iran to be in violation of the npt ; neither the council nor the u.n. general assembly has a responsibility to adjudicate treaty violations .

however , the lack of a ruling by the council on iran's compliance with the npt has apparently had little practical effect because , as noted , the council has taken action in response to the iaea board of governors' determination that iran has violated its safeguards agreement .

iran's violations of its safeguards agreement appear to constitute violations of article iii , which requires npt non - nuclear - weapon states - parties to accept iaea safeguards , in accordance with the agency's statue , "for the exclusive purpose of verification of the fulfillment of its obligations assumed under this treaty with a view to preventing diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful uses to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. .

tehran may also have violated provisions of article ii which state that non - nuclear - weapon states - parties shall not "manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices" or "seek or receive any assistance in the manufacture of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. .

as noted , the iaea investigated evidence of what then - iaea director general mohamed elbaradei described in june 2008 as "possible military dimensions to iran's nuclear programme. .

such activities may indicate that tehran has violated both article ii provisions described above .

moreover , a november 2007 national intelligence estimate ( nie ) stated that "until fall 2003 , iranian military entities were working under government direction to develop nuclear weapons. .

this past program could be a violation of article ii , although the estimate does not provide any detail about the program .

nevertheless , the iaea has never reported that iran has attempted to develop nuclear weapons .

despite the lack of such an iaea conclusion , a 2005 state department report regarding states' compliance with nonproliferation agreements argued that the country had violated article ii of the npt: the breadth of iran's nuclear development efforts , the secrecy and deceptions with which they have been conducted for nearly 20 years , its redundant and surreptitious procurement channels , iran's persistent failure to comply with its obligations to report to the iaea and to apply safeguards to such activities , and the lack of a reasonable economic justification for this program leads us to conclude that iran is pursuing an effort to manufacture nuclear weapons , and has sought and received assistance in this effort in violation of article ii of the npt .

the report also stated that iran's "weapons program combines elements" of tehran's declared nuclear activities , as well as suspected "undeclared fuel cycle and other activities that may exist , including those that may be run solely by the military. .

the state department's 2005 reasoning appears to be based on an interpretation of the npt which holds that a wide scope of nuclear activities could constitute violations of article ii .

the 2005 report states that assessments regarding article ii compliance "must look at the totality of the facts , including judgments as to" a state - party's "purpose in undertaking the nuclear activities in question. .

the report also includes a list of activities which could constitute such noncompliance .

the 2005 state department report cites testimony from then - arms control and disarmament agency director william foster during a 1968 senate foreign relations committee hearing .

foster stated that "facts indicating that the purpose of a particular activity was the acquisition of a nuclear explosive device would tend to show non - compliance" with article ii .

he gave two examples: "the construction of an experimental or prototype nuclear explosive device" and "the production of components which could only have relevance" to such a device .

however , foster also noted that a variety of other activities could also violate article ii , adding that the united states believed it impossible "to formulate a comprehensive definition or interpretation. .

it is worth noting that the 2005 state department report's arguments appear to rely heavily on the notion that a state's apparent intentions underlying certain nuclear - related activities can be used to determine violations of article ii .

this interpretation is not shared by all experts .

the 2005 report "primarily reflected activities from january 2002 through december 2003. .

whether the state department assesses that iran has violated article ii since then is unclear .

a version of the report released in 2010 , which primarily reflected activities from january 1 , 2004 , through december 31 , 2008 , states that "the issues underlying" the 2005 report's conclusion regarding iran's article ii compliance "remain unresolved. .

subsequent versions of the report reiterated the 2010 report's assessment until 2016 , when the state department assessed that "previous issues leading to npt noncompliance findings [regarding iran] had been resolved. .

as noted , the 2007 nie assessed that iran halted its nuclear weapons program in 2003 ; subsequent u.s. official statements have consistently reiterated that tehran has not yet decided to build nuclear weapons .

the united kingdom's then - foreign secretary william hague would not say whether iran had violated article ii when asked by a member of parliament in march 2012 .

appendix a. iranian noncompliance with its iaea safeguards agreement the november 2003 report ( gov / 2003 / 75 ) from iaea director general elbaradei to the agency's board of governors details what the september 2005 board resolution described as "iran's many failures and breaches of its obligations to comply with its safeguards agreement. .

the report stated that iran has failed in a number of instances over an extended period of time to meet its obligations under its safeguards agreement with respect to the reporting of nuclear material and its processing and use , as well as the declaration of facilities where such material has been processed and stored .

the report detailed some of these failures and referenced other failures described in two earlier reports ( gov / 2003 / 40 and gov / 2003 / 63 ) from elbaradei to the iaea board .

according to gov / 2003 / 40 , iran failed to declare the following activities to the agency: the importation of natural uranium , and its subsequent transfer for further processing .

the processing and use of the imported natural uranium , including the production and loss of nuclear material , and the production and transfer of resulting waste .

additionally , iran failed to declare the facilities where nuclear material ( including the waste ) was received , stored , and processed ; provide in a timely manner updated design information for a research reactor located in tehran ; as well as provide in a timely manner information on two waste storage sites .

gov / 2003 / 63 stated that iran failed to report uranium conversion experiments to the iaea .

according to gov / 2003 / 75 , iran failed to report the following activities to the iaea: the use of imported natural uranium hexafluoride for the testing of centrifuges , as well as the subsequent production of enriched and depleted uranium .

the importation of natural uranium metal and its subsequent transfer for use in laser enrichment experiments , including the production of enriched uranium , the loss of nuclear material during these operations , and the production and transfer of resulting waste .

the production of a variety of nuclear compounds from several different imported nuclear materials , and the production and transfer of resulting wastes .

the production of uranium targets and their irradiation in the tehran research reactor , the subsequent processing of those targets ( including the separation of plutonium ) , the production and transfer of resulting waste , and the storage of unprocessed irradiated targets .

iran also failed to provide the agency with design information for a variety of nuclear - related facilities , according to the report .

these included the following: a centrifuge testing facility .

two laser laboratories and locations where resulting wastes were processed .

facilities involved in the production of a variety of nuclear compounds .

the tehran research reactor ( with respect to the irradiation of uranium targets ) , the hot cell facility where the plutonium separation took place , as well as the relevant waste handling facility .

additionally , the report cited iran's "failure on many occasions to co - operate to facilitate the implementation of safeguards , through concealment" of its nuclear activities .

appendix b. iaea special inspections as noted , iran's obligations under its additional protocol to provide access to certain locations are unclear ; tehran may refuse to grant the iaea access to certain facilities .

in such a case , the iaea director general could call for a special inspection ; the inspection could require approval from the iaea board of governors .

according to the iaea , an inspection is deemed to be special when it is in addition to iaea routine inspections or "involves access to information or locations" that have not been identified to the iaea as part of the agency's implementation of safeguards in that country .

such inspections "are foreseen in all agency safeguards agreements , principally as a means for the agency to resolve unforeseen verification problems," according to a 1991 iaea document .

paragraph 73 of the model safeguards agreement , infcirc 153 , states that comprehensive safeguards agreements should provide for the iaea's ability to "make special inspections," subject to certain procedures , if the agency considers that information made available by the state , including explanations from the state and information obtained from routine inspections , is not adequate for the agency to fulfill its responsibilities under the agreement .

according to the 1991 document , a special inspection could be triggered by the iaea's receipt of "plausible information , which is not adequately explained by the state or otherwise resolved" by other iaea inspections that the country has "nuclear material in a nuclear activity" outside of iaea safeguards , or that the state has an undeclared nuclear facility that it had been required to report to the agency .

the iaea director general "has the authority ... to determine the need for , and to direct the carrying out of , special inspections," according to another 1991 iaea paper .

in the event that the iaea argues for a special inspection in a country , the agency and the government "must hold immediate consultations," according to the 1991 paper .

any dispute regarding the inspection request must be resolved according to dispute settlement provisions described in infcirc 153 .

however , paragraph 18 of infcirc 153 states that if the board , upon report of the director general , decides that an action by the state is essential and urgent in order to ensure verification that nuclear material subject to safeguards under the agreement is not diverted to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices the board shall be able to call upon the state to take the required action without delay , irrespective of whether procedures for the settlement of a dispute have been invoked .

if the state refuses the inspection , the iaea board of governors can take action according to paragraph 19 of infcirc 153 , including reporting the matter to the u.n. security council .

appendix c. extended remarks by william foster regarding possible npt article ii violations on july 10 , 1968 , then - arms control and disarmament agency director william foster testified before the senate foreign relations committee about the npt .

in response to a question regarding the type of nuclear activities prohibited by article ii of the treaty , foster supplied the following statement: extension of remarks by mr. foster in response to question regarding nuclear explosive devices the treaty articles in question are article ii , in which non - nuclear - weapon parties undertake "not to manufacture or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices," and article iv , which provides that nothing in the treaty is to be interpreted as affecting the right of all parties to the treaty "to develop research , production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes…in conformity with articles i and ii of this treaty. .

in the course of the negotiation of the treaty , united states representatives were asked their views on what would constitute the "manufacture" of a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device under article ii of the draft treaty .

our reply was as follows: "while the general intent of this provision seems clear , and its application to cases such as those discussed below should present little difficulty , the united states believe [sic] it is not possible at this time to formulate a comprehensive definition or interpretation .

there are many hypothetical situations which might be imagined and it is doubtful that any general definition or interpretation , unrelated to specific fact situations could satisfactorily deal with all such situations .

"some general observations can be made with respect to the question of whether or not a specific activity constitutes prohibited manufacture under the proposed treaty .

for example , facts indicating that the purpose of a particular activity was the acquisition of a nuclear explosive device would tend to show non - compliance .

 ( thus , the construction of an experimental or prototype nuclear explosive device would be covered by the term 'manufacture' as would be the production of components which could only have relevance to a nuclear explosive device. ) .

again , while the placing of a particular activity under safeguards would not , in and of itself , settle the question of whether that activity was in compliance with the treaty , it would of course be helpful in allaying any suspicion of non - compliance .

"it may be useful to point out , for illustrative purposes , several activities which the united states would not consider per se to be violations of the prohibitions in article ii .

neither uranium enrichment nor the stockpiling of fissionable material in connection with a peaceful program would violate article ii so long as these activities were safeguarded under article iii .

also clearly permitted would be the development , under safeguards , of plutonium fueled power reactors , including research on the properties of metallic plutonium , nor would article ii interfere with the development or use of fast breeder reactors under safeguards. .

