after a period of diplomatic rancor earlier in the decade , japan and china have demonstrably improved their bilateral relationship since 2006 .

sino - japanese relations over the past ten years have followed a remarkable trajectory: from a disastrous japan visit by former chinese president jiang zemin in 1998 to hu jintao's well - orchestrated and highly successful visit to tokyo in may 2008 .

the emerging détente has expanded to include breakthrough agreements on territorial disputes , various high - level exchanges , and reciprocal port calls by naval vessels .

despite the rollercoaster of political and diplomatic ties , other aspects of the relationship have remained relatively consistent .

china - japan economic interdependence has grown as trade and investment flows have surged over the past decade .

china - japan economic ties serve as an anchor for the overall bilateral relationship , and the two nations and have become the key players in a robust east asian trade and investment network .

on the other hand , military strategists in each country remain wary of the other's motives .

beijing is suspicious of any moves that hint at japan developing a more assertive and active security posture , and japanese defense planners note with alarm china's burgeoning military modernization .

japanese defense documents have publicly declared their concern with beijing's lack of transparency and apparently aggressive military spending over the past several years .

in addition , occasional incursions by chinese vessels into japan's territorial waters have kept tension high at times despite the overall improving relations .

the détente , pursued with vigor by leaders in both beijing and tokyo , follows an exceedingly tense period in the relationship under former japanese prime minister junichiro koizumi ( 2001-2006 ) .

koizumi's annual visits to the controversial yasukuni shrine , which honors japan's war dead — including several convicted class a war criminals — particularly rankled beijing .

the visits , together with changes to japanese history textbooks that critics claim whitewash japan's wartime behavior , led to large , sometimes violent anti - japan protests in chinese cities that damaged japanese diplomatic posts .

since 2006 , political leaders on both sides — even those whose rhetoric was the most vehement — appear to have concluded that political accommodation is the best course , at least temporarily .

the fact that this trend has survived several political transitions in tokyo is particularly promising .

many analysts contend that the short - to medium - term outlook is remarkably stable , but acknowledge that fundamental distrust and disagreements over history could threaten ties in the longer term .

in short , it appears that these disputes have created a firm ceiling for chinese - japanese relations ; the question is if this recent détente points to the establishment of a new , higher floor .

the durability of the recent détente could have significant implications for u.s. interests .

u.s. interests in the region are generally well served by pragmatic sino - japanese accommodation .

equanimity in the tokyo - beijing relationship not only fosters stability and prosperity , but also allows the united states to avoid choosing sides on delicate issues , particularly those related to history .

during the tension of the koizumi years , u.s. officials voiced fears — both publicly and privately — that the discord was harmful to regional stability .

multilateral efforts such as the six - party talks on north korea's nuclear program can be complicated by acute bilateral tension among the participants .

on the other hand , some u.s. officials and analysts who view china as a security threat find the recent détente somewhat disconcerting .

although this tends to be a minority view among influential policymakers , this school of thought advocates building up japan's military capability to deter any of china's strategic ambitions .

this camp encourages japan to move past some of restrictions placed on its military , including article 9 , the so - called peace clause of the japanese constitution , authored by u.s. officials during the post - war occupation .

the chance for japan and china to grow too close for u.s. interests appears , at this point , remote .

historical grievances and contemporary distrust , combined with the inherent tension of two major powers competing in the same region , seem to preclude the possibility of a more exclusive political partnership between tokyo and beijing that could marginalize u.s. interests .

moreover , despite some signs of drift in the u.s. - japan alliance , the american security commitment to japan appears to remain fundamentally solid .

in the event of a conflict in the taiwan straits , japan would almost definitely play a role in a u.s. military response .

the presence of 47,000 u.s. troops in japan ( 65% of them stationed in okinawa , geographically proximate to taiwan ) implies that a u.s. counter - attack could be staged from japan .

to many security analysts , taiwan's status as a potential flashpoint for conflict between china and the united states provides a fairly reliable bulwark for the u.s. - japan relationship despite periodic bilateral tension .

against this background of historical division but increasing economic interdependence , japan and china have undergone a remarkable reversal from the tension of the koizumi years ( 2001-2006 ) .

this section outlines the motivations and most prominent aspects of the reconciliation of the past few years .

the china - japan economic relationship has become one of the most dynamic and important bilateral economic relationships in the 21 st century .

it combines the world's second largest national economy ( japan ) with one of the world's fastest growing and potentially largest economies ( china ) .

the two economies have become the world's largest net savers and , thus , potential sources of credit to the rest of the globe .

china and japan are the largest and second largest holders of foreign exchange reserves .

how the two countries conduct their economic relations will likely have important implications for east asia and the rest of the world and , therefore , for the united states .

the economic relationship is a critical part of the overall china - japan relationship .

while political and national security relations have made relations volatile through the years , economic ties have provided stability .

china and japan have grown more economically inter - dependent , which has provided great incentive for them to pursue better relations .

the economic relationship has broadened and deepened over the last two decades and has become more complex .

modern china - japan economic relations developed at first very slowly after world war ii as the two countries dealt with the legacies of japan's colonial occupation of china and of the war .

they were hampered also in the 1960s and 1970s as the two countries were on opposite sides of the cold war , during which japan largely followed u.s. policy , and because china's severely centralized economic system was not conducive to liberalized foreign trade and investment .

the climate for economic ties vastly improved first with japan's diplomatic recognition of china in 1972 , following the u.s. opening to china with the visit of president nixon .

even more importantly , major economic reforms that china's leadership introduced beginning in the late 1970s included opening the chinese economy to foreign trade and investment .

while the economic relationship improved over the years , it has still experienced periods of turmoil but has stabilized in the last few years as the two countries have become more closely intertwined economically .

sources: jiji press , kyodo news , nikkei weekly , new york times , bbc , washington post , defense of japan , agence france presse , yomiuri shimbun , xinhua news agency , people's daily 8 / 13 / 01 — japanese prime minister junichiro koizumi pays homage at the yasukuni shrine dedicated to the country's war dead , including war criminals , provoking protests from china and south korea .

the chinese foreign ministry says in a statement that koizumi's visit has damaged the political foundation of sino - japanese relations and insulted the feelings of chinese and other asian people .

8 / 31 / 01 — chinese ambassador to japan wu dawei says that sino - japanese relations are facing their "toughest situation" since the two countries normalized ties nearly 30 years ago due to history , trade and taiwan issues .

in a press conference , wu criticizes japan for issuing a visa to former taiwan president lee teng - hui , who visited japan in april for medical treatment .

he also criticizes japanese textbooks and koizumi's yasukuni visit .

10 / 8 / 01 — koizumi meets with chinese president jiang zemin in china and tries to ease chinese concerns over japan's policy of sending troops of its self - defense forces for logistical support for antiterrorist operations by the united states .

koizumi and jiang agree to cooperate with each other toward the 30 th anniversary of the restoration of diplomatic relations between the two countries next year .

4 / 21 / 02 — koizumi pays a surprise visit to yasukuni shrine , and chinese vice foreign minister li zhaoxing quickly summons japanese ambassador koreshige anami to express china's "strong dissatisfaction. .

china puts off a visit later in the month to beijing by japan's defense agency chief gen nakatani and a call by chinese warships to tokyo port in may in order to protest koizumi's visit .

8 / 15 / 02 — five cabinet members visit the yasukuni shrine to pay respects to the japanese war dead on the anniversary of japan's wwii surrender .

koizumi does not attend and instead had visited the chidorigafuchi national memorial in tokyo for the unknown dead earlier in the week .

11 / 15 / 02 — hu jintao assumes office as president of china .

1 / 14 / 03 — koizumi visits yasukuni shrine for the third time .

chinese vice foreign minister yang wenchang quickly expresses china's "strong displeasure and indignation" over the visit to japanese ambassador anami .

8 / 15 / 03 — four cabinet ministers attend but koizumi does not visit yasukuni shrine on the day marking japan's world war ii surrender .

chinese foreign minister li zhaoxing praises koizumi .

3 / 30 / 04 — chinese activists land on uotsuri island , the largest of japan's senakaku islands .

the house of representatives committee on security unanimously adopts a resolution emphasizing japan's sovereignty over the east china sea islands .

the activists are arrested by japanese officials and deported to china .

8 / 7 / 04 — china and japan face each other at the asia cup final .

chinese fans burn japanese flags , yell "kill ! .

kill ! .

kill ! .

and shout various insults at the japanese spectators .

japan wins 3-1 , leading to weeping chinese fans and riots .

thousands of police are on hand , including riot troops in black body armor and special tactical units .

earlier in the tournament , in chongqing , hostile chinese fans booed the japanese team throughout the games and surrounded the japanese team's bus after one match .

11 / 10 / 04 — an unidentified nuclear submarine , later discovered to be chinese , enters japanese territorial waters near the sakishima island chain off okinawa , initiating a two - day chase .

japan's navy goes on alert for the first time in five years .

japan accuses china of violating its sovereign rights and demands a formal apology .

beijing expresses regret over the incident , saying that the sub was on routine maneuvers and that it made the incursion due to a technical error .

11 / 21 / 04 — koizumi and hu meet in a japan - china summit in santiago , chile .

the leaders agree to develop economic and cultural bilateral ties , which are important for themselves and also for other parts of the world , and pledge to make efforts for the resumption of multilateral talks over north korea's nuclear ambitions .

1 / 6 / 05 — despite strong protests from china , japan grants taiwanese president lee teng - hui a weeklong visit to japan .

china postpones a visit by a group of japanese lawmakers , claiming that the request was not made to protest lee's visit and that more time is needed to prepare for the trip .

4 / 5 / 05 — the japanese ministry of education , culture , sports , science and technology approves new editions of middle school textbooks that china says glosses over japan's world war ii record .

anti - japan demonstrations occur in chendu , sichuan province , and shenzhen , guangdong province .

millions of mainlanders sign a petition against tokyo's un bid on the security council .

protestors attack japanese owned or funded stores and boycott japanese products .

4 / 9 / 05 — anti - japan demonstrations continue in cities across china .

10,000 people march in beijing to voice their anger at the textbooks , the city's biggest protest since 1999 .

protestors stone the japanese embassy and the ambassador's residence .

4 / 17 / 05 — protestors hurl stones and eggs at the japanese consulate general building in shanghai .

some 2,000 people take part in anti - japanese demonstrations in shenyang and 10,000 in shenzhen .

4 / 20-4 / 21 / 05 — china orders an end to anti - japanese protects .

senior foreign diplomats are dispatched to all cities where protests occurred to calm sentiments and stress the importance of stability and observance of law .

officials urge its leaders to meet with japanese leaders later this week .

4 / 24 / 05 — hu and koizumi meet for a 46-minute talk at the asian - african summit in indonesia in hopes of improving relations .

one day earlier , koizumi had apologized for japan's world war ii aggression while addressing representatives of more than 100 countries at the summit .

5 / 24 / 05 — chinese vice premier wu yi abruptly cancels a meeting with koizumi , citing pressing domestic issues in china .

china's official xinhua new agency says china was extremely dissatisfied with remarks repeatedly made by japanese leaders on visiting yasukuni shrine .

china's assistant foreign minister shen guofang tells reuters that a "good atmosphere" is needed for wu yi to visit .

japanese ministers criticize the cancellation and lack of an apology .

9 / 9 / 05 — five chinese naval vessels , including a missile destroyer , are seen navigating near the chunxiao gas field in the east china sea .

10 / 16 / 05 — koizumi visits the yasukuni shrine for the fifth time , sparking more protests from china , south korea , and other asian countries .

china cancels japanese foreign minister nobutaka machimura's visit to china scheduled for late october .

koizumi has repeatedly said that he visits in order to mourn the dead and to vow that japan shall never wage war again .

in response to criticisms , he has said that "other countries should not intervene on how ( japan ) should pay tribute" to the dead .

10 / 25 / 05 — chinese vice foreign minister wu dawei says that it would be "very difficult" to hold sino - japanese summits on the sidelines of upcoming international meetings in the future , due to koizumi most recent visit to the yasukuni shrine .

while past yasukuni visits have stopped meetings by japanese and chinese leaders to their reciprocal countries , they have held talks on the sidelines of international meetings in third countries instead .

3 / 23 / 06 — japan delays a decision on providing further yen loans to china because of the two countries' worsening relations .

japan's aid has little financial importance but the delay is a symbolic gesture .

tokyo has given billions of dollars in loans for chinese infrastructure projects over the past two decades but its aid has declined in recent years as china's economy has grown .

9 / 26 / 06 — shinzo abe takes over from koizumi as prime minister of japan .

10 / 06 — a chinese song - class submarine appears in the vicinity of the uss kitty hawk aircraft carrier of the united states in international waters reportedly near okinawa .

10 / 8 / 06 — abe makes his ice - breaking trip to beijing , where he is greeted warmly .

his visit is the first meeting between the chinese and japanese leaders since the asia - africa summit in indonesia in april 2005 and the first bilateral summit between the leaders for five years .

1 / 11 / 07 — china conducts an anti - satellite weapon test and destroys an old chinese weather satellite .

japan shows concern over use of space and national security and demands that china explains the test and the country's intentions .

china claims that it had informed some countries including japan and the united states about the experiment .

4 / 12 / 07 - wen becomes the first chinese premier to address the japanese parliament and the first chinese premier to visit japan since 2000 .

wen urges japan to face up to its world war ii actions but says both sides have succeeded in warming relations .

8 / 30 / 07 — chinese defense minister cao gangchuan spends five days in japan in talks with his counterpart masahiko komura .

the defense chiefs agree to steps to ease military tensions such as the establishment of a military hotline and reciprocal port calls by naval vessels .

9 / 07 — chinese h - 6 medium - range bombers fly into the japanese air defense identification zone over the east china sea to advance close to the japan - china median line .

9 / 25 / 07 — yasuo fukuda becomes japan's prime minister after the abrupt resignation of shinzo abe .

12 / 27 / 07 — fukuda visits beijing .

his engagements include a speech at beijing university that is broadcast live on china central television , an unprecedented joint press conference with hu , and a rare banquet hosted by the chinese president — the first for a japanese prime minister since the nakasone visit in 1986 .

fukuda calls for increased co - operation with china in the future and says that he will not visit the shrine while prime minister .

5 / 6-5 / 10 / 08 — hu visits japan and becomes the first chinese president in over a decade to go to japan on an official state visit .

it is also the longest visit hu has made to a single country .

the imperial family holds a welcoming ceremony and banquet for hu .

in a joint press conference , fukuda praises china on a successful olympics , and hu offers to lend pandas to japan as a symbol of bilateral friendship .

hu and fukuda also issue a joint document and agree to promote a "mutually beneficial relationship based on common strategic interests. .

the statement stays away from history issues and any mention of a japanese apology while china notably recognizes japan as a peaceful postwar country for the first time in a political document .

6 / 18 / 08 — japan and china reach a deal for the joint development of the shirakaba gas field , known as chunxiao in china , in the east china sea .

the two governments agree to divide profits according to their stakes .

9 / 17 / 08 — japanese defense minister yoshimasa hayashi and chinese air force chief gen. xu qiliang agree that there is a need to enhance bilateral defense exchanges .

xu is the first commander of the people's liberation army air force to visit japan since 2001 .

