medicare is a federal insurance program that pays for covered health care services of most individuals aged 65 and older and certain disabled persons .

medicare serves approximately one in six americans and virtually all of the population aged 65 and over .

in calendar year ( cy ) 2019 , the program is expected to cover about 61 million persons ( 52 million aged and 9 million disabled ) at a total cost of about $798 billion , accounting for approximately 3.8% of gross domestic product .

the medicare program is administered by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and individuals enroll in medicare through the social security administration ( ssa ) .

medicare consists of four parts — parts a through d. part a covers hospital services , skilled nursing facility services , home health visits , and hospice services .

part b covers a broad range of medical services and supplies , including physician services , laboratory services , durable medical equipment , and outpatient hospital services .

enrollment in part b is voluntary ; however , most medicare beneficiaries ( about 91% ) are enrolled in part b .

part c ( medicare advantage ) provides private plan options , such as managed care , for beneficiaries who are enrolled in both part a and part b .

part d provides optional outpatient prescription drug coverage .

each part of medicare is funded differently .

part a is financed primarily through payroll taxes imposed on current workers ( 2.9% of earnings , shared equally between employers and workers ) , which are credited to the hospital insurance ( hi ) trust fund .

beginning in 2013 , workers with annual wages over $200,000 for single tax filers or $250,000 for joint filers pay an additional 0.9% .

beneficiaries generally do not pay premiums for part a .

in 2019 , total part a expenditures are expected to reach about $328 billion , representing about 41% of program costs .

parts b and d , the voluntary portions , are funded through the supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) trust fund , which is financed primarily by general revenues ( transfers from the u.s. treasury ) and premiums paid by enrollees .

in 2019 , about $2.8 billion in fees on manufacturers and importers of brand - name prescription drugs also will be used to supplement the smi trust fund .

in 2019 , part b expenditures are expected to reach about $367 billion , and part d expenditures are expected to reach about $104 billion , representing 46% and 13% of program costs , respectively .

 ( part c is financed proportionately through the hi and smi trust funds ; expenditures for parts a and b services provided under part c are included in the above expenditure figures. ) .

part b beneficiary premiums are normally set at a rate each year equal to 25% of average expected per capita part b program costs for the aged for the year .

higher - income enrollees pay higher premiums set to cover a greater percentage of part b costs , while those with low incomes may qualify for premium assistance through one of several medicare savings programs administered by medicaid .

individuals who receive social security or railroad retirement board ( rrb ) retirement or disability benefits have their part b premiums automatically deducted from their benefit checks .

part b premiums are generally announced in the fall prior to the year that they are in effect ( eg , the 2019 part b premiums were announced in october 2018 ) .

in 2019 , the standard monthly part b premium is $135.50 .

however , about 3.5% of part b enrollees are protected by a hold - harmless provision in the social security act that prevents their medicare part b premiums from increasing more than the annual dollar amount of the increase in their social security benefit payments .

these individuals pay premiums of less than $135.50 .

in addition to premiums , part b beneficiaries may pay other out - of - pocket costs when they use services .

the annual deductible for part b services is $185.00 in 2019 .

after the annual deductible is met , beneficiaries are responsible for coinsurance costs , which are generally 20% of medicare - approved part b expenses .

this report provides an overview of medicare part b premiums , including information on part b eligibility and enrollment , late - enrollment penalties , collection of premiums , determination of annual premium amounts , premiums for high - income enrollees , premium assistance for low - income enrollees , protections for social security recipients from rising part b premiums , and historical medicare part b premium trends .

this report also provides a summary of various premium - related issues that may be of interest to congress .

specific medicare and social security publications and other resources for beneficiaries , and those who provide assistance to them , are cited where appropriate .

an individual ( or the spouse of an individual ) who has worked in covered employment and paid medicare payroll taxes for 40 quarters is entitled to receive premium - free medicare part a benefits upon reaching the age of 65 .

those who have paid in for fewer than 40 quarters may enroll in medicare part a by paying a premium .

all persons entitled to part a ( regardless of whether they are eligible for premium - free part a ) are also entitled to enroll in part b .

an aged person not entitled to part a may enroll in part b if he or she is aged 65 or over and either a u.s. citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence who has resided in the united states continuously for the immediately preceding five years .

those who are receiving social security or rrb benefits are automatically enrolled in medicare , and coverage begins the first day of the month they turn 65 .

these individuals will receive a medicare card and a "welcome to medicare" package about three months before their 65 th birthday .

those who are automatically enrolled in medicare part a also are automatically enrolled in part b .

however , because beneficiaries must pay a premium for part b coverage , they have the option of turning it down .

disabled persons who have received cash payments for 24 months under the social security or rrb disability programs also automatically receive a medicare card and are enrolled in part b unless they specifically decline such coverage .

those who choose to receive coverage through a medicare advantage plan ( part c ) must enroll in part b .

persons who are not receiving social security or rrb benefits , for example because they are still working or have chosen to defer enrollment because they have not yet reached their full retirement benefit eligibility age , must file an application with the ssa or rrb for medicare benefits .

there are two kinds of enrollment periods , one that occurs when individuals are initially eligible for medicare and one annual general enrollment period for those who missed signing up during their initial enrollment period .

a beneficiary may drop part b enrollment and reenroll an unlimited number of times ; however , premium penalties may be incurred .

beneficiaries who do not sign up for part b when first eligible , or who drop it and then sign up again later , may have to pay a late - enrollment penalty for as long as they are enrolled in part b .

monthly premiums for part b may go up 10% for each full 12-month period that one could have had part b but did not sign up for it .

 ( see " calculation of penalty ." ) .

some may be exempt from paying a late - enrollment penalty if they meet certain conditions that allow them to sign up for part b during a special enrollment period ( sep ) .

 ( see " penalty exemptions ." ) .

in 2018 , about 1.4% of part b enrollees ( about 760,000 ) paid this penalty .

on average , their total premiums ( standard premium plus penalty ) were about 28% higher than what they would have been had they not been subject to the penalty .

those who receive premium assistance through a medicare savings program do not pay the late - enrollment penalty .

additionally , for those disabled persons under the age of 65 subject to a premium penalty , once the individual reaches the age of 65 , he or she qualifies for a new enrollment period and no longer pays a penalty .

the penalty provision was included in the original medicare legislation enacted in 1965 to help prevent adverse selection by creating a strong incentive for all eligible beneficiaries to enroll in part b .

adverse selection occurs when only those persons who think they need the benefits actually enroll in the program .

when this happens , per capita costs are driven up and premiums go up , causing more enrollees ( presumably the healthier and less costly ones ) to drop out of the program .

with most eligible persons over the age of 65 enrolled in part b , the costs are spread over the majority of this population and per capita costs are less than would be the case if adverse selection had occurred .

as the part b late - enrollment penalty is tied to medicare eligibility and not to access to covered services , individuals who live in areas where medicare benefits are generally not provided , such as outside of the united states or in prison , could still be subject to the part b late - enrollment penalty if they do not sign up for ( or if they drop ) part b when eligible .

to illustrate , if a retired medicare - eligible individual stopped paying part b premiums while living overseas for a three - year period and reenrolled when returning to the united states , he or she would not be entitled to a sep .

this individual would instead need to enroll during the general enrollment period and could also be subject to late - enrollment penalties based on that three - year lapse in coverage .

additionally , part b does not have a "creditable" coverage exemption similar to that under the part d outpatient prescription drug benefit .

except for certain circumstances discussed below , having equivalent coverage does not entitle one to a sep should one decide to enroll in part b later .

for example , an individual who has retiree coverage similar to part b and therefore decides not to enroll in part b when first eligible could be subject to late - enrollment penalties if he or she enrolls in part b at a later time ( for example , because the retiree coverage was discontinued ) .

part b premiums may be paid in a variety of ways .

if an enrollee is receiving social security or railroad retirement benefits , the part b premiums must , by law , be deducted from these benefits .

additionally , part b premiums are deducted from the benefits of those receiving a federal civil service retirement annuity .

the purpose of collecting premiums by deducting them from benefits is to keep premium collection costs at minimum .

this withholding does not apply to those beneficiaries receiving state public assistance through a medicare savings program because their premiums are paid by their state medicaid program .

 ( see " premium assistance for low - income beneficiaries ." ) .

part b enrollees whose premiums are not deducted from social security , railroad retirement , or civil service retirement monthly benefits ; are paid by medicaid ; or are paid by another person or organization must pay premiums directly to cms .

each year , the cms actuaries estimate total per capita part b costs for beneficiaries aged 65 and older over for the following year and set the part b premium to cover 25% of expected part b expenditures .

however , because prospective estimates may differ from the actual spending for the year , contingency margin adjustments are made to ensure sufficient income to accommodate potential variation in actual expenditures during the year .

 ( see " contingency margin ." ) .

the part b premium is a single national amount that does not vary with a beneficiary's age , health status , or place of residence .

premiums may be adjusted upward for late enrollment ( see " late - enrollment premium penalty and exemptions " ) and for beneficiaries with high incomes ( see " income - related premiums " ) , or they may be adjusted downward for those protected by the hold - harmless provision ( see " protection of social security benefits from increases in medicare part b premiums " ) .

monthly part b premiums are based on the estimated amount that would be needed to finance part b expenditures on an incurred basis during the year .

in estimating needed income and to account for potential variation , cms takes into consideration the difference in prior years of estimated and actual program costs , the likelihood and potential impact of potential legislation affecting part b in the coming year , and the expected relationship between incurred and cash expenditures ( eg , payments for some services provided during a particular year may not be paid until the following year ) .

once the premium has been set for a year , it will not be changed during that year .

while both aged and disabled medicare beneficiaries may enroll in part b , the statute provides that part b premiums are to be based only on the expected program costs — that is , the monthly actuarial rate — for the aged ( those 65 years of age and older ) .

the actuarial rate for the aged is defined as one - half of the expected average monthly per capita program costs for the aged plus any contingency margin adjustments .

standard part b premiums are one - half of the actuarial rate .

 ( see appendix a for a discussion of the history of the premium methodology. ) .

part b costs not covered by premiums are paid for through transfers from the general fund of the treasury .

the monthly actuarial rates for both aged and disabled enrollees are used to determine the needed amount of matching general revenue funding .

starting in 2016 , a $3.00 per month surcharge is being added onto the standard premium ( higher amounts for high - income individuals ) .

to mitigate the expected large premium increases for those not held harmless in 2016 , the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( bba 15 ; p.l .

114-74 ) required that 2016 medicare part b premiums be set as if the hold - harmless rule were not in effect — in other words , to calculate premiums as if all enrollees were paying the same annual inflation - adjusted standard premium .

 ( for additional information on the changes made by bba 15 , see appendix d . ) .

to compensate for the lost premium revenue ( below the required 25% ) and to ensure that the smi trust fund had adequate income to cover payments for part b benefits in 2016 , the act allowed for additional transfers from the general fund of the treasury to the smi trust fund .

to offset the approximately $9 billion in increased federal spending in 2016 resulting from the reduction in standard premiums for those not held harmless , a $3.00 surcharge was added to the monthly premium in 2016 , and will continue to be applied in subsequent years until the additional federal costs are fully offset .

for those who pay high - income premiums , the surcharge increases on a sliding scale up to $9.60 .

 ( see " income categories and premium adjustments ." ) .

it is estimated that the surcharge will be applied to premiums through 2021 .

for the first 41 years of the medicare program , all part b enrollees paid the same part b premium , regardless of their income .

however , the medicare modernization act of 2003 ( mma ; p.l .

108-173 ) required that , beginning in 2007 , high - income enrollees pay higher premiums .

about 3.6 million medicare part b enrollees ( about 6.6% ) paid these higher premiums in 2018 .

adjustments , known as income - related monthly adjustment amounts ( irmaa ) , are made to the standard part b premiums for high - income beneficiaries , with the share of expenditures paid by beneficiaries increasing with income .

this share ranges from 35% to 85% of the value of part b coverage .

in 2019 , individuals whose incomes exceed $85,000 and couples whose combined income exceeds $170,000 are subject to higher premium amounts .

the hold - harmless provision that prevents a beneficiary's social security benefits from decreasing from one year to the next as a result of the part b premium increase does not apply to those subject to an income - related increase in their part b premiums .

 ( see " protection of social security benefits from increases in medicare part b premiums ." ) .

medicare beneficiaries with limited incomes and resources may be able to qualify for assistance with their premiums and other out - of - pocket expenses .

about one in five medicare beneficiaries receives part b premium subsidies .

medicare beneficiaries who qualify for full medicaid benefits ( full dual - eligibles ) have most of their health care expenses paid for by either medicare or medicaid .

for these individuals , medicaid covers the majority of medicare premium and cost - sharing expenses , and it supplements medicare by providing coverage for services not covered under medicare , such as dental services and long - term services and supports .

in cases where services are covered by both medicare and medicaid , medicare pays first and medicaid picks up most of the remaining costs .

each state has different rules about eligibility and applying for medicaid .

beneficiaries who do not meet their respective state's eligibility criteria for medicaid may still qualify for assistance with part b premiums if they have incomes of less than 135% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) and assets of less than $7,730 for an individual or $11,600 for a couple in 2019 .

these assistance programs are commonly referred to as medicare savings programs ( msps ) .

three of these programs provide assistance with part b premiums .

the type of assistance is based on a beneficiary's level of income .

after a person becomes eligible to receive social security benefits , his or her monthly benefit amount is adjusted annually to compensate for increases in the prices of goods and services over time .

near the end of each year , the social security administration announces the cost - of - living adjustment ( cola ) payable in january of the following year .

the amount of the cola is based on inflation as measured by the consumer price index - urban wage earners and clerical workers ( cpi - w ) .

if the cpi - w decreases , social security benefits stay the same — benefits are not reduced during periods of deflation .

when the annual social security cola is not sufficient to cover the standard medicare part b premium increase , most medicare beneficiaries are protected by a hold - harmless provision in the social security act .

specifically , if in a given year the increase in the standard part b premium would cause a beneficiary's social security check to be less , in dollar terms , than it was the year before , then the part b premium is reduced to ensure that the amount of the individual's social security check does not decline .

this determination is made by the social security administration .

to be held harmless in a given year , a social security beneficiary must have received social security benefit checks in both december of the previous year and january of the current year , and the beneficiary must also have had part b premiums deducted from both checks .

the hold - harmless provision operates by comparing the net dollar amounts of the two monthly benefit payments ; if the net social security benefit for january of the current year is lower than in december of the previous year , then the hold - harmless provision applies to that person .

premiums of those held harmless are then reduced to an amount that would not cause their social security benefits to decline in the next year .

the premium paid by those held harmless is called the variable supplementary medical insurance premium .

those not held harmless pay the standard premium as determined for that year .

typically , the hold - harmless provision affects only a small number of beneficiaries and has had minimal impact on part b financing .

in most years , this rule primarily protects those with relatively low social security payments .

however , in years in which there is no or a very low social security cola , such as in 2010 , 2011 , 2016 , and 2017 , a large number of beneficiaries may be protected by this provision .

 ( see " application of the hold - harmless rule in years prior to 2016 ," " application of the hold - harmless rule in 2016 ," and " application of the hold - harmless rule in 2017 ." ) .

part b premium changes over time generally reflect the growth in total part b expenditures , although the exact relationship between part b expenditures covered by the part b premium has been changed by statute at various points .

 ( see appendix a . ) .

the standard monthly part b premium has risen from $3.00 in 1966 to $135.50 in 2019 .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

for comparison , during a similar time period , average annual part b benefit costs per beneficiary have increased from about $101.00 in 1970 ( about $8.42 per month ) to a projected $6,391 per beneficiary ( about $532.60 per month ) in 2019 .

prior to 2000 , the part b premium decreased from year to year twice .

the first instance was from 1989 ( $31.90 ) to 1990 ( $28.60 ) as a result of the repeal of the medicare catastrophic coverage act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-360 ) .

the second was from 1995 ( $46.10 ) to 1996 ( $42.50 ) as a result of the transition from a premium as determined by a fixed dollar amount under the omnibus reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) to 25% of costs as directed under the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) .

more recently , because of the absence of a social security cola in 2010 and 2011 , most beneficiaries were held harmless and paid the 2009 premium of $96.40 per month during those years .

the standard 2010 and 2011 premiums , paid by those who were not held harmless , were thus higher than they would have been had the hold - harmless provision not been in effect .

 ( see prior section " protection of social security benefits from increases in medicare part b premiums " for additional detail. ) .

since 2000 , the standard medicare part b premium has almost tripled , from $45.50 in 2000 to the current premium of $135.50 in 2019 .

this growth has been due to a number of factors that have increased per capita part b expenditures during that time , including the rising prices of health care services and equipment , new technologies , and increased utilization of medicare part b services .

while part b expenditure growth has slowed in recent years , the medicare trustees project faster benefit spending growth over the next five years ( an 8.2% part b average annual growth rate compared with a 5.5% growth rate over the last five years ) .

the medicare trustees estimate that 2020 premiums will increase to about $141.10 per month , and that premiums will increase thereafter at an average rate of about 5.3% per year through 2027 .

 ( for estimates of premiums in future years through 2027 , see appendix c . ) .

the medicare trustees estimate that medicare part b premiums will increase from $135.50 per month in 2019 to about $202.70 in 2027 .

 ( see appendix c . ) .

rising medicare premiums could have a large effect on social security beneficiaries , particularly on those who rely on social security as their primary source of income .

for example , in 2018 , social security benefits represented about 33% of the income of americans aged 65 and older .

about 48% of married couples and 69% of unmarried persons received more than half of their income from social security , and 21% of married couples and 44% of unmarried persons received more than 90% of their income from social security .

some of these beneficiaries may see a decline in their standard of living as their medicare premiums rise .

once a person receives social security , his or her benefit is indexed to inflation and thereafter grows with annual social security colas .

however , medicare premiums are based on the per capita cost growth of part b benefits , which reflects the growth in the cost of medical care and in the utilization and intensity of services used by beneficiaries , factors that have historically grown faster than cpi - w. additionally , as there has been a continuing shift from providing care in inpatient ( part a ) to outpatient settings ( part b ) , a greater portion of medicare spending is expected to be covered by beneficiary premiums .

this means that , over time , medicare premiums are expected to represent a growing proportion of most beneficiaries' social security income .

since 2000 , social security's annual cola has resulted in a cumulative benefit increase of about 50% , significantly less than the part b premium growth of close to 200% .

the medicare trustees estimated that average part b plus part d premiums would represent close to 12% of the average social security benefit in 2018 and would increase to an estimated 17% in 2092 .

 ( see appendix b and appendix c for historical , current , and projected part b premiums. ) .

additionally , while the hold - harmless provision provides protection against increases in the part b premium , the rule does not apply to part d premiums or to late - enrollment penalties .

therefore , even in a year with a 0% or a very low social security cola , beneficiaries may still see a decline in benefits as a result of increases in part d premiums and / or any applicable late - enrollment penalties .

the law does not specify how medicare part b financing ( premiums and general revenues ) should be established in years in which the hold - harmless provision applies to a large number of medicare beneficiaries .

under current law , the only way to generate enough premium revenue to cover 25% of part b costs is to have those not held harmless shoulder the entire beneficiary share of any increase in premiums .

absent legislation such as bba 15 , the premiums of those not held harmless can therefore be significantly greater than if there were no hold - harmless provision .

as the medicare trustees pointed out in their 2010 annual report , " ( t ) his approach to preventing exhaustion of the part b trust fund account is the only one available under current law," despite the "serious equity issues" that this method raises .

in years in which there has been both a 0% or a very low social security cola and a medicare premium increase , concerns have been raised about the potential financial impact of the premium increases on those not held harmless as well as on the state medicaid agencies that pay part b premiums on behalf of low - income beneficiaries .

for example , individuals in retirement systems other than social security or rrb may also have not received a cola but could face significantly higher medicare premiums than those who qualified for protection under the hold - harmless provision .

some have proposed changes to the hold - harmless provision to avoid the disproportionate impact of premium increases on those not held harmless , such as holding all part b enrollees harmless in years in which there is no social security cola or allowing social security checks to decline as a result of medicare premium increases in some years .

others have proposed linking the social security cola to a measure of inflation that is based on purchasing patterns of the elderly , such as the bls's experimental consumer price index for americans aged 62 and older ( cpi - e ) or requiring a minimum annual social security cola .

periodically , proposals have been offered to modify or eliminate the part b premium penalty either for all enrollees or alternatively for a selected population group .

as an increasing number of new medicare - eligible beneficiaries must actively sign up for medicare because they are not yet receiving social security benefits ( eg , their full retirement social security age exceeds the medicare age of eligibility ) , there is concern that more people could become subject to late - enrollment penalties .

for example , the medicare rights center reported a large number of calls to its hotline related to transitioning to medicare .

their report notes that " ( m ) any individuals who call medicare rights are confused by medicare enrollment rules , and specifically by decision - making related to taking or declining part b" and that "medicare - eligible people who do not understand part b enrollment rules and fail to enroll in medicare when they first became eligible may face late - enrollment penalties , gaps in coverage , and disruptions to access to needed care. .

some proposals have suggested modifying the penalty provision to limit both the amount and the duration of the surcharge , as is the case for delayed part a enrollment , which has a maximum 10% surcharge and a duration of twice the number of years that enrollment was delayed .

 ( see appendix e for information on the part a premium and late - enrollment penalty. ) .

some have also suggested that medicare part b have a creditable - coverage exemption , similar to that under part d , that would allow medicare beneficiaries with equivalent coverage to postpone enrollment in part b without being subject to a penalty .

for example , under the part d prescription drug benefit , individuals are not subject to a late - enrollment penalty if they have maintained "creditable" prescription drug coverage prior to enrollment — that is , coverage that is expected to pay at least as much as medicare's standard prescription drug coverage .

creditable prescription drug coverage includes employer - based prescription drug coverage , qualified state pharmaceutical assistance programs , and military - related coverage ( eg , veterans affairs health care system and tricare ) .

other suggestions include formally training employers about medicare coverage and interaction with other insurance ; improving education on medicare , including late - enrollment penalties , for those nearing medicare - eligibility age ; and expanding equitable relief to include remedies for actions based on misinformation provided by entities in addition to an agent of the federal government , such as an agent of state or local government , and / or an employer or insurer .

in recent congresses , a number of bills have been introduced that would address some of the issues associated with the part b late - enrollment penalty .

for example , in the 116 th congress , h.r .

1788 would limit the penalty to 15% and twice the period of no enrollment , and would exclude periods of cobra , retiree , and va coverage when determining the late enrollment penalty .

in the 115 th congress , h.r .

2575 and s. 1909 would have required medicare to provide advance notification to those approaching medicare eligibility , required the creation of a centralized enrollment webpage containing both social security and medicare online tools , restructured medicare enrollment periods and coverage periods , and expanded the eligibility for special enrollment periods for those who meet exceptional conditions as defined by the secretary of hhs .

also introduced in the 115 th congress , h.r .

2342 would have required that employers notify employees about the availability of special enrollment periods to obtain marketplace coverage and medicare coverage upon termination or separation , and h.r .

5104 would have established a special medicare part b enrollment period for individuals enrolled in cobra ( consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act ) continuation coverage who elected not to enroll in part b during their initial enrollment period .

additionally , h.r .

707 would have , among other changes , eliminated late - enrollment penalties for those between the ages of 65 and 70 .

as introduced in the 112 th congress , in addition to creating a special enrollment period for those with cobra coverage , h.r .

1654 would have created a continuous enrollment period that would have allowed medicare - eligible beneficiaries to sign up for part b outside of the general enrollment period and to receive health coverage the following month .

h.r .

1654 would have also expanded eligibility for equitable relief to those who based enrollment decisions on incorrect information provided by group health plans and plan sponsors , and it would have directed the government accountability office to study problems with part b enrollment .

in the 111 th congress , h.r .

2235 would have limited the penalty for late part b enrollment to 10% and limited the duration to twice the period of no enrollment , similar to the part a late - enrollment penalty .

it also would have excluded periods of cobra and retiree coverage from the penalty .

as medicare currently represents about 14% of federal spending , many proposals to reduce federal deficits include suggestions to reduce medicare program spending and / or increase program income .

for example , some proposals would increase medicare premiums as a portion of total program funding , whereas others would limit the amount of federal contributions .

certain proposals suggest limiting premium increases to high - income beneficiaries .

for example , the president's fy2017 budget proposal would have increased the percentage of per capita expenditures paid by high - income enrollees from 35% to 80% of expenditures to a range of between 40% and 90% , and it would have increased the number of high - income brackets from four to five .

the proposal also would have continued the freeze on income thresholds until 25% of beneficiaries were subject to the high - income premiums .

 ( subsequent to that proposal , the bba 18 added a fifth high - income bracket with premiums set at 85% of per capita expenditures .

see " income - related premiums ." ) .

other proposals suggest increasing premiums paid by all part b enrollees .

for example , a proposal introduced in 2011 by then - senators lieberman and coburn suggested raising the standard part b premium from the current 25% of program costs to 35% over five years .

in 2016 , about 34% of beneficiaries enrolled in traditional medicare bought medigap policies from private insurance companies that cover some or all of medicare's cost sharing .

individuals who purchase medigap must pay a monthly premium , which is set by , and paid to , the insurance company selling the policy .

there are 10 standardized medigap plans with varying levels of coverage .

two of the 10 standardized plans cover parts a and b deductibles and coinsurance in full ( i.e. , offer first - dollar coverage ) .

in 2015 , 65% of all beneficiaries who purchased medigap insurance were covered by one of these two plans .

some are concerned that beneficiaries enrolled in medigap plans with low cost - sharing requirements may have less incentive to consider the cost of health care services and may thus increase costs to the medicare program .

to address this , section 401 of macra prohibits the sale of medigap policies that cover part b deductibles to newly eligible medicare beneficiaries beginning in 2020 .

some have also proposed imposing a part b premium surcharge for medicare beneficiaries who purchase certain types of medigap plans .

for example , the president's fy2016 budget proposal suggested imposing a part b premium surcharge of approximately 15% of the average medigap premium ( about 30% of the part b premium ) for new medicare beneficiaries who enroll in a near first - dollar medigap plan .

finally , other proposals , such as that put forth in the fy2019 house budget resolution , would place limits on the amount of the federal subsidy for medicare , and premiums would vary depending on the medicare plan in which the beneficiary enrolled .

in general , such premium support proposals would limit federal spending by changing the current medicare program from a defined - benefit to a defined - contribution system .

most such proposals would limit the growth in the annual federal premium subsidy .

depending on how such a proposal is designed , and should medicare costs grow more quickly than the limit , beneficiary premiums could increase more rapidly than the amount of the premium subsidy .

some of the issues that would need to be addressed when evaluating these types of deficit reduction proposals include ( 1 ) the ability of medicare beneficiaries to absorb increased costs given their current levels of income and assets , as well as their other out - of - pocket expenditures ( both health and non - health related ) ; ( 2 ) the willingness of high - income beneficiaries to continue participating in medicare part b should their premiums be increased ; and ( 3 ) the capacity of the medicaid program to continue providing premium assistance to low - income beneficiaries should premiums increase .

appendix a .

history of the part b premium statutory policy and legislative authority the basis for determining the part b premium amount has changed several times since the inception of the medicare program , reflecting different legislative views of what share beneficiaries should bear as expenditures have increased .

when the medicare program first went into effect in july 1966 , the part b monthly premium was set at a level to cover 50% of part b program costs .

legislation enacted in 1972 limited the annual percentage increase in the premium to the same percentage by which social security benefits were adjusted for changes in the cost - of - living adjustments ( i.e. , colas ) .

under this formula , revenues from premiums soon dropped from 50% to below 25% of program costs because part b program costs increased much faster than inflation as measured by the consumer price index on which the social security cola is based ( see table a - 1 ) .

from the early 1980s , congress regularly voted to set part b premiums at a level to cover 25% of program costs , in effect overriding the cola limitation .

the 25% provisions first became effective january 1 , 1984 , with general revenues covering the remaining 75% of part b program costs .

premiums increased in 1989 as a result of the medicare catastrophic coverage act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-360 ) , which added a catastrophic coverage premium to the part b premium .

the act was repealed in november 1989 , and the part b premium for 1990 fell as a result .

congress returned to the general approach of having premiums cover 25% of program costs in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( obra 90 ; p.l .

101-508 ) .

however , obra 90 set specific dollar figures , rather than a percentage , in law for part b premiums for the years 1991-1995 .

these dollar figures reflected congressional budget office estimates of what 25% of program costs would be over the five - year period .

however , program costs grew more slowly than anticipated , in part due to subsequent legislative changes .

as a result , the 1995 premium of $46.10 actually represented 31.5% of medicare part b program costs .

the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( obra 93 ; p.l .

103-66 ) extended the policy of setting the part b premium at a level to cover 25% of program costs for the years 1996-1998 .

as was the case prior to 1991 , a percentage rather than a fixed dollar figure was used , which meant that the 1996 premium ( $42.50 ) and the 1997 premium ( $43.80 ) were lower than the 1995 premium ( $46.10 ) .

the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba 97 ; p.l .

105-33 ) permanently set the premium at 25% of program costs so that , generally speaking , premiums rise or fall with part b program costs .

the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ; p.l .

108-173 ) , as modified by the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ; p.l .

109-171 ) , required that beginning in 2007 , higher - income beneficiaries pay higher part b premiums .

the income thresholds used to determine eligibility for the high - income premium are to be adjusted each year by the growth in the consumer price index .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 , as amended , section 3402 ) , however , froze these thresholds for the period of 2011 through 2019 at the 2010 levels .

in 2020 , the thresholds were to return to the levels they would have been had they been adjusted for inflation each year during the freeze and again indexed to inflation each year .

as this would have resulted in higher income thresholds , it would have had the effect of reducing the number of beneficiaries who pay the high - income premiums in 2020 .

section 402 of the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ; p.l .

114-10 ) maintains the freeze on the income thresholds for all income categories through 2017 and on the lower two high - income premium tiers through 2019 .

beginning in 2018 , macra reduces the threshold levels for the two highest income tiers so that more beneficiaries will fall into the higher percentage categories .

 ( see " income thresholds ." ) .

additionally , starting in 2020 , the income thresholds for all income categories will be adjusted annually for inflation based on the 2019 income thresholds .

this will , in effect , maintain the proportion of beneficiaries who pay the high - income premium .

due to a 0% social security cola coupled with an increase in medicare premiums , a large percentage of medicare part b enrollees were protected by the hold - harmless provision in 2016 and continued to pay the 2015 premium of $104.90 per month .

the medicare trustees estimated that the standard premiums of those not held harmless in 2016 would therefore need to be increased to approximately $159 per month for aggregate premiums to still cover 25% of per capita benefit costs .

the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( bba 15 ; p.l .

114-74 ) , however , mitigated this sharp premium increase and required that the 2016 part b standard premium be calculated as if the hold - harmless rule were not in effect and the increased costs had been spread across all beneficiaries .

 ( see appendix d . ) .

instead of having those not held harmless bear the increase for all of the part b enrollee population , the act allowed for the transfer of additional general revenues to the smi trust fund to make up for the shortfall in premium revenue .

as a result of this change , part b enrollees not held harmless paid a standard monthly premium of $121.80 in 2016 .

to offset the increased costs , a $3.00 surcharge was added to the monthly premium in 2016 ( the $121.80 premium amount included this surcharge ) , and will continue to be applied in subsequent years until the additional federal cost of about $9 billion is fully offset ( the surcharge increases on a sliding scale for those who pay high - income premiums , up to $9.60 ) .

bba 15 provided for similar premium adjustments in 2017 if there were a 0% social security cola again in that year .

however , as there was a 0.3% 2017 social security cola , this provision was not applicable in 2017 .

section 53114 of the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 18 ; p.l .

115-123 ) added an additional high - income category beginning in 2019 for individuals with annual incomes of $500,000 or more or couples filing jointly with incomes of $750,000 or more .

enrollees with income equal to or exceeding these thresholds pay premiums that cover 85% of the average per capita cost of part b benefits instead of 80% .

the threshold for couples filing jointly in this new income tier is calculated as 150% of the individual income level rather than 200% as in the other income tiers .

the bba 15 premium surcharge for this category is $10.20 .

this new top income threshold will be frozen through 2027 and will be adjusted annually for inflation starting in 2028 based on the cpi - u .

appendix b .

standard and high - income part b premiums and income thresholds: 2007-2019 appendix c. estimated future part b premiums appendix d. bipartisan budget act of 2015 changes to 2016 part b premiums under normal circumstances , standard medicare part b premiums are set at an amount to cover 25% of projected average per capita part b expenditures plus an appropriate contingency margin .

due to expected growth in the cost of part b benefits , the medicare trustees projected that in order to cover 25% of benefit costs as well as to build up adequate contingency reserves , the 2016 part b premiums would need to be increased to about $121 per month from the 2015 amount of $104.90 .

however , due to the absence of a social security cola in 2016 and the resulting widespread application of the hold - harmless provision , most part b enrollees continued to pay the 2015 premium amount of $104.90 through 2016 .

with about 70% of enrollees continuing to pay $104.90 , the only way that premiums could cover 25% of per capita expenditures would have been if those not held harmless ( the remaining 30% ) bore the entire cost increase ( i.e. , if the aggregate increase in premiums were spread out over fewer people ) .

the medicare trustees estimated that the premiums of those not held harmless would therefore need to be increased to about $159 per month .

the trustees also estimated that high - income beneficiaries ( i.e. , those earning more than $85,000 ) would need to pay significantly higher monthly premiums of about $223 , $319 , $414 , or $510 depending on their level of income ( compared to their respective 2015 premiums of $147 , $210 , $273 , and $336 per month ) .

to mitigate the expected large premium increases for those not held harmless , the bipartisan budget act of 2015 ( bba 15 ; p.l .

114-74 ) required that 2016 medicare part b premiums be set as if the hold - harmless rule were not in effect — in other words , to calculate premiums as if all enrollees were paying the same annual inflation - adjusted standard premium ( about $121 per month ) .

to compensate for the lost premium revenue ( below the required 25% ) and to ensure that the supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) trust fund had adequate income to cover payments for part b benefits in 2016 , the act allowed for additional transfers from the general fund of the treasury to the smi trust fund .

to offset the approximately $9 billion in increased federal spending in 2016 resulting from the reduction in standard premiums for those not held harmless ( i.e. , the additional amounts transferred from the general fund ) , as well as the loss of income due to reductions in the income - related monthly adjustment for high - income enrollees , the law required that a $3.00 per month surcharge be added to standard premiums in 2016 , and each subsequent year , until the $9 billion is fully offset .

 ( for those who pay high - income premiums , the surcharge increases on a sliding scale , up to $9.60. ) .

it is expected that this surcharge will be applied to premiums through 2021 .

the monthly repayment surcharge is paid only by those not held harmless .

should there have been a 0% social security cola in 2017 , bba 15 allowed for a similar medicare part b premium setting mechanism for 2017 .

however , as there was a 0.3% cola in 2017 , this provision did not apply .

bba 15 did not allow for similar adjustments beyond 2017 .

appendix e. part a premiums the vast majority of persons turning the age of 65 are automatically entitled to medicare part a based on their own or their spouse's work in covered employment .

however , individuals aged 65 and older who are not otherwise eligible for medicare part a benefits and certain disabled individuals who have exhausted other entitlement may voluntarily purchase part a coverage .

in most cases , persons who voluntarily purchase part a must also purchase part b .

the periods during which one can enroll are the same as those for part b ( see " medicare part b eligibility and enrollment " ) .

the monthly part a premium is equal to the full average per capita value of the part a benefit ( $437.00 per month in 2019 ) .

persons who have at least 30 quarters of covered employment ( or are married to someone who has such coverage ) pay a premium that is 45% less than the full part a premium ( $240.00 per month in 2019 ) .

cms estimates that in 2019 , about 679,000 individuals will voluntarily enroll in part a by paying the full premium and about 75,000 will pay the reduced premium .

similar to part b , a penalty is imposed for persons who delay part a enrollment beyond their initial enrollment period ( which is the same seven - month period applicable for enrollment in part b ) .

however , both the amount of the penalty and the duration of the penalty are different than under part b .

persons who delay part a enrollment for at least 12 months beyond their initial enrollment period are subject to a 10% premium surcharge .

the surcharge is 10% regardless of the length of the delay .

further the surcharge only applies for a period equal to twice the number of years ( i.e. , 12-month periods ) during which an individual delays enrollment .

thus , an individual who delays enrollment for three years under part a would be subject to a 10% penalty for six years , whereas a person who delays enrollment for the same three - year period under part b would be subject to a permanent 30% penalty .

