in recent years , state and federal laws have facilitated law enforcement's expanded use of deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) for investigating and prosecuting crimes .

such laws authorize compulsory collection of biological matter , which local law enforcement agencies send to the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) for analysis .

the fbi then stores unique dna profiles in a national distributive database , through which law enforcement officials match individuals to crime scene evidence .

early laws authorized compulsory extraction of dna only from people convicted for violent or sex - based felonies , such as murder , kidnapping , and offenses "related to sexual abuse" — crimes associated with historically high recidivism rates and for which police were likely to find evidence at crime scenes .

since the turn of the century , new laws have greatly extended the scope of compulsory dna collection , both by expanding the range of offenses triggering collection authority , and , more recently , by authorizing compulsory collection from people who have been arrested but not convicted .

a bill passed by the house in may 2010 , the katie sepich enhanced dna collection act of 2010 ( h.r .

4614 ) , would provide grant funding incentives to states that collected dna samples from persons who are at least 18 years old who are arrested for specified types of crimes .

litigants have challenged compulsory collection and the subsequent analysis and storage of dna as unreasonable searches and seizures under the fourth amendment to the u.s. constitution .

although they have reached their conclusions using different analytical approaches , federal and state courts have generally upheld compulsory dna collection as non - violative of the fourth amendment .

however , prior cases involved the collection of dna samples from people who had been convicted of a crime .

more recently , a handful of state and federal courts have addressed such collection from arrestees , with differing results .

this report examines statutory authorities , constitutional principles , and case law related to compulsory dna extraction and analyzes potential impacts of recent developments for fourth amendment cases .

dna is a complex molecule found in human cells and "composed of two nucleotide strands," which "are arranged differently for every individual except for identical twins. .

relatively new technology enables dna analysts to determine the arrangement of these strands , thereby creating unique dna profiles .

in the law enforcement context , dna profiles function like "genetic fingerprints" that aid in matching perpetrators to their crimes .

as with fingerprints , law enforcement officers collect dna samples from specific classes of individuals , such as prisoners .

however , compulsory dna collection generally entails blood or saliva samples rather than finger impressions , and dna profiles can later match any of many types of biological matter obtained from crime scenes .

for these reasons , dna matching is considered a "critical complement to," rather than merely a supplement for , fingerprint analysis in identifying criminal suspects .

the fbi administers dna storage and analysis for law enforcement agencies across the country .

typically , a law enforcement agency's phlebotomist collects a blood sample pursuant to state or federal law .

then , the agency submits the sample to the fbi , which creates a dna profile and stores the profile in the combined dna index system , a database through which law enforcement officers match suspects to dna profiles at the local , state , and national levels .

fbi analysts create dna profiles by "decoding sequences of 'junk dna.' .

so - called "junk dna," the name for "non - genic stretches of dna not presently recognized as being responsible for trait coding," is "'purposefully selected'" for dna analysis because it is not "associated with any known physical or medical characteristics," and thus theoretically poses only a minimal invasion of privacy .

the categories of individuals from whom law enforcement officials may require dna samples has expanded in recent years .

the federal government and most states authorize compulsory collection of dna samples from individuals convicted for specified criminal offenses , including all felonies in most jurisdictions and extending to misdemeanors , such as failure to register as a sex offender or crimes for which a sentence greater than six months applies , in some jurisdictions .

in addition , the federal government and some states now authorize compulsory collection from people whom the government has arrested or detained but not convicted .

as discussed infra , the dna analysis backlog elimination act 2000 , as amended , authorizes compulsory collection from individuals in federal custody , including those detained , arrested , or facing charges , and from individuals on release , parole , or probation in the federal criminal justice system .

under the federal law , if an individual refuses to cooperate , relevant officials "may use or authorize the use of such means as are reasonably necessary to detain , restrain , and collect a dna sample. .

state laws vary , but nearly all states authorize compulsory dna collection from people convicted for specified crimes , and a small but growing number of states also authorize compulsory collection from arrestees .

the fourth amendment to the u.s. constitution provides a right "of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures. .

two fundamental questions arise in every fourth amendment challenge .

first , does the challenged action constitute a search or seizure by federal or local government and thus trigger the fourth amendment right ? .

second , if so , is the search or seizure "reasonable" ? .

courts have uniformly held that compulsory dna collection and analysis constitutes a search , and thus triggers fourth amendment rights .

although some courts have signaled that dna collection or storage might also constitute a seizure , courts have generally not addressed that question .

thus , the question in cases brought is whether the collection of dna satisfies the fourth amendment reasonableness test .

courts will likely wrestle with the questions raised by the divergent pool and marshall decisions in future cases involving pre - conviction dna collection .

several additional issues are likely to affect courts' analyses in such cases , and might also impact the existing judicial consensus regarding the constitutionality of dna collection from persons who have been convicted of a crime .

in particular , the emerging science regarding biological purposes for junk dna and the fbi's long - term storage of dna profiles are likely to play a role in future analyses .

although nearly all courts that have addressed the issue have upheld the compulsory collection of dna from persons who have been convicted , no judicial consensus has yet emerged regarding the constitutionality of such collection from persons who have been arrested or are facing charges prior to a criminal trial .

the two u.s. district court cases addressing pre - conviction dna collection pursuant to the federal law illustrate that outcomes in future cases involving arrestees may depend on courts' resolution of at least two key issues , namely: ( 1 ) what , if any , distinction exists between the reasonable expectation of privacy of an arrestee and a convict ; and ( 2 ) the degree of privacy intrusion perceived as a result of a dna sample .

the latter question may turn on courts' framing of the role of dna collection — that is , whether it is analogous to the long - upheld practice of fingerprinting or whether it represents a greater privacy intrusion .

existing expungement provisions might also become a factor in future challenges to pre - conviction dna collection .

the government might argue that requirements that dna samples be expunged once an arrestee is discharged or acquitted offset the degree of privacy intrusion caused by such samples .

to date , some federal courts have made note of the expungement provisions , but they generally have not addressed the effect of expungement requirements in fourth amendment analyses .

