najib miqati appointed prime m inister .

on january 25 , hezbollah and its allies nominated former prime minister najib miqati to replace hariri as prime minister .

miqati was approved by a parliamentary vote of 68 in favor to 60 opposed and is now working to form a new government .

many analysts agree that miqati's nomination likely came after he agreed to hezbollah's demands on the stl , and that he will likely support hezbollah and the opposition on other issues .

in response , hariri's supporters staged a number of protests , and the security situation in lebanon remains tenuous .

hariri responded by calling for peaceful demonstrations and announcing that he and his allies would not take part in the hezbollah - backed government , but observers question his resolve .

at present , administration officials appear to be reserving judgment until a new government is formed , a process that could take months .

during a press conference in spain on january 25 , 2011 , secretary of state hillary clinton said that "we are watching the situation closely and carefully in lebanon .

we are monitoring new developments .

as you know , the government formation is just beginning .

a hezbollah - controlled government would clearly have an impact on our bilateral relationship with lebanon. .

hezbollah , allies withdraw from g overnment .

in anticipation of looming indictments and in response to prime minister hariri's refusal to denounce the stl , hezbollah and its allies withdrew from the cabinet on january 13 , 2011 .

the resignations coincided with prime minister hariri's meeting with president obama in washington .

following the resignations , the white house issued a statement saying that "the efforts by the hezbollah - led coalition to collapse the lebanese government only demonstrate their own fear and determination to block the government's ability to conduct its business and advance the aspirations of all of the lebanese people. .

the state department also decried the action , calling it a "transparent effort by forces who seek to subvert justice and undermine lebanon's stability and progress. .

according to the constitution , the current government now serves as a caretaker until a new consensus can be reached .

special tribunal for lebanon ( stl ) i ndictments .

on january 17 , 2011 , stl prosecutor daniel bellemare signed indictments against the alleged assassins of rafiq hariri and filed them with pre - trial judge daniel fransen .

fransen will now review the indictments and reject or certify them .

the process could take months and the indictments will remain confidential .

hezbollah responded with organized demonstrations in a number of beirut neighborhoods , but no serious incidents were reported .

secretary of state hillary clinton called this "an important step toward justice and ending impunity for murder. .

she added that "those who oppose the tribunal seek to create a false choice between justice and stability in lebanon ; we reject this. .

the united states and lebanon have historically enjoyed a good relationship due in part to cultural and religious ties ; the democratic character of the state ; a large lebanese american community in the united states ; and the pro - western orientation of lebanon , particularly during the cold war .

the american university of beirut ( aub ) was founded in 1866 by americans in lebanon and continues to receive u.s. funding .

despite long - standing interaction between the united states and lebanon , some might argue that lebanon is of limited strategic value to the united states .

unlike many american partners in the middle east , lebanon has no u.s. military bases , oil fields , international waterways , military or industrial strength , or major trading ties with the united states .

others would disagree , pointing to lebanon's strategic location as a buffer between israel and syria , lebanon's large palestinian refugee population , and its historical role as an interlocutor for the united states with the arab world .

current u.s. policy toward lebanon centers on containing iran's sphere of influence while maintaining security and stability in the levant .

as regional actors like saudi arabia , iran , and syria compete for influence in the region , lebanon has become the staging ground for a proxy war that exacerbates historic sectarian tensions and holds hostage the functions of state institutions .

the united states has long provided foreign assistance to lebanon , but following the israel - hezbollah war in 2006 , the bush administration requested and congress appropriated a significant increase in foreign assistance .

the war heightened the need for additional economic aid as the lebanese government and its international and arab partners vied with iran and hezbollah to win the "hearts and minds" of many lebanese citizens who had lost homes and businesses .

the war also highlighted the need for a more robust lebanese military to adequately patrol lebanon's porous borders with syria and prevent hezbollah's rearmament .

since then , u.s. assistance has been designed to strengthen the institutions of the state to implement unscr 1701 and to create alternatives to extremism , reduce the influence and appeal of hezbollah and other extremist groups and create the political space necessary to allow the government to tackle the range of challenges it faces — from improving fiscal responsibility and environmental resource management to securing its borders and extending the control of the legitimate security forces over the entire territory of the state .

the lebanese government , with support from the united states and the international community , constantly struggles to maintain the delicate political balance of its confessional system ( see " demography ," below ) .

the legacy of civil war and foreign occupation left government institutions weak , and recovery has been difficult , particularly in the face of interference from iran and syria through their proxies .

political parties and citizens of lebanon express both a sense of dissatisfaction with the political system and a reluctance to alter it , possibly because of the national memory of the civil war and a fear that any attempt to alter the political system could reignite the tensions that led the country to fracture along sectarian lines in 1975 .

lebanon is among the most religiously diverse society in the middle east , with 17 recognized religious sects .

the lebanese government operates under a confessional system and government positions are distributed by religion .

in 1943 , when lebanon became fully independent from france , leaders of the principal religious communities adopted an unwritten agreement known as the national covenant , which provided that the president be a maronite christian , the prime minister a sunni muslim , and the speaker of parliament a shiite muslim .

parliamentary seats were apportioned between christians and muslims according to a ratio of 6:5 , until 1989 when the ratio was evened .

cabinet posts are generally distributed among the principal sectarian communities .

the 1943 ratios were developed based on the sole lebanese census conducted in 1932 and became less reflective of lebanese society as muslims gradually came to outnumber christians .

within the muslim community , shiite muslims came to outnumber sunni muslims .

as a result of this system , lebanese political parties developed along religious , geographic , ethnic , and ideological lines and are associated with prominent families .

discontent over power - sharing imbalances was an important factor in the inter - communal tensions and civil strife culminating in the 1975-1990 civil war .

these issues are still unresolved .

lebanon has not adopted a national budget since 2005 and , while the cabinet reported progress on a draft 2010 budget in june 2010 , the march 8 opposition continues to reject proposals for tax increases and spending limits supported by the march 14 leadership .

a june 2010 international monetary fund assessment noted that despite strong economic growth in lebanon over the last year , public debt ( an estimated $51 billion , or 154% of 2009 gdp ) is soaring and encouraged the government to implement planned investment in infrastructure while reforming key sectors , such as electricity production .

according to the u.s. international trade administration , lebanese exports to the united states in 2009 were $77 million ( down from $99 million in 2008 ) and lebanese imports from the united states were $1.4 billion ( roughly equivalent to the 2008 level ) .

at stake in the civil war were control over the political process in lebanon , the status of palestinian refugees and militia , and the respective goals of syria and israel .

from 1975-1990 , hundreds of thousands were killed , wounded , or disabled , and comparable numbers were left homeless at one time or another .

the war was marked by foreign occupations , kidnappings , and terror bombings .

in the aftermath , lebanon's warring factions reached a precarious consensus , but sectarian divisions and a culture of distrust among lebanon's various demographic groups persist .

both syria and israel sent troops into lebanon during the civil war .

syria sent troops into lebanon in 1976 at the request of then - president suleiman frangieh .

israel invaded in 1978 following plo attacks against israelis that originated from southern lebanon .

35,000 syrian troops entered lebanon in march 1976 to protect christians from muslim and palestinian militias .

from 1987 and june 2001 , syrian forces occupied most of west beirut and much of eastern and northern lebanon .

in march 1978 , israel invaded and occupied lebanese territory south of the litani river to destroy palestinian bases that were being used as staging grounds for attacks against israel .

israeli forces withdrew in june 1978 , after the united nations interim force in lebanon ( unifil ) was deployed to southern lebanon to act as a buffer between israel and the palestinians ( u.n. security council resolution 425 , march 19 , 1978 ) .

in june 1982 , israel mounted a more extensive invasion designed to root out armed palestinian guerrillas from southern lebanon .

israel defeated syrian forces in central lebanon and advanced as far north as beirut .

israeli forces completed a phased withdrawal in 1985 , but maintained a 9-mile - wide security zone in southern lebanon from 1985 to 2000 .

about 1,000 members of the israeli defense forces ( idf ) patrolled the zone , backed by a 2,000 to 3,000 member lebanese militia called the south lebanon army ( sla ) , which was trained and equipped by israel .

israel withdrew unilaterally from southern lebanon in 2000 , with the exception of its continuing presence in a small area known as the shib'a farms , which remains disputed .

the lebanese parliament elected in 1972 remained in place for 20 years because it was impossible to elect a new parliament during the civil war .

after a prolonged political crisis , lebanese parliamentary deputies met in 1989 in taif , saudi arabia , under the auspices of the arab league , and adopted a revised power - sharing agreement .

the taif agreement raised the number of seats in parliament from 99 to 108 ( later changed to 128 ) , replaced the former 6:5 ration of christians to muslims with an even ratio , provided for a proportional distribution of seats among the various christian and muslim sub - sects , and left appointment of the prime minister to parliament , subject to the president's approval .

in addition , syria and lebanon signed a treaty of brotherhood , cooperation , and coordination in may 1991 , which called for creating several joint committees and coordinating policies .

although syrian troop strength in lebanon reportedly declined over time , syria continued to exercise controlling influence over lebanon's domestic politics and regional policies .

syrian intelligence agents also remained active in lebanon .

the taif agreement continues to be the benchmark to which lebanese people refer in times of stress and sectarian violence .

the consensus reached in taif still guides the distribution of political power in lebanon .

for many in lebanon , the taif agreement is still viewed as the compromise between sunnis , christians , and shiites that keeps the country from falling back into civil war .

at the same time , ongoing sectarian violence and political stalemate reflect deep tension over revisiting the core principles of the agreement and the absence of a political framework for reevaluating the distribution of political power in lebanon .

in 2004 , tensions mounted between then - prime minister rafiq hariri , who favored more independence from syria , and pro - syrian president emile lahoud .

on september 2 , 2004 , the u.n. security council adopted resolution 1559 , calling for "all remaining security forces to withdraw from lebanon," among other things .

the next day , the lebanese parliament , under suspected syrian pressure , adopted a constitutional amendment that extended president lahoud's term by three years .

hariri , who disagreed with the amendment , resigned in october 2004 and aligned himself with the anti - syrian opposition coalition .

hariri was killed when his motorcade was bombed in beirut on february 14 , 2005 .

many suspect syrian involvement in the assassination .

his death led to widespread protests by the anti - syrian coalition including christians , druze , and sunni muslims and to counter - demonstrations by pro - syrian groups including shiites who rallied behind the hezbollah and amal parties .

outside lebanon , the united states and france were particularly vocal in their denunciation of the assassination and of syria for its suspected role in the bombing .

the hariri assassination prompted strong international pressure on the syrian regime , particularly from the united states and france , to withdraw its forces and intelligence apparatus from lebanon in accordance with resolution 1559 .

on april 26 , 2005 , the syrian foreign minister informed then - u.n. secretary - general kofi annan and the president of the u.n. security council that syrian forces had completed their withdrawal from lebanon .

the united nations confirmed that all syrian troops had been removed but acknowledged allegations that syrian intelligence still operates in lebanon and that close , historical ties between the two nations make evaluating the syrian role in lebanon difficult .

as syrian troops departed from lebanon under u.s. and international pressure , lebanon prepared to hold parliamentary elections without overt syrian interference for the first time since 1972 .

the parliamentary elections , held in four phases between may 29 and june 5 , 2005 , gave a majority ( 72 out of 128 seats ) to a large , anti - syrian bloc known as the bristol gathering or the march 14 movement , headed by saad hariri , a son of the late prime minister .

a second , largely shiite and pro - syrian bloc combining hezbollah and the more moderate amal organization won 33 seats .

a third bloc , the change and reform movement ( also known as the free patriotic movement ) , consisted of largely christian supporters of former dissident armed forces chief of staff general michel aoun , who returned to lebanon from exile in france in may 2005 .

aoun's bloc , which adopted a somewhat equivocal position regarding syria , gained 21 seats .

despite hariri's success , the electoral system resulted in a mixed government , which complicated its ability to adopt clear policies .

hariri associate fouad siniora became prime minister , and the 24-member cabinet contained 15 members of hariri's bloc .

it also contained five members of the shiite bloc , including for the first time in lebanese history a member of hezbollah .

other key pro - syrians remaining in the government were president lahoud and veteran parliamentary speaker nabih berri , who heads the amal organization ( hezbollah's junior partner in the shiite coalition ) .

berri has held the speakership since 1992 .

on february 25 , 2005 , the president of the u.n. security council issued a statement that condemned the assassination of rafiq hariri .

on april 7 , the u.n. security council adopted resolution 1595 to establish an international independent investigation commission ( uniiic ) in lebanon "to assist the lebanese authorities in their investigation of all aspects of this terrorist act , including to help identify its perpetrators , sponsors , organizers , and accomplices. .

the commission was fully functional as of june 16 , 2005 .

on may 30 , 2007 , two years after the commission began its investigation , a divided u.n. security council voted 10 to 0 with five abstentions ( russia , china , south africa , indonesia and qatar ) to adopt resolution 1757 , which established a tribunal outside of lebanon to prosecute persons responsible for the attack against hariri .

resolution 1757 has proven divisive in lebanon and elsewhere in the region .

pro - syrian elements have criticized it and syria has repeatedly threatened not to cooperate with the tribunal .

opponents of the resolution objected on the grounds that it was passed under chapter vii of the u.n. charter , which could include the use of force , and that it represented interference in lebanon's internal affairs .

the russian delegate to the u.n. commented that "never before has the security council ratified agreements on behalf of a parliament of a foreign country. .

the united states has contributed $20 million for the tribunal .

lebanon is expected to fund 49% of its costs .

for more information , see " special tribunal for lebanon ," above .

the strong showing of the march 14 coalition in the 2005 elections and the prospects for stability in lebanon were soon jeopardized by months of protracted political crises and renewed sectarian violence .

from mid - 2007 until the agreement in doha in may 2008 , lebanon's political environment was paralyzed by a number of interrelated disagreements .

preparations for a scheduled september 2007 presidential election went ahead , but were mooted by lebanese leaders' inability to agree on a consensus presidential candidate and subsequent wrangling over the distribution of cabinet seats .

as a result , a vote to elect a new president was postponed until october 23 , 2007 .

hezbollah and its allies boycotted the balloting and the election was repeatedly delayed as a result .

parties failed to agree on a consensus presidential candidate prior to the expiration of president emile lahoud's term in november 2007 .

the political stalemate in lebanon lasted until may 2008 , when the worst round of sectarian violence since the civil war broke out in beirut .

on may 6 , 2008 , parliament voted to replace the pro - hezbollah chief of security at rafiq hariri international airport and to dismantle hezbollah's extensive telecommunications network following accusations that the organization was using these tools to monitor the movement of anti - syrian politicians .

at a press conference on may 8 , hezbollah secretary general hassan nasrallah stated that the cabinet's position was "a declaration of war and a launching of war by the government ... against the resistance and its weapons. .

a week - long confrontation between hezbollah and its opposition allies and militias loyal to the siniora government followed .

shiite protestors burned tires in major thoroughfares , effectively closing the airport .

hezbollah seized control of march 14 coalition strongholds in west beirut , looting and burning future movement media offices .

fearing continued violence and possibly another civil war , the arab league and the qatari government facilitated negotiations between the rival factions .

in the resulting "doha agreement," the factions committed to end the violence , fill the vacant presidency , arrange for a power - sharing agreement in the cabinet , and hold parliamentary elections in 2009 based on updated electoral laws .

in accordance with the agreement , general michel suleiman , perceived as relatively neutral , was elected president on may 25 , 2008 .

he chose prime minister fouad siniora to continue as the head of the government .

disagreements over the assignment of ministry positions in the cabinet delayed the formation of a unity government until july 11 , 2008 .

in the new government , hezbollah and the opposition gained a blocking minority ( one - third plus one ) of cabinet seats .

eleven ministerial portfolios went to the opposition , including one to hezbollah itself — the ministry of labor .

hezbollah and the opposition have repeatedly pushed for this veto power to block certain government decisions .

in particular , hezbollah has long sought to block any attempt by the government to disarm its militia , as called for in united nations security council resolution 1701 .

on august 4 , the government released its policy statement to the lebanese news agency .

paragraph 24 recognized "the right of lebanon's people , army and resistance to liberate the israeli - occupied shebaa ( alternate spelling: shib'a ) farms , kfar shuba hills , and the lebanese section of ghajar village , and defend the country using all legal and possible means. .

it also included the "commitment of the government to united nations security council resolution 1701 with all its clauses. .

the policy statement also reaffirmed the government's commitment to hold parliamentary elections in accordance with the doha agreement .

on june 7 , 2009 , lebanese voters elected 128 deputies — from 26 districts and 11 politically recognized religious sects — to lebanon's unicameral legislature .

the march 14 coalition won 71 seats to march 8's 57 seats , maintaining its slim majority in parliament .

on november 9 , 2009 , minister - designate saad hariri announced that consensus had been reached and that a cabinet had been formed .

the announcement followed five months of tense negotiations that centered on the minority march 8 coalition's desire to retain the veto power ( one - third plus one or 11 of the 30 cabinet seats ) that it was granted in the doha agreement .

also at issue was the distribution of ministerial portfolios among the parties .

reports indicate that the march 8 coalition fought to keep the ministry of telecommunications , which plays an important role in funding the treasury and in security matters involving surveillance and monitoring communications .

the consensus cabinet is made up of 15 ministers appointed by the majority march 14 coalition , 10 ministers appointed by the march 8 opposition , and five ministers appointed by president michel suleiman .

this formula differs from the previous cabinet , which provided the march 8 coalition with 11 ( one - third plus one ) of the 30 ministerial positions and an effective veto over cabinet decisions .

the march 8 coalition did retain the telecommunications portfolio , but the labor ministry , which was headed by a hezbollah member in the previous cabinet , went to the march 14 coalition .

hezbollah now holds two ministry positions , the ministries of agriculture and administrative reform .

some observers have argued that march 8 still holds an unofficial veto in the new cabinet even though it only has 10 seats .

the shiite minister of state adnan hussein , appointed by president suleiman , reportedly has long - standing ties with hezbollah and is presumed to be hezbollah's swing vote on crucial issues .

appendix a. u.s. assistance to lebanon appendix b. map of lebano .

