on december 1 , 2008 , the national bureau of economic research confirmed what many had suspected for some time – that the economy was in a recession .

they announced that the economy had reached a cyclical peak , and that a recession had begun in december 2007 .

the term "recession" may often be used loosely to describe an economy that is slowing down or characterized by weakness in at least one major sector like the housing market .

when economists use the term , however , they try to do so consistently .

recessions typically have common characteristics and so economists try to identify the beginning and ending dates of recessions in order to further their overall understanding of the economy .

a recession is one of several discrete phases in the overall business cycle .

the beginning of a recession is known as a business cycle "peak," and the end of a recession is referred to as a business cycle "trough. .

in 1946 , arthur burns and wesley mitchell published a study of business cycles and offered a definition intended as a guide for further study: business cycles are a type of fluctuation found in the aggregate economic activity of nations that organize their work mainly in business enterprises: a cycle consists of expansions occurring at about the same time in many economic activities , followed by similarly general recessions , contractions , and revivals which merge into the expansion phase of the next cycle .

this definition requires both expansions and recessions to be apparent in many economic activities at about the same time , which would seem to exclude an economy exhibiting weakness in a single market .

more recently , economists at the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) , issued a memo with a slightly more precise definition: a recession is a significant decline in economic activity spread across the economy , lasting more than a few months , normally visible in real gdp , real income , employment , industrial production , and wholesale - retail sales .

a recession begins just after the economy reaches a peak of activity and ends as the economy reaches its trough .

between trough and peak , the economy is in an expansion .

expansion is the normal state of the economy ; most recessions are brief and they have been rare in recent decades .

this is the generally accepted view among economists of what constitutes an economic recession .

there is also a commonly cited "rule of thumb" that is referred to in the press .

that rule is that a recession is two consecutive quarterly declines in real gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

but this rule does not always apply .

for example , there was a recession beginning in march 2001 and ending in november 2001 that was not characterized by two successive quarterly declines in real gdp .

in any case , an important distinction is that a recession is a period of declining output and not just a period of slower economic growth .

it is possible for gdp growth to be positive yet so slow that the unemployment rate rises .

this is sometimes referred to as a "growth recession. .

among economists , the nber is the generally accepted arbiter of business cycle turning points .

the nber is a private nonprofit and nonpartisan organization that was founded in 1920 .

in the beginning its focus was on the macroeconomy , business cycles , and long - term growth , but now it seeks to promote research on a wide variety of topics .

for many years , the nber itself determined the dates of swings in the business cycle .

in 1978 , however , a separate business cycle dating committee was formed .

the members of the committee are appointed by the president of the nber , and they are now responsible for determining the dates of the beginnings and ends of recessions .

the current members of this committee are robert hall , chair – director of nber's program of research on economic fluctuations and growth , and professor at stanford university ; martin feldstein – president emeritus of nber , and professor at harvard university ; jeffrey frankel – director of nber's program in international finance and macroeconomics , and professor at harvard university ; robert j. gordon – nber research associate , and professor at northwestern university ; james poterba – nber president , and professor at mit ; david romer – professor at the university of california , berkeley ; victor zarnowitz – senior fellow at the conference board , and professor emeritus at the university of chicago .

one important indicator of economic conditions is growth in real gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

gdp statistics are compiled each quarter , and thus there is a time lag between the first month that is reflected in the data and the release of the data .

for example , the first release of data for the first calendar quarter of a given year does not occur until late april .

the data from that release is subject to revision in each of the next two months and may be revised later on as well .

it is not inconceivable that a first release of data that showed a decline in real gdp would later be revised to show an increase .

even so , those using the rule of thumb that two successive quarterly declines in real gdp constitutes a recession would have to wait for the release of the second quarter data in august to establish that a recession began at the start of the year .

because of the time lag associated with the release of gdp data , and because business cycle turning points are associated with months rather than quarters , the dating committee relies on a number of monthly economic indicators .

among the more important monthly indicators the committee looks at are personal income , employment , and industrial production .

even in the case of monthly indicators , it may require several months of data to establish a change in trends .

when there is a recession , not all of the economic indicators may show a change in trend at the same time .

historically , some indicators , such as housing starts and the stock market , tend to slow or decline in advance of a recession , and some , like the unemployment rate tend to react to changing conditions with a lag .

with all statistics it takes some time to compile the data , which means that the statistics are only available after the events they describe .

moreover , because it takes time to discern changes in trends given the usual month - to - month volatility in economic indicators , and because the data are subject to revision , it takes some time before the dating committee can agree that a recession ( or an expansion ) began at a certain date .

table 1 shows , for recent business cycle peaks and troughs , the date of the turning point and the date when the committee issued a release identifying the date of the turning point .

the longest delay between the beginning of a new phase of the business cycle and its announcement was when a recession was found to have ended in march 1991 but was not announced until 21 months had passed .

the shortest delay was five months after the expansion ended in january 1980 .

of the eight examples shown here , four were not announced until at least a year had elapsed .

while all recessions have unique characteristics , they also have many common aspects .

thus they are the object of economic analysis both individually and collectively .

because they are undesirable , economists study them in the hope that they can advise policymakers how to avoid them .

to do so , it is important to agree on a chronology , and it may not be an inconvenience to economists that it takes time to establish one .

policymakers , on the other hand , are more concerned with the present and the immediate future .

if they hope to avert or mitigate the consequences of recession , they cannot wait for an "official" declaration .

by then the recession may be history .

although there can be a significant delay between the onset of a recession and the dating committee determination , there is often little doubt that the economy is , or has been , in recession well before the announcement .

for policy measures to have mitigating effects , they must be timely .

policymakers may not have the luxury of holding themselves to as strict a definition of recession as economic analysts .

