after the long economic expansion that characterized much of the current decade , the nation entered its 11 th postwar recession in december 2007 .

it was not until november 2008 , however , that the business cycle dating committee of the national bureau of economic research announced that a substantial and widespread decline in economic activity had begun a year earlier .

as part of its announcement , the committee noted that it "views the payroll employment measure , which is based on a large survey of employers , as the most reliable comprehensive estimate of employment .

this series [the ces] reached a peak in december 2007. .

the committee's announcement intensified congressional interest in passage of legislation aimed at encouraging creation of new jobs and warding off further loss of jobs .

so , too , did comments equating the recession to the great depression .

 ( see crs report r40655 , the labor market during the great depression and the current recession . ) .

this , in turn , sparked the interest of some policymakers in the job creation programs of the depression period .

 ( see crs report r41017 , job creation programs of the great depression: the wpa and the ccc . ) .

to mitigate all but one recession since the 1960s , congress chose to increase federal expenditures on infrastructure ( public works ) , thereby directly raising demand for goods and services to offset the reduced demand of consumers .

 ( see crs report 92-939 , countercyclical job creation programs . ) .

but , there are a number of issues associated with using spending on public works to quickly create jobs during a recession .

 ( see crs report r40107 , the role of public works infrastructure in economic stimulus . ) .

when congress considers spending on infrastructure to help stimulate a flagging economy , "how many jobs are created" is a commonly asked question .

after first briefly examining trends in employment since the latest recession began , this report focuses on job creation estimates available in late 2008 associated with increased spending on traditional and so - called green infrastructure , placing a heavy emphasis on explaining the methodology often used to derive them and the difficulties associated with developing estimates for green economic activities in particular .

once stimulus legislation is signed into law , the focus of congress customarily turns to estimates of the number of jobs that result as federal funds are allocated to specific activities .

in the case of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) , which was enacted in early 2009 , congress included language requiring entities that receive arra appropriations from federal agencies to report the number of jobs created or maintained as a result and requiring the council of economic advisers to report on the employment and other economic effects of arra provisions .

the report closes with a review of what is known to date about the number of jobs associated with the stimulus act .

total nonfarm employment declined steadily between december 2007 and october 2009 , falling from 137,951,000 to 129,633,000 .

the great majority of this 8,318,000 job loss occurred after november 2008 .

despite a small uptick in employment from october to november 2009 , the number of jobs on employer payrolls fell the following month .

private and public employers typically have increased aggregate employment since then , however , with the number of jobs in july 2010 preliminarily rising to 130,470,000 .

as is typical during economic downturns , employees in the goods - producing sector ( mining , construction , manufacturing ) have been the most adversely affected .

workers in the sector's construction industry began experiencing job losses even before the economy - wide downturn began .

employment in the service - providing sector most recently peaked in december 2007 , when the recession began .

some service - providing industries — education and health services — have continued to add workers .

but , job losses elsewhere in the sector have far outweighed their gains .

the financial activities industry began to lose jobs before the advent of the economy - wide downturn .

this mirrors the above - mentioned trend in construction employment in part because real estate is a component of financial activities and it , like construction , has been hurt by the collapse of the housing market .

other components of financial activities , such as brokerage firms that packaged high - risk mortgages and the investors ( eg , banks ) that purchased them , have been negatively affected by the housing market downturn as well .

despite the widely expressed belief that the recession ended sometime in the third quarter of 2009 , the pattern following the end of the prior 10 postwar recessions suggests that an uninterrupted rebound in jobs will not be immediate .

according to a crs analysis , in all but one of these recessions , the number of jobs on employer payrolls fluctuated for months... .

sustained job growth occurred within three to five months of the start of seven recoveries .

in sharp contrast , steady job growth did not commence until march 1992 — 12 months after the july 1990 – march 1991 recession ended — and not until september 2003 — 22 months after the march – november 2001 recession ended .

when in response to a recession congress has acted to create jobs by raising demand for goods and services through increased federal spending , it often has chosen to direct the funds to infrastructure ( public works ) activities .

other means of direct countercyclical job creation — public service employment , fiscal relief to state governments , and employment tax credits — have been relied on much less often .

historically , public works has been synonymous with heavy and civil construction activities ( eg , road and bridge building , flood control structures and dam building ) .

today , it includes green economic activities or so - called green jobs .

although numerous studies on the emerging green economy have been released in the last several years , no consistent definition of green jobs exists at present .

green jobs seemingly are those in and related to industries that utilize renewable resources to produce their outputs ( eg , energy generated by wind , solar , and geothermal technologies ) and jobs in and related to industries that produce energy - efficient goods ( eg , energy star appliances ) and services ( eg , mass transit ) .

for this reason , the following discussion focuses on what is known about the job - generating impact of infrastructure spending broadly defined .

the section below begins with an in - depth examination of how job creation estimates usually are developed .

the focus then narrows to look at two models that can be used to calculate the number of jobs nationwide dependent upon demand in the construction industry among others , and one model that can be used to calculate the number of jobs by state dependent on the construction industry among other industries .

the section ends by reviewing the difficulties that researchers encounter in estimating the number of jobs supported by expenditures on green economic activities and the consequent caution that should be taken when utilizing these estimates in particular .

while crafting the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) , congress was concerned about timely tracking of the number of jobs whose creation or maintenance results from the legislation .

the 111 th congress therefore addressed this matter in bill language much more than prior congresses had in countercyclical job creation legislation .

at title xv — accountability and transparency of division a — appropriations provisions , p.l .

111-5 requires entities that receive arra appropriations from federal agencies ( eg , grant , loan , or contract recipients ; states ) to include in their quarterly reports to the agencies estimates of the number of direct jobs created and retained by infrastructure projects , for example .

recipients of recovery funds were required to make their first submission of the required information in october 2009 .

federal agencies are required to post the contents of these and subsequent reports on websites 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) was directed to provide guidance to help recipients prepare the reports , including the development of job estimates .

the act further charged the congressional budget office ( cbo ) and the government accountability office ( gao ) with commenting on the job estimates contained in the reports within 45 days after their submission to federal agencies .

based on the self - reporting of recipients of arra appropriations , 633,342 jobs were saved or retained through september 30 , 2009 .

because the notion of a retained ( saved ) job caused consternation in some quarters , omb revised its guidance issued in june 2009 .

according to that guidance , upon which the aforementioned job figure was based , congress' reference in arra to a job retained meant "an existing position that would not have been continued to be filled were it not for recovery act funding. .

in response to feedback from gao , among others , omb revised its guidance on jobs saved so that recipients no longer will have "to make a subjective judgment on whether a given job would have existed were it not for the recovery act .

the updated guidance [issued in december 2009] ... defines jobs created or retained as those funded ... by the recovery act. .

based on this definition , recipients reported that 608,311 jobs were funded by arra in the fourth quarter of 2009 .

another 682,370 jobs were created or saved at arra recipients in the first quarter of 2010 .

title xv of p.l .

111-5 additionally tasked the council of economic advisers ( cea ) with submitting quarterly reports to the committees on appropriations on the effect of arra - provisions on employment and other economic indicators .

the cea's mandate thus extends well beyond the above - described reporting requirements , which apply only to $271 billion in direct government investment spending out of a total of $787 billion .

the first quarterly report of the cea was issued in september 2009 .

based on two different estimating procedures , it found that arra might have added some one million jobs to employer payrolls in august 2009 compared to what employment would have been in the absence of the legislation .

as noted above , cbo was charged in arra with commenting on the number of jobs created or saved as a result of direct government purchases of goods and services , grants and loans to private entities , and grants to states and localities .

although it did so in estimated impact of the american recovery and reinvestment act on employment and economic output as of september 2009 , cbo went further to provide a broader estimate than can be gleaned from the reports of primary and secondary recipients of more than $25,000 from appropriations in arra ; it is an estimate more comparable to that of the cea .

based upon information provided by macroeconomic models and historical relationships , cbo estimated that arra's tax cuts and outlay increases that occurred through september 2009 increased the number of people employed by between 600,000 and 1.6 million compared to the employment level without the law .

the cea's estimate of 1.0-1.1 million additional jobs as of august 2009 , discussed in the preceding paragraph , falls within the range estimated by cbo .

in its second quarterly report , released in january 2010 , the cea estimated the effect of arra on employment through december 2009 .

it found that the stimulus law might have raised year - end employment by about 1.7 – 1.9 million jobs above what it otherwise would have been .

similarly , cbo estimated in its report covering the fourth quarter of 2009 that arra's policies might have increased the number of people employed by 1.0 – 2.1 million .

the cea's third quarterly report , released in april 2010 , showed arra's employment effect through march 2010 .

it estimated that the law might have raised employment by 2.2 – 2.8 million jobs above what it otherwise would have been as of the first quarter of 2010 .

similarly , cbo estimated in its report covering the first quarter of 2010 that arra's policies might have increased the number of people employed by 1.2 – 2.8 million .

the fourth quarterly arra jobs report of the cea covering the second quarter of 2010 was released on july 14 .

based on the two methods utilized by the cea , arra might have increased employment compared to what it otherwise would have been in the quarter by between 2.5 million and 3.6 million jobs .

using its macroeconomic model , the cea further estimated the effect on aggregate employment of public investment outlays under arra , which include clean energy generation and efficiency ; human capital ( eg , pell grants , k - 12 schools excluding the state fiscal stabilization fund ) ; transportation infrastructure ( air , sea , highway ) and transit ; health care delivery and technology ; and building construction .

public investment outlays might have increased total employment by over 627,000 jobs in the first quarter of 2010 , and by over 800,000 jobs in the second quarter of the year .

