members of congress hold diverse views about the value of international cooperation to address climate change .

while some members are convinced that human - induced climate change is a high priority risk that must be addressed through federal actions and international cooperation , others are not convinced of significant risk .

some are wary , as well , of international processes that could impose costs on the united states , undermine national sovereignty , or lead to trade advantages for other countries .

the united states government has participated for more than two decades in various multilateral negotiations and actions aimed at addressing climate change .

this report surveys the united nations negotiations , from a primarily u.s. perspective .

a table at the end of the report summarizes the chronology ( table 1 ) .

formal international negotiations were launched in december 1990 to address growing scientific and political concern about human - induced climate change .

the negotiations on the 1992 united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) marked the progress of decades of scientific research .

scientific conclusions — with uncertainties — have remained stable over two decades: greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from human - related activities are very likely causing the major portion of climate change observed in recent decades .

if changes continue , they could lead to adverse impacts on human societies and their environment , potentially including catastrophes .

predicting the timing , magnitude , and implications of change remains imprecise ; many uncertainties may not be resolvable in a time frame consistent with making effective and efficient decisions to reduce the risks of climate change .

the question of how to share any effort to address climate change has been a core challenge for international cooperation .

because emissions come from all countries , only concerted reductions by all major emitters can stabilize the rising ghg concentrations in the atmosphere .

the united states historically has contributed the most — almost one - fifth of the rise of ghg concentrations since the industrial revolution .

in 2007 , however , china surpassed the united states as the leading emitter of ghg annually .

in the future , the greatest growth in ghg emissions is expected from industrializing countries , such as china , india , and brazil .

these countries historically have contributed less , and still emit much less per person , than the united states and most other high - income countries .

arguably , the least developed and still industrializing nations have lower economic and governance capacities to address the problem .

the size of effort and how to allocate it is a key element of negotiations .

the primary issues for negotiation in 1990 remain the same today: when and by how much to reduce greenhouse gas emissions globally in order to achieve the unfccc's objective of avoiding " dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system " ; how to share " common but differentiated responsibilities " among countries taking into account " historic contributions " and " respective capacities " of different people — in particular , the acceptable degree of participation of low - income countries ; what mechanisms are best suited to assuring ghg reductions at the lowest cost , respecting national sovereignty and supporting " sustainable economic development " and " the eradication of poverty " ; how cooperatively to understand the risks and facilitate adaptation to climate changes , especially by those people least able to cope on their own ; and how to adapt international arrangements over time as science , social conditions , and capabilities evolve .

at present , the united states is one of three of the 194 parties to the unfccc that is not also party also to the subsidiary kyoto protocol .

 ( the other two are canada and andorra. ) .

as a party to the unfccc , the united states has general obligations to reduce its ghg emissions , report its emissions and be subject to international review , and assist lower - income countries , and other binding commitments .

the industrialized parties to the kyoto protocol ( annex i parties ) , however , took on binding , quantitative commitments to reduce their ghg emissions to 5% below 1990 levels during 2008-2012 and agreed in 2012 to reduce these further during a second commitment period from 2013 to 2020 .

most parties have made voluntary pledges to ghg reduction targets or nationally appropriate mitigation actions under the 2009 copenhagen accord and the 2010 cancun agreements .

nonetheless , many non - annex i parties have opposed taking on legally binding commitments to abate ghg emissions .

many annex i parties have opposed taking on further legally binding commitments without participation by all parties .

the 2011 durban platform envisioned an end to two - track ( developed versus developing ) negotiations and provided a mandate to negotiate by 2015 a single outcome "with legal force" applicable to all parties and that would take effect after 2020 .

how to pay for ghg reductions and adaptation measures is another key issue .

the wealthiest parties ( including the united states ) pledged "fast start" financing approaching $30 billion during 2010-2012 , and a goal of mobilizing financing of $100 billion annually by 2020 .

funding will come from public and private , bilateral and multilateral , and alternative sources .

the most vulnerable developing countries had priority for the 2010-2012 funds .

reportedly , the fast - start financing goal was exceeded , but the pathway to meeting the 2020 pledge remains obscure .

this report summarizes the process and principle issues and outcomes of the international climate change negotiations since 1990 .

further , crs has produced a series of reports on many aspects of the international climate change negotiations ( and domestic issues ) that can be accessed through the crs website ( http: / / www.crs.gov / pages / clis.aspx ? cliid=2522 ) or by contacting crs inquiry at [phone number scrubbed] .

this report summarizes the principal events and agreements , followed by a chronology at the end .

the international negotiations launched in 1990 culminated in the 1992 adoption of the united nations framework convention on climate change ( unfccc ) in rio de janeiro , brazil .

the u.s. senate quickly gave its advice and consent , leading the united states to be the fourth nation to ratify the unfccc — the first among industrialized countries .

as of november 1 , 2013 195 governments were parties to the unfccc .

as a framework convention , this treaty provides the structure for collaboration and evolution of efforts over decades , as well as the first qualitative step in that collaboration .

the unfccc does not , however , include measurable and enforceable objectives and commitments .

the unfccc originally listed 35 of the most industrialized nations ( including the united states ) plus the european economic community ( now the european union , or eu ) in annex i .

these annex i parties accepted specific commitments , particularly to take the lead in adopting national policies and undertaking measures with an aim to reduce human - related greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions to their 1990 levels by the year 2000 .

annex i parties also agreed to submit inventories of their emissions and sinks , and national communications of their unfccc - related policies and actions .

the non - annex i parties were then low - income countries , though many are now middle - or high - income countries ( eg , singapore ) .

the unfccc also listed in annex ii the then - wealthiest parties ( including the united states ) , which committed to providing agreed new and additional financial resources to assist the developing country parties to meet their obligations .

by the time the treaty entered into force and the conference of the parties ( cop ) met for the first time in 1995 , the parties agreed that achieving the objective of the unfccc would require further , stronger , and binding ghg commitments .

the 1995 berlin mandate for negotiations on a 1997 protocol deferred any new commitments for developing countries to later agreements .

as a first enforceable step toward meeting the objective of the unfccc , the 1997 kyoto protocol promised to reduce the net ghg emissions of industrialized country parties ( annex i parties ) to 5.2% below 1990 levels in the first commitment period of 2008 to 2012 .

it also pledged to assess the adequacy of these commitments early in the new century .

the united states signed the kyoto protocol on november 12 , 1998 .

in congress , however , opposition was strong .

in the "byrd - hagel" resolution in july 1997 , the senate expressed its opposition ( 95-0 vote ) to the terms of the berlin mandate , by stating that the u.s. should not sign any treaty that does not include specific , scheduled commitments of non - annex i parties in the same compliance period as annex i parties , or that might seriously harm the u.s. economy .

the kyoto protocol ( kp ) was not submitted to the senate for ratification by president clinton , nor by his successor , president george w. bush .

newly elected president bush announced in 2001 that the united states would not become a party because the kyoto protocol did not include ghg commitments by other large emitting non - annex i countries and because of his conclusion that it would cause serious harm to the u.s. economy .

as of november 1 , 2012 , 192 governments were parties to the kyoto protocol .

the united states and andorra are the only party to the unfccc never to join the kyoto protocol , while canada withdrew from it in december 2012 .

negotiations following the kyoto protocol particularly contested differentiation of commitments and assistance to developing countries , and slowed agreement on further steps under the unfccc .

in 2007 , parties agreed to establish two tracks for negotiation of further commitments of parties , one under the kyoto protocol and the other under the unfccc .

the first track was a mandate among the kyoto protocol parties ( not including the united states ) to pursue an amendment to the protocol on further commitments of annex i parties for the period ( s ) beyond the year 2012 .

the first commitment period runs from 2008 through 2012 .

the second track was established in december 2007 , when the conference of the parties ( cop ) to the unfccc agreed to a "bali action plan" to negotiate new ghg mitigation targets for annex i parties , "nationally appropriate mitigation actions" for non - annex i parties , and other commitments for the post - 2012 period .

the mandates specified that the products of negotiation should be ready by the end of 2009 , for decision at the 15 th meeting of the cop and the fifth meeting of the parties to the kyoto protocol ( cmp , or sometimes cop / mop ) , in copenhagen , denmark .

the form ( s ) of agreement were not clear , nor how the two negotiating tracks might converge .

 ( as discussed later , the durban platform of 2011 established a mandate that ended the bali action plan , with negotiations that proceed on one track applicable to all parties. ) .

the bali action plan framed the key items for the "copenhagen" negotiations to address climate change beyond 2012 as mitigation of climate change ( primarily to reduce ghg emissions or to enhance removals of carbon by forests and other vegetation "sinks" ) ; adaptation to impacts of climate change ; financial assistance to low - income countries ; technology development and transfer ; and a shared vision for long - term goals and action .

in addition , provisions for "monitoring , reporting , and verification" ( mrv ) permeated the negotiations .

provisions to reduce ghg emissions from deforestation and forest degradation ( "redd+" ) were also pursued under the bali action plan .

while the inter - sessional meetings during 2008 and 2009 showed little movement , public and many diplomatic expectations were high that the united states , and perhaps china and other developing countries , would come to the copenhagen negotiations with a new willingness to change positions and agree to ( 1 ) a second commitment period of the kyoto protocol with ghg targets for annex i parties and ( 2 ) a new instrument that would include quantitative ghg commitments for the united states and perhaps an array of non - annex i parties or all parties .

many experts and stakeholders around the world opined that the copenhagen sessions in december 2009 failed , bringing the united nations' process close to collapse ; others judged the meetings differently .

certainly , the copenhagen meetings did not meet the very high expectations set by the unfccc secretariat and many advocates of commitments to aggressive ghg emissions mitigation by either the annex i or all parties .

there were practical outcomes of the copenhagen negotiations nonetheless ; these included evolving recognition of the political and economic barriers in some countries to setting aggressive international obligations that parties are not sure to fulfill .

another was a greater focus on transparency through enhanced reporting and verification of actions in countries .

the u.s. deputy envoy for climate change , jonathan pershing , called the copenhagen accord a "paradigm shift" in the long - term path of the unfccc negotiations , from a "top - down" assignment of ghg targets to parties to a "country - up" offering of commitments .

the copenhagen negotiations revealed distance among many countries' "bottom lines," without ground of consensus on major issues , such as the form and structure of agreements ; obligations for ghg reductions and actions ; the legal nature of future commitments ; and acceptable provisions for monitoring , reporting , and verification ( mrv ) .

a "copenhagen accord" emerged that bridged some difficult differences and identified a common and differentiated path forward .

while most unfccc parties seemed willing to adopt the copenhagen accord , it was blocked by bolivia , cuba , sudan , and venezuela , arguing that the closed - door deal - making violated the procedures of the united nations charter .

tuvalu and some other nations rejected the agreement for not assuring , in their views , sufficiently deep ghg reductions .

consequently , the cop only "took note" of the text , but did not adopt it .

hence , the copenhagen accord was a political outcome , not a legal agreement .

the copenhagen accord outlines a number of key points for action on mitigation , adaptation , financing , technology , reducing emissions from deforestation , and a long - term vision of avoiding temperature increases .

all of these elements have been embodied in the cancun agreements of december 2010 ( see next section ) .

the copenhagen accord also included a pledge by the wealthiest parties to arrange "fast start" financing approaching $30 billion during 2010-2012 , and a goal of mobilizing financing of $100 billion annually by 2020 .

funding will come from public and private , bilateral and multilateral , and alternative sources .

the most vulnerable developing countries have priority for the 2010-2012 funds .

these financial pledges carried into the cancun agreements as well .

the copenhagen accord seemed a weak but generally agreed instrument .

following the terms of the pact , by the end of 2010 , 114 parties to the unfccc had associated themselves with the copenhagen accord , and 42 annex i parties and eu member states had submitted quantified economy - wide emissions targets for 2020 .

thirty - five non - annex i parties submitted nationally appropriate mitigation actions ( namas ) .

another 42 non - annex i parties associated themselves formally with the accord ( and were listed in the accord as such ) .

some of those that submitted actions or targets did not associate with the accord .

cuba , the cook islands , ecuador , kuwait , and nauru formally notified the unfccc secretariat that they would not associate or engage with the accord .

meetings in 2010 suggested that some parties might retreat from pledges made in the copenhagen accord .

notably , several low - income countries reemphasized the two - track , pre - copenhagen texts from the 2007 bali meetings , rather than the single text of the copenhagen accord .

nevertheless , the government of mexico , as host of the december 2010 meeting in cancun , facilitated inclusive and transparent deliberations , restoring the confidence of some parties in the negotiations process , and which yielded several decisions of the parties collectively called the "cancun agreements" ( ca ) .

to a large degree , the cancun agreements reiterated elements already included in the unfccc , the bali action plan , and the copenhagen accord .

the cancun agreements continued the two tracks of negotiations toward post - 2012 commitments .

however , they contained nearly identical language on key points in the separate decisions under the unfccc and the kyoto protocol .

a few paragraphs established explicit formal linkages between the two negotiating tracks .

major elements of the cancun agreements included the following: long - term vision for ghg mitigation: ( only in the decision directly under the unfccc. ) .

identifies a wide variety of elements that are components of the long - term package considered necessary to address the multiple faces of climate change .

states that "deep cuts" in global emissions are required "with a view to ... hold the increase in global average temperature below 2 o c." also , establishes consideration beginning in 2013 of setting a more stringent goal to avoid a temperature increase exceeding 1.5 o c. a cancun adaptation framework and an adaptation committee: both established to promote national adaptation plans ; and to prioritize and strengthen institutional capacities and disaster risk reduction strategies , research and technology development , and other country - driven actions to build social and ecological resilience to climate change .

the work program may consider options for risk management , including development of a climate risk insurance facility .

parallel ghg mitigation by annex i and non - annex i parties: notes ghg mitigation targets for 2020 reported by annex i parties , and nationally appropriate mitigation actions ( namas ) to be implemented by non - annex i parties and communicated to the secretariat by them , compiled in public documents to be issued by the secretariat .

further reporting and analysis will clarify the assumptions and implications for the reported targets and actions .

a registry on namas: to record and update information on actions for which countries are seeking support ; support available for namas ; and support provided for namas .

enhanced reporting by annex i parties and international assessment: requires reporting of emissions and removals related to ghg commitments , and to financial , technology , and capacity - building support provided by them .

transparent reporting and international review of non - annex i parties' mitigation while respecting national sovereignty: non - annex i parties must submit national communications every four years , with biennial updates to include national ghg inventories and mitigation actions , needs , and support received .

domestic actions will be subject to domestic monitoring , reporting , and verification ( mrv ) in accordance with future guidelines .

a process for international consultations and analysis ( ica ) of biennial reports will be non - intrusive , non - punitive , and respectful of national sovereignty .

mitigation actions ( as well as technology , financing , and capacity - building ) supported by international finance will be subject to international mrv .

reducing emissions from deforestation: requests countries to reduce carbon losses from land uses , including redd+ , and to enable mobilization of supportive international financing .

requests the awg - lca to explore financing mechanisms for implementing "results - based actions" to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation , conserve and enhance forest carbon stocks , and to manage forests sustainably .

with provision of adequate and predictable support , developing countries would develop forest and carbon reference levels and transparent national forest plans and safeguards monitoring systems .

"results - based actions" should be "fully measured , reported , and verified. .

consideration of market - based mechanisms: permits further consideration of emissions trading to assist developed country parties to meet part of their ghg commitments , to supplement their domestic actions , to maintain and build on those under the kyoto protocol .

a commitment by developed countries to mobilize finance for adaptation , mitigation , technology , and capacity - building: pledges approaching $30 billion during 2010-2012 , and a goal of $100 billion annually by 2020 .

funding will come from public and private , bilateral and multilateral , and alternative sources .

the most vulnerable developing countries had priority for the 2010-2012 funds .

a green climate fund ( gcf ) : the gcf is governed by a board of 24 representatives , equally from developed and developing countries , to channel a significant share of new multilateral funding for adaptation and mitigation .

the gcf is accountable to the cop , and is assisted by a new standing finance committee .

a trustee ( for at least three years the world bank ) , accountable to the gcf board , manages the financial assets , maintains records and prepares statements according to fiduciary standards .

a technology mechanism: to support actions on mitigation and adaptation , accountable to the cop , composed of a standing , expert technology executive committee and a climate technology center ( ctc ) and network .

the ctc is intended to facilitate assistance by the network at the request of a developing country party .

intellectual property controversies are not addressed .

review by the cop of the long - term global goal: starting by 2013 and ending by 2015 , to lead to "appropriate action based on the review. .

the decision of the parties to the kyoto protocol took note of the ghg reduction pledges of the annex i parties in accordance with the copenhagen accord .

the decision under the kyoto protocol did not set a new deadline to conclude extension of the protocol , only agreeing that it should be "as early as possible and in time to ensure that there is no gap between the first and second commitments periods. .

japan , canada , and others announced that they would not participate in an extension of the kyoto protocol , and that they would consider only an agreement that includes ghg mitigation requirements of all major emitters ( including the united states ) .

the absence of commitments from the top three global ghg emitters ( china , the united states , and india ) was a matter of consternation among many delegations and stakeholders .

the cancun agreements marked a tentatively renewed confidence of many in the united nations process .

many , though , watched the development of rules and guidelines , and degree of follow - through by countries on their pledges , as measures of success of the global process .

many , simultaneously , turned toward other domestic , bilateral , and multilateral institutions and processes , such as the development banks , the major economies meetings , and private fora , as possibly more effective supplements or alternatives to the unfccc processes .

additionally , the experiences of the copenhagen and cancun processes , and their outcomes , marked an increase in attention to national and sub - national efforts to address climate change , relative to the attention and credence given to international negotiations .

among the decisions made by parties at cop 17 in durban , south africa were two of particular note: ( 1 ) an agreement to a second commitment period ( cp2 ) of the kyoto protocol , and ( 2 ) a mandate , the durban platform for enhanced action ( dp ) , to negotiate by 2015 a new agreement "with legal force" that would be "applicable to all parties" , to begin implementation after 2020 .

agreement on a new commitment period for ghg abatement under the kyoto protocol proved key to gaining consensus on the durban platform .

notably , delegations from china , india , and some other middle - income countries insisted that the highest - income annex i parties must meet their existing ghg reduction obligations and sign up to further reductions under the kyoto protocol .

they also sought continuation of the clean development mechanism of the kyoto protocol , through which non - annex i parties could sell ghg reduction credits .

on the other hand , canada , japan , and russia stated they would only consider an agreement that includes ghg reduction commitments from all major emitters ( i.e. , including china , the united states , and others ) .

the eu , ultimately pivotal in the compromise , agreed to a second commitment period of the kyoto protocol only in conjunction with a decision to set out a clear roadmap to a new agreement that would include legally binding ghg reductions for all major emitters .

in concept , the durban platform mandate could eliminate after 2020 the bifurcation of countries into "developed" or "developing. .

it remains to be seen whether parties will adopt new approaches or fall back on positions that have been in stalemate for many years .

following up on other aspects of the cancun agreements , parties also decided on the governing instrument for the green climate fund ( launched in 2012 ) to help finance mitigation and adaptation measures in low - income countries ; a technology expert panel , modalities of the technology executive committee , and criteria and a process for selecting the host of the new climate technology centre — the center of a global network of technology centers ; methods to establish reference levels against which to measure avoided deforestation as a basis for market payments , rules to count reductions from peatlands , and languages on reporting safeguards for indigenous people and other concerns with redd+ projects ; and guidelines for biennial reports by parties , procedures for "international assessment and review," "international consultation and analysis," and other actions to increase the transparency of countries' emissions - cutting actions .

the 18 th session of the cop and the 8 th session of the cmp produced a set of decisions collectively dubbed the doha climate gateway .

the agreements formally closed processes under the bali action plan ( 2007 ) , such as the ad hoc working group on long - term cooperation ( awg - lca ) and the ad hoc working group on the kyoto protocol ( awg - kp ) .

these processes have given way to new paths forward focused 1. under the unfccc , on a. implementation of past agreements , and b. the search for a future accord to be hammered out by the ad hoc working group on the durban platform for enhanced action ( adp ) ; 2. under the kyoto protocol , on adoption of the doha amendment , which established a second commitment period for ghg targets from 2013-2020 , covering 37 countries and the european union , and requiring reductions of ghg emissions to , on average , 18% below 1990 levels .

these are detailed below .

in addition , the parties to the unfccc continue to operate without rules on voting .

as a result , decisions must be made by consensus ( without objection ) .

this is increasing seen by some as a problem for further progress under the unfccc , as any one party may block an agreement .

for the second time in unfccc history , the chair gaveled adoption of a decision over the objections of a party ( see bolivia's experience in discussion of the cancun agreements ) .

the chair announced adoption of the doha amendment with language restricting sales of surplus aaus over a delegation trying to object .

this incident has raised questions about whether and how voting and consensus may evolve .

members of congress may seek to monitor and provide input to the doha platform ( adp ) negotiations , due to reach an agreement in 2015 to take effect in 2020 , with a vision of avoiding a 2 o c ( 3.6 o f ) increase of global average temperature above pre - industrial levels .

the united states will be among the countries under most pressure also to provide financial and other assistance to low - income countries , to help them take on and adhere to commitments to ghg mitigation and adaptation .

in preparation for the 2015 adp negotiations , congress may wish to provide advice regarding the united states' position at summit of world leaders , to be convened by un secretary general ban ki - moon in september 2014 ; he has challenged leaders to bring "bold pledges. .

members of congress hold divergent views about the value of international cooperation to address climate change .

while some members are convinced that human - induced climate change is a high priority risk that must be addressed through federal actions and international cooperation , others are not convinced of significant risk .

some are wary , as well , of international processes that could impose costs on the united states , undermine national sovereignty , or lead to trade advantages for other countries .

regardless of current views , the united states is a party to the unfccc and has certain obligations , however unenforceable , under that treaty .

the united states' behaviors in that context are likely to continue to draw great attention on the world stage .

arguably , u.s. credibility is impaired to the degree that it has not followed through on earlier commitments , is unable to negotiate for unambiguous commitments due to lack of domestic consensus , and cannot assure others that any agreements made by an administration would be accepted by congress .

the executive branch continues international negotiations and implementation of the unfccc obligations .

committees of congress engage in oversight ( from home and at the international meetings ) , providing input to the administration formally and informally , and deciding program authorities and appropriations for these activities .

given the continuing public and legislative debate over whether and how to address climate change , the 113 th congress may engage on the international aspects .

international cooperation would be required to curtail human - induced climate change and to facilitate successful adaptation to its projected impacts .

many u.s. legislators seek assurance of comparable actions by all major emitters prior to committing the united states to actions .

additional issues that may be important to congress include the compatibility of any international agreement with u.s. domestic policies and laws ; the adequacy of appropriations and fiscal incentives to achieve any commitments under the agreement ; the desirable form of any agreement ; and any requirements for potential ratification and implementing legislation , should a formal treaty emerge from the negotiations .

many members of congress are especially attentive to questions of parity of ghg actions among major trading partners , and especially to the potential for adverse competitiveness effects if some countries do not mandate ghg reductions while others move ahead .

most other major countries ( including china , brazil , and others ) are taking actions , and some are measurably altering their ghg emission trajectories .

the united states has taken some actions , such as establishing ghg emission limits for motor vehicles and providing fiscal incentives for energy efficiency , renewable , and other energy technologies , etc .

the environmental protection agency ( epa ) has proposed carbon dioxide emission standards for future electric generating units as well .

with existing programs and regulations , and the addition of the expected epa regulation of ghg , the administration believes the united states will accomplish its pledge of reducing u.s. ghg emissions to at least 17% below 2005 levels by 2020 .

still , the cumulative effects of measures taken may be unlikely to achieve the deep , absolute reductions of ghg emissions considered necessary by many to stabilize atmospheric concentrations or to substantially increase rates of carbon removals from the atmosphere and sequestration ( eg , by forests and agricultural activities ) .

many observers have noted other risks to the u.s. economy relating to ghg abatement: some major competitors are undertaking rapid development and deployment of advanced energy technologies , justified by their domestic commitments to abating ghg emissions , enhancing energy security , reducing environmental impacts of industrial systems , and achieving additional policy objectives .

some of the countries have , correspondingly , emerged as the leading inventors and / or manufacturers of new technologies that are gaining global market shares .

while fossil fuel use is unlikely to decline in the next two decades , markets for alternative technologies are expanding .

some in congress may continue inquiries into the relationship of climate change policies to other national interests , including technological competitiveness and energy and water security .

