congress has established statutory offices of inspectors general ( igs ) in many executive and legislative branch agencies , as well as two special igs for programs and operations funded with amounts appropriated for the reconstruction of iraq and afghanistan .

the four principal responsibilities of igs are: ( 1 ) conducting and supervising audits and investigations ; ( 2 ) providing coordination and recommending policies for activities designed to promote economy and efficiency in agency programs and operations ; ( 3 ) preventing and detecting fraud , waste , and abuse ; and ( 4 ) keeping the agency head and congress fully and currently informed about problems and deficiencies relating to such programs and recommending corrective actions .

the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ) , which was enacted as p.l .

110-343 on october 3 , 2008 , established an additional special ig for the troubled asset relief program ( sigtarp ) .

under eesa , tarp funds may be used by the secretary of the treasury to purchase "troubled assets," defined to include both mortgage - related financial instruments and other types of securities which the secretary , after consulting the chairman of the board of governors of the federal reserve system , determines to purchase as necessary "to promote financial stability. .

the 111 th congress has passed two bills containing provisions related to the sigtarp .

p.l .

111-15 , the special inspector general for the troubled asset relief program act of 2009 , was enacted on april 24 , 2009 .

the senate had passed a similar bill in the 110 th congress .

p.l .

111-15 makes modifications to the sigtarp's audit and investigative authorities , grants the sigtarp temporary hiring power outside of the competitive civil service process , grants the sigtarp authority to hire up to 25 retired annuitants , requires coordination with other inspectors general with regard to audits and other responsibilities , and makes sigtarp reports publicly available , with certain exceptions .

p.l .

111-15 makes sigtarp , as well as the special igs for iraq and afghanistan reconstruction , members of the newly codified council of the inspectors general on integrity and efficiency until the date that each special ig terminates .

p.l .

111-22 , the helping families save their homes act of 2009 , was enacted on may 20 , 2009 , and contains provisions with regard to sigtarp in the context of public - private investment funds .

section 402 requires any public - private investment fund program ( ppip ) to , in consultation with sigtarp , impose conflict of interest rules on fund managers ; allows the sigtarp access to the books and records of such public - private investment funds ; requires the treasury secretary to consult with the sigtarp and issue regulations governing the interaction of the ppip , the term asset backed securities loan facility ( talf ) , and other similar public - private investment programs ; and mandates a report from the sigtarp 60 days after such a program is established .

the law also provides additional appropriations for the sigtarp , and mandates that priority for those appropriations be given to the performance of audits or investigations of recipients of non - recourse federal loans made under programs funded in whole or in part by eesa funds .

the provisions in eesa establishing the sigtarp are similar to the ig provisions for sigir and sigar in many respects .

however , there are important substantive distinctions between these three special igs , as well as between the sigtarp and the statutory igs created under the inspector general act of 1978 , as amended ( ig act ) .

due to the ambiguous nature of the statutory language in eesa , the scope of the powers and authorities of the sigtarp , although clarified by p.l .

111-15 , remains unclear in certain respects , as discussed below .

this portion of the report provides a legal analysis of the general ability of igs to conduct audits and investigations , as well as the specific authority of the sigtarp to conduct audits and investigations .

at the outset , it is important to recognize that most igs have virtually unfettered discretion over initiating and conducting audits and investigations dealing with waste , fraud , and abuse within their own agencies .

as a corollary , they may accept , delay , modify , or reject a request to conduct an audit or investigation from any party , including individual members of congress , officials at the office of management and budget , other igs , ig councils , agency officials , and private parties and organizations .

only a provision in a statute could officially order an ig investigation or audit .

however , igs are intended to serve as an oversight arm of congress within agencies , and it is congress that has explicitly delegated auditing and investigative functions to igs .

congress is not prohibited from requesting igs to conduct audits or investigations , and no improprieties are raised when a committee or a member makes such a request .

the legislative history of the ig act supports the understanding that congress could ask igs for information .

igs generally comply with such requests .

on january 22 , 2009 , sigtarp neil barofsky noted in a letter to the chairman of the house committee on financial services that his office was preparing requests to tarp recipients asking them to provide information and documentation related to their use or expected use of tarp funds , as well as their plans for following executive compensation limitations , within 30 days of the request .

on january 30 , 2009 , in a letter to the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , peter r. orszag , senator grassley disclosed that omb had "advised the ig that sigtarp could not initiate its significant oversight effort to improve the general transparency of tarp funds due to restrictions of the paperwork reduction act" ( pra ) .

according to the letter , sigtarp requested "emergency processing" by omb of its letter to tarp recipients .

reportedly , omb initially noted that sigtarp "would not be limited" by the pra , and then subsequently withdrew its emergency approval within several minutes of granting such approval .

according to the letter , it was senator grassley's understanding at the time that omb "is requiring sigtarp to post a proposed letter of inquiry to tarp recipients for 15 days , wait for comments , and then justify to omb that it has taken into account the public comments in redrafting the inquiry letter. .

it is not clear if a proposed letter of inquiry was posted for 15 days , but it appears unlikely that it was posted , given the following chain of events .

according to testimony on february 5 , 2009 , by sigtarp neil m. barofsky , the office "received approval from omb to send letter requests to each of the tarp recipients" that week .

on that day , the sigtarp began issuing letters with an omb control number that expires in august 2009 .

such letters were sent from february 5-11 , 2009 , and encompass the issues indicated in the sigtarp's january 22 , 2009 letter .

according to the sigtarp's testimony on february 24 , 2009 , the office has "already begun to receive responses to these requests and look[s] forward to providing an interim report to congress on this audit project after we receive the responses. .

also on february 5 , 2009 , the department of the treasury posted a comment request regarding the collection of information that the sigtarp proposed to undertake under the pra with regard to tarp recipients .

it was published in the federal register on february 11 , 2009 .

the comment request noted that the sigtarp's information collection requirement was submitted to omb "for emergency review , and it has been approved under the [pra]. .

the section of the comment request describing the purpose of the sigtarp information collection noted that the questionnaires "are intended to accommodate a september 2009 report to congress," and the summary of the proposed information collection estimated that the questionnaires would be sent to 350 respondents , "[b]ased upon current program participants. .

this estimate may increase as the treasury announced its plan for the use of the remainder of the tarp funds on february 10 , 2009 , the date before the comment request was published .

under the pra , agencies must receive approval ( signified by an omb control number displayed on the information collection ) for each collection of information request before it is implemented .

failure to obtain approval for an active collection , or the lapse of that approval , represents a violation of the act , and triggers the pra's public protection provision .

under that provision , no one can be penalized for failing to comply with a collection of information subject to the pra if the collection does not display a valid omb control number or if the agency does not inform the respondents that they are not required to respond unless the collection of information contains a valid omb control number .

oira can disapprove any collection of information if it believes the collection is inconsistent with the requirements of the pra .

it has been estimated by some in the ig community that it takes nine to ten months to receive approval for a collection of information under the pra .

the act generally defines a "collection of information" as the obtaining or disclosure of facts or opinions by or for an agency by 10 or more nonfederal persons .

the pra does not apply to collections of information "during the conduct of a federal criminal investigation," or "during the conduct of ... an administrative action or investigation involving an agency against specific individuals or entities," which would appear to include ig investigations that fall within this category .

however , the pra does apply to "the collection of information during the conduct of general investigations ... undertaken with reference to a category of individuals or entities such as a class of licensees or an entire industry. .

the pra requires agencies to justify any collection of information from the public by establishing the need and intended use of the information , estimating the burden that the collection will impose on respondents , and showing that the collection is the least burdensome way to gather the information .

each agency must "establish a process within the office headed by the chief information officer" whereby the proposed collections of information are reviewed before being submitted to omb .

agencies cannot conduct a collection of information until after undertaking such a review , evaluating public comments received , and submitting a certification that the information collection meets statutory requirements ( such as being written in plain terms and "necessary for the proper performance of the functions of the agency" ) , in addition to receiving omb approval and a control number .

however , an agency "may request the director [of omb] to authorize a collection of information," upon the agency head's determination that ( a ) a collection of information - ( i ) is needed prior to the expiration of time periods established ... ; and ( ii ) is essential to the mission of the agency ; and ( b ) the agency cannot reasonably comply with the provisions of [the pra] because — ( i ) public harm is reasonably likely to result if normal clearance procedures are followed ; ( ii ) an unanticipated event has occurred ; or ( iii ) the use of normal clearance procedures is reasonably likely to prevent or disrupt the collection of information or is reasonably likely to cause a statutory or court ordered deadline to be missed .

omb must report to congress annually and include in such report "a list of all violations" of the pra .

neither the pra , the ig act , nor eesa contain explicit language discussing whether ig investigations and audits are subject to the requirements of the pra .

both the pra and ig acts and their subsequent major amendments or reform acts ( in 1986 and 1995 for the pra , and in 1988 and 2008 for the ig act ) are silent on this issue , as is eesa .

a search of the congressional record debate regarding eesa similarly indicated that this issue was not raised .

nor does it appear that the issue of the pra and its potential impact on the sigtarp's ability to obtain information was raised in sigtarp confirmation hearings .

assuming that the pra is construed to apply to the sigtarp and future information collection requests , in the event that the sigtarp encounters additional difficulties under the pra process , there are several approaches that the sigtarp or congress could pursue .

one approach would be for the sigtarp to proceed with the information collection regardless of the requirements of the pra or to only send future requests to nine entities .

the potential repercussions of ignoring the pra would be that the public protection provision of the pra would be triggered and that the entities that received the sigtarp request could not be penalized for failing to comply with that collection of information .

however , public expectations might decrease potential noncompliance by recipients of tarp funds or the challenge of a request from sigtarp , whose purpose is to provide oversight of such expenditures , for information regarding how the entity spent its funds .

a second approach to address the sigtarp's responsibilities and the pra would be for congress to enact an amendment to the pra that would exclude sigtarp , or executive branch igs generally , from the definition of "agency," similar to the exclusions currently provided for the gao and the federal election commission .

it could be argued that gao has similar auditing and investigative functions to those of igs .

the former president's council on integrity and efficiency , a council of presidentially appointed igs that has now been codified , reconstituted , and renamed under the inspector general reform act of 2008 , has previously suggested amendments that would ( 1 ) exempt federal igs from the pra definition of "agency," and ( 2 ) add a new section which , when read with the rest of the statute , would state: "except as provided in paragraph ( 2 ) , this chapter shall not apply to the collection of information ... ( b ) during the conduct of ... ( iii ) audits , inspections , evaluations , investigations or other reviews conducted by federal inspectors general. .

s. 976 would provide such an exemption for statutory igs , special igs , the council of igs on integrity and efficiency , and the recovery accountability and transparency board , which is comprised of igs and a presidential designee or appointee .

a third approach would be for congress to create an exemption from the pra for collections of information undertaken specifically with regard to tarp funds in 44 u.s.c .

§ 3518 ( c ) ( 2 ) , which states that the pra applies to "the collection of information during the conduct of general investigations ... undertaken with reference to a category of individuals or entities such as a class of licensees or an entire industry. .

such a legislative fix could state that the provision would not apply to collections of information undertaken by the sigtarp .

a fourth approach would be for sigtarp to use its subpoena powers to compel the production of such information by tarp fund recipients .

as mentioned above , eesa § 121 ( d ) gives the sigtarp the "authorities provided in section 6" of the ig act , which encompass subpoena powers .

