since 1995 , the international community has donated over 12.5 million mt of food aid to north korea to help north korea alleviate chronic , massive food shortages that began in the early 1990s .

a severe famine in the mid - 1990s killed an estimated 600,000 to 3 million north koreans .

as figure 1 shows , the amount of food aid has varied from year to year and has declined dramatically since a decade ago .

over 90% of u.s. food assistance to pyongyang has been channeled through the wfp .

the united states has been by far the largest cumulative contributor to the wfp's north korea appeals .

four countries , china , south korea , the united states , and japan , have dominated the provision of food aid , contributing over 75% of the total since 1995 , though only china has provided assistance since 2009 .

in 2012 , according to the world food programme ( wfp ) , china provided nearly two - thirds of the 372,000 mt in food assistance provided to north korea .

north korea has been adept at turning from one donor to another , opportunistically seeking out the least stringent terms .

for instance , unlike the wfp , beijing historically has made few requests for access and monitoring .

the same was true of south korea for much of the 1995-2008 period .

when both countries increased their food contributions to north korea in the mid - 2000s , this arguably allowed north korea's central government authorities to roll back the highly intrusive ( from north korea's perspective ) wfp in the mid - 2000s ( see " north korea's 2006 restrictions and the decline in the wfp's program " below ) .

conversely , in 2008 , when inter - korean relations began to sour and humanitarian assistance from south korea dried up , north korea turned back to the united states for food aid and accepted washington's demands for expanded access and improved monitoring conditions .

from time to time , the united states has responded to humanitarian disasters in north korea by sending medicines and other emergency equipment .

for instance , after floods struck parts of north korea in the summer of 2010 , the obama administration sent north korea about $600,000 worth of pharmaceuticals and other assistance .

the aid was channelled through two u.s. ngos: samaritan's purse and mercy corps .

the aforementioned 2011 $900,000 flood relief package was distributed by samaritan's purse , which along with other ngos paid for the costs of transporting the assistance .

in an example of a broader aid program , in 2008 , the bush administration allocated $4 million in assistance to u.s. ngos to help several north korean rural and provincial hospitals by improving their electrical supplies and by providing medical equipment and training .

the four recipient ngos are mercy corps , the eugene bell foundation , global resource services , and samaritan's purse .

during the bush administration , various officials , including the president , issued vague pledges of more extensive u.s. assistance that might be forthcoming if north korea dismantled its nuclear programs and satisfied other u.s. security concerns dealing with missiles and the deployment of conventional forces .

the obama administration has indicated a "comprehensive" aid package would be forthcoming if north korea takes positive steps on the nuclear front .

with regard to u.s. development assistance programs , in the near term , the president has considerable flexibility to offer some forms of development assistance .

the foreign assistance act of 1961 , for instance , allows the president annually to provide up to $50 million per country for any purpose .

longer - term initiatives , however , would likely require changes in u.s. law and thereby require congressional action .

for instance , the 2014 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

113-76 ) specifically bans many forms of direct aid to the north korean government .

many health and emergency disaster relief aid programs are exempt from such legislative restrictions because they have "notwithstanding" clauses in their enacting legislation .

additionally , if the administration were to designate north korea as a country involved in drug production and trafficking — as some have advocated — then by law north korea would be ineligible for receiving most forms of u.s. development assistance .

finally , by law , u.s. representatives in the international financial institutions ( ifi ) are required to vote against any support for north korea due to its nuclear weapons programs .

