the federal budget is central to congress's ability to assert its "power of the purse. .

federal budget decisions express congress's priorities among competing aims and reinforce congress's influence on federal policies .

the budget also affects , and is affected by , the national economy as a whole .

the federal budget over the next few fiscal years will likely face significant challenges to both revenues and outlays as a result of recent turmoil in the economy and financial markets .

making budgetary decisions for the federal government is an enormously complex process , entailing the efforts of tens of thousands of staff persons in the executive and legislative branches , totaling millions of work hours each year .

the budget process allows the president and congress to negotiate and refine spending plans for the nation's fiscal priorities .

the current budget situation is challenging .

the federal government faces very large budget deficits , rising costs of entitlement programs , and significant spending on overseas military operations .

the enactment of financial intervention and fiscal stimulus legislation designed to alleviate a credit crunch and to bolster the economy will push up the deficit , shifting fiscal burdens into the future .

while gdp grew at an estimated annual rate of 2.8% in the third quarter of 2009 , perhaps marking an end to the longest post - world war ii recession , most forecasters expect unemployment to remain at high levels for the medium term .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projects that the unemployment rate will crest at nearly 10.5% in early 2010 , well above some earlier predictions .

high unemployment rates would add to government spending through "automatic stabilizer" programs , such as unemployment insurance and income support programs .

the economic downturn has not only pushed federal spending up and revenues down , but also threatens to slow economic growth for the next few years .

the federal government has responded to the economic slowdown with an array of policy responses unprecedented in recent decades , including fiscal stimulus and loan programs .

these federal interventions have helped stimulate economic activity and reduce dislocation in financial markets , but may also expose the federal government to substantial credit risks .

concern remains about the federal government's long - term fiscal situation .

the rising costs of federal health care programs and the effects of the baby boom generation's retirement present serious challenges to fiscal stability .

operating these programs in their current form may pass on substantial economic burdens to future generations .

aside from the specific issues related to the budget in presidential transition years , the current economic climate poses another major challenge to policymakers shaping the federal budget .

federal spending tied to means - tested social programs has been increasing due to rising unemployment , while federal revenues will likely fall as individuals' incomes drop and corporate profits sink .

congress faces extraordinary budgetary challenges in fy2010 with both short - run and long - run budget priorities that may conflict in critical ways .

in the short term , economic issues may dominate policy debates , creating pressure for higher deficit spending .

in the long term , increasing federal health care costs are expected to keep mandatory spending rising .

although estimates for the third quarter of 2009 , which put gdp growth at an annual rate of 2.8% , may signal an end to the economic recession , economic conditions remain weak due to budget challenges facing state and local governments , high levels of consumer debt , and continuing weakness in many real estate markets .

most economists expect unemployment rates to remain elevated for the medium term .

congress may choose to enact more government spending in response to the state of the economy .

while the power of debt - financed government spending to provide fiscal stimulus is independent of how those funds are spent , clearly taxpayers and beneficiaries of federal programs gain more when that spending reduces households' economic vulnerabilities or promotes future economic efficiency .

soon after the 111 th congress was sworn in , work began on a major fiscal stimulus package , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( h.r .

1 , p.l .

111-5 ) , which was enacted february 17 , 2009 .

the $787.2 billion package ( according to cbo ) includes extended unemployment benefits , aid to state and local governments in the form of higher infrastructure , medicaid , school spending , health care information technology funding , as well as tax cuts and rebates .

the appendix to this report discusses the macroeconomic policy options available to combat economic downturns and details reasons for enacting fiscal stimulus when monetary policy options are no longer available .

apart from any additional stimulus spending , the u.s. auto industry , facing the worst downturn in auto sales in 15 years and a significant loss in market share , asked for $34 billion in loans through tarp or through other means to revitalize and restructure its companies .

the 110 th congress did not pass proposals to provide additional aid to automobile manufacturers in late 2008 , but on december 19 , 2008 , the bush administration announced a plan to provide $17.4 billion in loans to general motors and chrysler using funds from the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) .

general motors and chrysler have said they would likely have filed for bankruptcy protection if they had failed to receive federal aid .

in order to further stabilize the industry , on march 19 , 2009 , treasury secretary geithner announced a program to provide auto suppliers with up to $5 billion in credit to help ensure the continuation of their operations in the face of slow sales to the struggling auto industry .

this program is intended to ensure that suppliers receive payment for their parts shipments regardless of what happens to the downstream car companies .

despite federal aid provided in late 2008 and early 2009 , the chrysler company filed for bankruptcy on april 30 , 2009 , and general motors filed for bankruptcy on june 1 .

on july 10 , 2009 , a reorganized general motors emerged from bankruptcy and chrysler was sold to the italian car maker fiat .

congress may wish to consider some general budgeting issues beyond short term considerations of annual funding requests and fiscal stimulus .

fcra requires that federal loan and credit program costs be recorded on a net present value basis .

the calculations mandated by fcra , while an advance over previous practices , do not take into account risks borne by the federal government , and indirectly , risks borne by taxpayers and program beneficiaries .

federal responses to economic and financial turmoil expose the government to substantial credit risks .

congress may opt to consider methods to undertake a systematic accounting of risks undertaken by government activities .

while some economists contend that sharply rising unemployment rates signal the need for more fiscal stimulus , president obama said in late june 2009 that a second stimulus package was not yet necessary .

in october 2009 , however , the president proposed increasing social security benefits by $250 for most beneficiaries .

debt - financed fiscal stimulus measures , like arra , eventually must be paid for through higher taxes or future cuts in government programs .

banks and other financial institutions must eventually be weaned off federal reserve and treasury borrowing facilities .

after the economic recovery begins , congress may use oversight authority to rein in spending as soon as is appropriate .

the budget , reflecting the size and complexity of the federal government , is complicated and detailed .

the budget books that omb compiles provide an enormous amount of information , and other budget data reported by federal agencies provide even more detail on federal spending plans .

the federal funding accountability and transparency act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-282 ) included several measures to increase the accessibility of budget information .

for example , as a result of that act , omb now runs the usaspending.gov website , which provides detailed information on federal spending .

some , however , have raised concerns about quality of those data .

moreover , it is not clear that those data are thoroughly coordinated with other federal budgeting data systems .

congress and the president have undertaken additional efforts in an attempt to improve transparency in light of the large amounts of spending currently occurring as a result of economic stabilization efforts and federal financial interventions .

websites , such as recovery.gov , were launched to track stimulus spending .

the congressional oversight panel was established in eesa to oversee tarp spending .

despite this , criticisms remain and requests for greater transparency continue .

in certain cases , despite the large amount of data provided by omb and other government agencies , it can be difficult to answer relatively simple budget questions .

critics maintain that the federal government in general and omb in particular should take steps to make data on federal spending more transparent to taxpayers and more useful to policymakers .

congress may consider requiring these changes to provide more organized and transparent budget data to citizens and to itself .

the budget enforcement act and other budget enforcement legislation was widely credited for laying the groundwork for the federal government's surpluses in the late 1990s .

the budget enforcement act , which imposed certain "pay - as - you - go" ( paygo ) rules , expired in 2002 .

paygo rules discourage or prevent the enactment of mandatory spending and revenue legislation that is not deficit neutral ( i.e. , legislation that would cause , or increase , a deficit or reduce a surplus ) .

the house and senate in the 111 th congress have enacted modified forms of paygo procedures .

in june 2009 , president obama encouraged congress to reinstitute statutory paygo rules .

when the economy starts to grow again , attention may turn to deficit reduction efforts , in which case paygo procedures could become more important .

some budget experts , however , warn that while paygo rules in the past have helped enforce stricter budgetary discipline , paygo is not a cure - all for fiscal challenges .

annual budget deficits or surpluses are not always the best indication of long - term fiscal stability .

most economists agree that , under certain conditions , running a budget deficit may be necessary to provide economic stimulus or pull an economy out of recession .

a large budget deficit , in itself , does not necessarily indicate a longer term problem .

the federal government , however , faces serious long - term budget challenges .

some measures of fiscal solvency in the long term indicate that the u.s. may face a major future crisis , specifically as it relates to rising healthcare costs and the likely impact on government financed health care spending .

cbo , gao , and omb agree that the current mix of federal fiscal policies is unsustainable in the long term .

the nation's aging population , combined with rising health care costs per beneficiary , seems likely to keep federal health costs rising faster than per capita gdp .

cbo has concluded that "under any plausible scenario , the federal budget is on an unsustainable path," extending well into this century .

in their august 2009 budget reports , omb and cbo identified fiscal challenges related to future healthcare costs as a major issue affecting the country's long - term budget outlook .

keeping future federal outlays at 20% of gdp , approximately its current share , and leaving fiscal policies unchanged , according to cbo projections , would require drastic reductions in all spending other than that for medicare , social security , and medicaid or reigning in the costs of these programs .

a former cbo acting director stated that , "by 2030 ... spending for those programs [medicare , social security , and medicaid] is projected to reach roughly 15 percent of gdp... .

if that increase happened ... , the rest of the budget would have to be cut by more than half" to keep overall spending close to its current level .

the social security , medicare , and medicaid programs present different challenges to the long - term fiscal position of the federal government .

estimates of the long - term fiscal gap between social security ( oasdi ) outlays and social security revenues as a proportion of long - term gdp are generally much smaller than estimates of the long - term fiscal gap between medicare ( hi , part b , and part d ) outlays and revenues as a portion of long - term gdp .

these long - term estimates of fiscal imbalances are sensitive to changes in assumptions regarding productivity growth and interest rates .

spending projections for medicare and medicaid are sensitive to medical inflation .

past projections that medical inflation would slow have proved to be overly optimistic .

the call for health care reform has grown .

the obama administration laid out a reserve fund in their fy2010 budget intended as a down payment to fund future health care reform .

the fy2010 budget conference agreement also contained provisions to allow for health care reform legislation .

both house speaker pelosi and senate majority leader reid had indicated that they intended to pass health care reforms in 2009 .

while the house passed the affordable health care for america act ( h.r .

3962 ) on november 7 by a 220 – 215 vote , and the senate passed the patient protection and affordable care act ( h.r .

3590 ) on december 24 , it appears that congress will continue to consider health care reform into 2010 .

when the economy recovers , congress may focus more effort on balancing the budget and reining in the debt .

this would require less spending , increases in revenue collections , faster than average economic growth , or a combination of these things .

many economists agree that having some federal debt is a good thing because it builds credit which allows for more favorable borrowing terms .

it encourages investment within the country because federal debt is seen as relatively low - risk and safe .

debt is not free , however , and requires interest payments that strain budgets .

high debt levels could limit the government's flexibility in meeting its obligations or in responding to emerging needs of its citizens .

ultimately , failing to take action to reduce the projected growth in the debt potentially might lead to future insolvency or government default .

governments typically strive to keep economic growth steady and employment high while maintaining price stability .

macroeconomic policy instruments are often divided into three components: monetary policy ( i.e. , control of monetary base and short - term interest rates ) , fiscal policy ( government borrowing and spending ) , and structural factors .

structural factors include regulation and competition policies that may enhance the efficiency of an economy .

while these standard macroeconomic policy tools have been highly effective in moderating economic fluctuations over the past few decades , the financial turmoil and credit crunch in fy2009 present special challenges that led the government to consider other types of responses .

the limits of monetary policy monetary policy has several important advantages in macroeconomic stabilization .

the federal reserve , the central bank of the united states , can deploy traditional monetary policy tools such as open - market interventions that help control certain key short - term federal interest rates .

the independence of the fed insulates it from political pressures and allows it to act quickly in response to new developments in the economy .

the fed , in conjunction with the treasury department , developed innovative responses to the financial turmoil that broke out in august 2007 .

as economic problems deepened in 2008 , the fed redoubled its efforts to unfreeze critical areas of credit markets .

in the current economic situation , traditional monetary policy initiatives appear to have neared their effective limits .

in their december meeting , the federal reserve set a target range for the federal funds rate between zero and ¼ % and cut the rate on discount window loans ( made to commercial banks and other financial institutions ) by 75 basis points to ½ % .

thus , the federal reserve has little room for further cuts .

in addition , declining investment demand and investors seeking a safe harbor for funds have pushed short - term interest rates on federal treasury securities to very low levels .

furthermore , many economists doubt that pushing those interest rates even lower would spur much additional lending when banks and other lenders worry about the solvency of financial counterparties .

monetary policy loses much of its effectiveness in such a "liquidity trap," as banks' reluctance to lend frustrates the fed's efforts to expand the money supply .

moreover , while new federal reserve lending facilities may improve credit conditions or at least limit further deterioration , those programs were not designed to address the larger macroeconomic issue of stimulating economic growth .

finally , while the fed responses in 2008 and early 2009 have been aggressive and creative , there may be limits to what additional programs can accomplish .

logic of fiscal stimulus the context for fiscal policy begins with national income accounting .

the national income , as measured by gdp , is the sum of expenditure categories .

specifically , the national income accounting identity is y ≡ c + i + g + net exports where y = national income ( gdp ) c = private consumption i = private investment g = government spending .

the identity implies that national income falls when private consumption and investment fall unless offset by increases in either government spending or net exports .

in the current economic environment , government spending increases have become the focus of attention as a source of stimulus as consumption and investment continue to decline .

while some measures of economic activity remained resilient in the first half of 2008 , despite rapidly rising unemployment and sharp drops in asset prices and in housing prices in many areas of the country , most forecasters predict sharp decreases in key economic indicators in 2009 .

private consumption fell in the last half of 2008 for several reasons .

rising unemployment rates left some households with lost earnings , and prompted others to increase savings to cushion against possible future job losses .

some households that had borrowed using home equity credit lines , credit cards , or other types of credit became unable to continue borrowing , thus requiring cutbacks in consumption .

other households became unable to afford mortgage payments , contributing to increasing foreclosure rates and reducing consumption .

auto sales , an important component of private consumption , fell drastically as financing became harder to obtain and gas prices rose in mid - 2008 .

private investment falls when businesses believe that demand for what they sell is falling or will fall .

non - residential investment , a component of private investment , has been weak relative to historical levels since the mid - 1990s , although information technology investment was strong until the collapse of dot - coms in 2000 .

the federal reserve then sharply lowered short - term interest rates .

capital inflows , especially from east asia , pushed down market interest rates .

low interest rates helped housing prices rise and stimulated new residential construction and development , boosting fixed residential investment .

as housing prices in many areas of the country reached their peak or began to decline in 2007 , investors who once had thought that home prices would continue to rise backed away .

additionally , many investors began to fear that residential mortgage - backed securities ( rmbs ) were much riskier than anticipated , and capital markets became reluctant to put more money into the residential sector .

a credit crunch , partially sparked by concerns over rmbs , emerged in august 2007 .

foreclosure rates have climbed , as refinancing options for many homeowners dwindled , putting added downward pressure on home prices .

high levels of fixed residential investment over the past decade have created large inventories of new houses , which may dampen incentives for future construction .

all of these variables contributed to declines in private investment , which are not expected to reverse in the near term .

the united states has run trade deficits since the mid - 1980s .

in recent years , the trade deficit has narrowed ( so that net exports are less negative ) in part because the dollar has weakened relative to most major currencies .

sharply higher energy prices in 2008 offset many of those gains , but falling energy prices in late 2008 may help shrink the trade deficit further .

as trading partners have begun to face their own economic problems , demand for american exports may fall .

american consumers , however , may buy fewer imported goods during the recession .

the combined effect on net exports is likely to be mixed , causing them to be an ineffective source of stimulus .

most macroeconomists believe that reductions in private consumption and investment will cut economic growth unless debt - financed government spending increases to provide substantial fiscal stimulus .

other measures , such as investment incentives or broad tax cuts may also promote economic growth , although some economists believe debt - financed government spending is a more effective stimulus to aggregate demand in a recession .

applying fiscal policy standard applied macroeconomic theory suggests that fiscal policy is more effective when short - term interest rates are extremely low .

fiscal policy therefore plays an especially important role in economic policy during economic downturns .

the amount and composition of the federal spending along with the size of the federal deficit are key fiscal policy instruments .

during economic downturns , government revenues fall and expenditures rise as more people become eligible for unemployment insurance and income support programs , causing deficits to increase or surpluses to shrink .

these effects , known as "automatic stabilizers," provide a countercyclical stimulus in the short run without the need for new legislative action .

automatic stabilizers , however , probably cannot provide enough fiscal stimulus to pull the current economy out of a recession .

higher government spending financed by borrowing , above and beyond the automatic stabilizer effects , provides a powerful fiscal policy tool that can help counteract recessions .

a countercyclical fiscal policy , in which taxes are cut or spending is increased , can dampen economic fluctuations and limit the depth of economic downturns .

debt - financed government spending is one component of keynesian demand management — the theory that government can stabilize the economy , or at least moderate economic fluctuations by using fiscal policy to offset changes in private consumption and investment .

the federal government , according to that theory , can shift buying power from future to the present more easily than firms and households , and is therefore better able to maintain stable economic conditions .

in the view of most macroeconomists , keynesian demand management , as one component of a well - designed macroeconomic policy regime , can increase economic efficiency by preventing labor and capital goods from becoming unnecessarily idle during economic downturns .

reducing government deficits when economic growth is robust is another key component of a well - designed macroeconomic policy regime .

in this respect , responsible fiscal policy requires that spending in economic downturns be paid for by future spending reductions and / or tax increases .

of course , higher taxes in the future reduce private consumption and cuts in future government programs reduce consumption of publicly provided goods and services .

if debt is not reduced , higher interest rates may reduce future investment .

caveats regarding fiscal stimulus some economists have criticized the logic of keynesian demand management and the discretionary application of fiscal spending by governments .

some have contended that keynesian fiscal policy arguments do not take sufficient account of choices made by firms and individual households .

others argue that keynesian demand management policies can create administrative problems and note that mustering the political will to maintain a sustainable fiscal policy by reducing spending over the economic cycle can be hard .

some economists have argued that not just the government , but also households can shift spending through time via borrowing and saving .

thus households , according to some , may counteract government fiscal policies by saving during economic downturns , thus further reducing consumption .

other economists note that many households are not in a position to choose between saving and consuming and that the low interest rates typically found in economic downturns may weaken incentives to save .

some evidence suggests that high - income households may take savings measures that offset government fiscal policies , but low - income households are , in general , less able to rearrange their finances in ways that would reduce the effectiveness of fiscal policy .

the argument for keynesian demand management presumes that governments run surpluses during economic expansions to repay debt accumulated when applying fiscal stimulus during economic downturns .

critics of deficit - financed fiscal policy argue that policymakers are more willing to raise government spending when economic growth slows than to cut spending when growth accelerates .

certain federal programs or increased spending , enacted during economic downturns , may remain in place after they are no longer necessary because of the interests of influential beneficiaries rather than overall economic welfare .

on the other hand , some programs created during the great depression such as social security , have helped make many families less vulnerable to economic shocks .

few economists believe that large changes in fiscal policy designed to counterbalance short - term economic downturns can be timed precisely .

certainly , macroeconomists are more skeptical about the ability to fine - tune fiscal policy than their predecessors a generation ago .

most macroeconomists nonetheless believe fiscal policy is an important tool during deep or prolonged periods of slow or negative growth .

