proponents of the two - state idea might argue that it would be better to strengthen existing political will for a two - state solution than to spend time and resources building a new consensus for one or more alternative solutions .

a quest for alternatives might more accurately reflect a "grass is always greener" mentality than a qualitatively superior approach to resolving the conflict .

on the other hand , opponents of the two - state idea might argue that recycling a framework that has fallen short for over a decade and a half is unwise and that something new should be tried instead of sinking more political capital into what could be an irredeemably failed idea .

in an august 2009 new york times column , former u.s. special assistant to the president for arab - israeli affairs ( under president clinton ) robert malley — now the director of the middle east program at the international crisis group — and hussein agha argued that rhetorical support for a two - state solution by binyamin netanyahu and khaled meshaal , with all their caveats and qualifications , may be more a sign that the term "two - state solution" has been drained of its explanatory value than that a peaceful resolution is any closer: this nearly unanimous consensus is the surest sign to date that the two - state solution has become void of meaning , a catchphrase divorced from the contentious issues it is supposed to resolve .

everyone can say yes because saying yes no longer says much , and saying no has become too costly .

acceptance of the two - state solution signals continuation of the israeli - palestinian struggle by other means... .

in the same column , malley and agha postulated that past attempts to resolve the conflict might have paid too little attention to the questions of identity and narrative that fuel israeli - palestinian disagreement on issues such as permanent security arrangements , the status of jerusalem , palestinian refugees , and the settlements .

that so many attempts to resolve the conflict have failed is reason to be wary... .

it is hard today to imagine a resolution that does not entail two states .

but two states may not be a true resolution if the roots of this clash are ignored .

the ultimate territorial outcome almost certainly will be found within the borders of 1967 .

to be sustainable , it will need to grapple with matters left over since 1948... .

in the closed - door session of the september 2009 trilateral meeting in new york , president obama reportedly laid out the following vision for negotiations to netanyahu and abbas: there's an historical record of the entire past negotiations and there are principles .

we won't start the negotiations from scratch , we will not take the historical record and toss it aside .

nor will we wait for the perfect formula... .

it's difficult to disentangle ourselves from history but we must do so .

the only reason to hold public office is to get things done .

we all must take risks for peace .

how the logistics of a land - for - peace compromise might be resolved at the same time the conflicting worldviews of israelis and palestinians are addressed or transcended remains unclear .

also unclear is whether calls for new ways to conceptualize and / or resolve the conflict might increase in frequency and intensity — compelling the israelis , palestinians , united states , and / or other international actors to respond — if future proposals advanced under the "two - state solution" heading are perceived to stretch the reasonable elasticity of the term to its breaking point .

in addition to wavering confidence in the peace process , changes with respect to geopolitics , demographics , violence between israelis and palestinians , factionalism among palestinians , israeli settlements , and impediments to palestinian movement and territorial contiguity may have altered the likelihood of reaching a two - state solution since the signing of the oslo accord in 1993 .

traditionally , the concept of a two - state solution has visualized a negotiated israel - plo final - status agreement on all core issues that , in a single stroke , ends the conflict between the parties and establishes a palestinian state alongside israel .

in summer 2009 , however , discussion of the possibility of at least two different pathways toward a two - state solution has intensified .

both emphasize intermediate steps that could confer certain sovereign characteristics upon the plo / pa .

skeptics question whether such steps would represent progress toward a two - state solution , or possibly work against a full final - status agreement by removing the motivation to act from one or both sides .

each proposed pathway faces at least one major unanswered question .

as warnings have grown more frequent and emphatic that the window of opportunity for a two - state solution might be closing , several proposals for other ways to address the future of the palestinian territories have surfaced from both the palestinian and the israeli sides .

some of these proposals are not altogether new , but rather existed in some form before a two - state solution became the official israeli and plo line .

some analysts suggest that raising alternatives is a time - honored tactic employed to jumpstart or to galvanize negotiations .

others perceive that the advent of alternative proposals reflects a shift in fundamental realities underlying the public discourse on the peace process that makes a two - state solution less likely as time passes .

lack of israeli - palestinian consensus on any of these alternatives may mean that the status quo in the west bank and gaza could continue .

because some analysts believe that prospects for a two - state solution could decrease as time wears on , some advocate vigorous u.s. engagement in pushing the peace process forward .

they tend to believe that an urgent approach is necessary to prevent israelis and palestinians from turning to other options .

others , however , believe that the united states should take a more incremental approach because current conditions — particularly the division among palestinians between fatah and hamas — militate against pressuring the two sides to reach and implement a final - status agreement .

an "incrementalist" u.s. posture with respect to the peace process could — by buying time — increase the chances of a propitious alignment of u.s. , israeli , and palestinian leaders and publics willing to conclude and implement a mutually beneficial final - status agreement , or it could squander opportunities and cede the initiative to other parties .

in deciding whether to play a more proactive role in the peace process , the u.s. could face concerns over possible israeli and palestinian resistance against outside pressure , offset by concerns that peace might not be possible without considerable third - party intervention .

it is within this context that the obama administration seeks to chart a policy course .

obama and many of his close advisers came into office saying that solving the israeli - palestinian problem is critical to u.s. national security interests because it fuels other problems america faces in the middle east , and the administration has insisted on these linkages in public disagreements with israeli leaders .

nevertheless , some might question whether the peace process is or can remain a priority for the united states given its other pressing foreign and domestic policy problems .

proponents of the obama administration's approach counter that obama has given the peace process a far higher profile than his predecessors in the early stages of their presidencies .

the appointment of special envoy for middle east peace george mitchell during the first week of obama's term could provide insight into obama's intentions .

yossi alpher , co - editor of the israeli - palestinian bitterlemons.org website , has noted that the administration's major points of emphasis thus far — freezing settlements , progress on security , restoring "pre - intifada" arab - israeli links , multilateral diplomacy — come directly from phases 1 and 2 of the roadmap , which was largely based on the 2001 mitchell report .

a common criticism of bush administration - era peace process diplomacy was that it ignored or bypassed key provisions of the roadmap , thus undermining its legitimacy .

is it possible that in appointing mitchell as his point man , obama is less interested in a wholly new approach to the peace process than in giving the roadmap a genuine chance to succeed by entrusting policy to one of its antecedents ? .

if so , does that mean that the roadmap might also be the best indicator of future policy proposals ? .

some might question whether the roadmap's framework — conceptualized in 2001-2002 — remains relevant for 2009-2010 in light of changes that have occurred in the meantime ( see " changes since oslo " above ) .

at a press conference following the september 2009 trilateral meeting in new york , mitchell provided some insight into how he might plan to approach final - status negotiations: we're going to meet with the parties .

we're going to seek to determine what is necessary to bridge their differences , to close the gaps .

we will , where appropriate , suggest language , suggest decisions .

and there will be a genuine back and forth... .

in a january 2010 interview on pbs's charlie rose show , mitchell said that the administration would tell the parties that negotiations should begin and would lay out what it thinks is a "proper basis" for the negotiations .

he also said , "we think that the negotiation should last no more than two years , once begun we think it can be done within that period of time .

we hope the parties agree .

personally i think it can be done in a shorter period of time. .

the obama administration has been staffing its peace process team to support the president , secretary clinton , and special envoy mitchell .

this support is available from several different sources .

within the state department , in addition to mitchell and his team , there is the bureau for near eastern affairs ( including the diplomats in residence at the u.s. embassy in tel aviv and the u.s. consulate general in jerusalem ) , the u.s. security coordinator for israel and the palestinian authority ( or ussc , based in the jerusalem consulate ) , and the bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( commonly known as the inl bureau , it also maintains an office in the jerusalem consulate ) .

the national security council , department of defense , and u.s. agency for international development ( usaid , which maintains an office in tel aviv ) also play significant roles in the region .

along with the changes in personnel owing to the change of presidential administration and to mitchell's appointment as special envoy for middle east peace come a variety of questions .

what lines of authority will reporting , decisionmaking , and implementation of programs follow ? .

will accountability be clearer or more muddled ? .

to what extent will mitchell and his deputies rely on officials from the jerusalem consulate ( including the ussc and the inl bureau ) , the embassy in tel aviv , and the near east affairs bureau ? .

how involved will obama , the white house / national security council staff , and secretary clinton be in diplomatic exchanges and in the day - to - day management of affairs ? .

who will be the primary actors in explaining administration policy to congress , and will those actors enjoy full access to and confidence of the key decisionmakers and implementers ? .

the environment shaping prospects for israeli - palestinian negotiations and a two - state solution can influence and be influenced by many factors .

four particularly important aspects of the current situation with possible implications for congress are: the role of hamas , efforts to assist palestinians , israeli settlements in the west bank and east jerusalem , and possible constructive involvement by arab states .

the role of hamas may pose the biggest open question: could hamas ( with which u.s. government representatives are currently prohibited from having contact because it is an fto ) be included ( either directly or indirectly ) in u.s. - facilitated final - status negotiations — in the event it wanted to be included ? .

acquiescing to the inclusion of hamas in the peace process in some manner could involve its integration or reintegration into existing palestinian leadership structures such as the pa and the plo .

among current u.s. restrictions on aid aimed at hamas and its affiliates is a prohibition on direct aid to any pa government that includes members of hamas unless all government ministers publicly agree to recognize israel's right to exist and to be bound by previous israeli - palestinian agreements .

prospects of palestinian unity may also lead to calls for a redefinition of the mission of u.s. - assisted pa security forces in the west bank , which target hamas members and sympathizers for arrest under certain conditions .

as demonstrated by obama's cairo speech , the administration has not departed from the bush administration's stance on hamas .

it has conditioned hamas's participation in the peace process on acceptance of the quartet principles .

however , a june 2009 meeting by thomas pickering , a former u.s. ambassador to the united nations and current co - chair of the international crisis group , with mahmoud al zahar — one of hamas's most senior leaders — has led some to wonder if the administration might be open to indirect or secret talks with hamas .

in august , washington post columnist david ignatius speculated that the timing could be right to pursue secret talks — perhaps allowing the united states to take advantage of possible hamas concerns occasioned by iran's internal post - election turmoil: but tehran's reliability as a patron is now open to question , and its friends may want to hedge their bets .

it's an ideal time for the united states to explore alternatives — through a broad diplomatic opening with syria and secret contacts ( using saudi , egyptian and syrian channels ) with hamas .

although the other quartet members formally espouse the quartet principles , russia has regular dealings with hamas , legislators from various eu countries have met publicly with khaled meshaal and other hamas leaders , and hamas representatives claim that high - ranking european officials — including ambassadors — are talking regularly to them .

some analysts believe that khaled meshaal's media overtures following obama's speech were largely aimed at gaining eu ( if not u.s. ) acceptance of a hamas role in palestinian affairs and the peace process without having to commit to the quartet principles .

some might argue that european governments could be useful as go - betweens for hamas and the united states , while others might counter that the go - between role may have limited utility — using bush - era european diplomacy with iran as a case in point .

any possibility of u.s. policy shifts regarding hamas's role could trigger heated debate .

those opposing policy shifts say dealing with hamas would likely strengthen its political hand at the expense of abbas and other more moderate palestinians , allowing the movement to argue to palestinians that its hardline tactics with israel are more effective than abbas's approach .

they also might say that any move toward legitimizing hamas could embolden it and other palestinian militants to use the mechanisms of palestinian leadership to mount attacks on israel — either before or after the establishment of a palestinian state .

those favoring policy shifts might say that hamas is less likely to attack israel if it is made a stakeholder that is accountable to revived palestinian hopes of a palestinian state .

leaving hamas out of a negotiated outcome could lead the united states to pursue one of the following courses of action .

one would be to trust that the palestinian people would rally to the support of abbas in the event he reaches a final - status agreement with israel , ratifying the agreement in a referendum or in some other manner regardless of hamas's objections .

another would be to help the pa and / or israel prepare for containment of hamas or for further military action against it .

it is possible that a combination of both courses of action could be used .

there are several risks involved with both courses of action .

entrusting the fate of a final - status peace agreement to a divided palestinian public after so many years spent striving for resolution could lead to an unpredictable result ( along the lines of the 2006 plc elections that brought hamas to power ) .

even if the palestinian public backs abbas , hamas could seek to nullify the popular will through force .

containment of or military action against hamas could backfire , as some believe it did for israel during the december 2008-january 2009 conflict , leading hamas to broaden and / or deepen its control of gaza and possibly also giving it inroads into the west bank .

even military success could come at great cost , given hamas's entrenchment in gaza and its attack capabilities ( either with rockets or through direct attacks on israelis ) .

by supporting the use of force against hamas , the united states could open itself up to charges that it is an aggressor , possibly eroding u.s. international credibility as an "honest broker" and guarantor with regard to the peace process .

if any of these risks materialize , congress could face requests for heightened economic and security assistance — as occurred in the aftermath of the 2008-2009 gaza conflict — at a time when discerning if potential aid recipients and their actions are hospitable to u.s. interests might become increasingly difficult .

the obama administration has expanded the amount of u.s. aid given to forward palestinian reform and development priorities .

u.s. economic assistance to the palestinians began following the establishment of limited palestinian self - rule in the mid - 1990s .

u.s. assistance levels have fluctuated in past years according to the composition of palestinian leadership and other circumstances .

current palestinian priorities include the internationally and congressionally supported programs of pa security and economic reform and assistance that were relaunched in conjunction with the annapolis process in 2007 .

since mid - 2007 , the united states has appropriated or reprogrammed nearly $2 billion in support of these programs , including $650 million for direct budgetary assistance to the pa and nearly $400 million ( toward training , non - lethal equipment , facilities , strategic planning , and administration ) appropriated to strengthen and reform pa security forces and criminal justice systems in the west bank .

the remainder is for usaid - administered programs implemented by non - governmental organizations in humanitarian assistance , economic development , democratic reform , improving water access and other infrastructure , health care , education , and vocational training .

$500 million in total assistance was appropriated for fy2010 pursuant to the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

many observers point to signs of progress with pa security capacities and west bank economic development , along with greater israeli cooperation .

it is less clear whether the progress they cite can be made self - sustaining and can be useful in promoting a broader political solution , and whether the level of israeli cooperation is sufficient .

the effectiveness of u.s. assistance is challenged , logistically and strategically , not only by the israelis , the plo , the pa , fatah , hamas , and their shifting and often conflicting interests , but also by the u.s. interagency process and by the need to coordinate assistance from the european union , european states , russia , japan , canada , china , turkey , and arab states , among others .

ensuring that all international assistance complements u.s. objectives can be difficult or even untenable depending on the circumstances .

presently , assisting palestinian development and reform advances the stated interests of both israel and the pa ( see " fayyad's plan – a de facto palestinian state " above ) .

opponents of an emphasis on palestinian development and reform might argue , however , that efforts to bolster palestinian moderates in the 16 years since oslo have made hamas stronger , not weaker .

if this trend continues , their argument might go , hamas might even attempt a takeover of the west bank , either through the pa electoral process ( according to palestinian law , both presidential and legislative elections are scheduled to take place in early 2010 ) or , eventually , through force ( as it took over the gaza strip in 2007 ) .

in such a situation , the future existence and / or posture of the pa and its security forces ( on which millions of dollars and thousands of man - hours have been spent through u.s. - sponsored programs ) could be thrown into doubt .

another reason some might oppose an emphasis on palestinian development and reform is that u.s. security and economic assistance to palestinians could come to be seen as reinforcing the status quo .

a peace process with no end in sight could erode momentum for a two - state solution and intensify the jockeying between and among israelis and palestinians for alternatives , perhaps leading ultimately to greater conflict .

also , the attention and resources devoted to reform and to strengthening anti - hamas groups in the west bank could widen divisions between the two palestinian territories , given perceptions that residents of the gaza strip — almost totally dependent on humanitarian assistance and illicit economic activity under restrictive hamas rule and the virtual israeli / egyptian shutdown of its borders — are being neglected , left behind , or perhaps even targeted .

this could lead to heightened palestinian resentment of all parties promoting the peace process .

as discussed above ( see " israeli settlements and infrastructure " ) , extensive construction of israeli settlements in the west bank and east jerusalem since oslo may have complicated prospects for a two - state solution .

the historical tendency for settlement construction to increase during negotiations has led to palestinian and arab complaints aimed not only at israel , but also at the united states , as israel's ally and as both parties' designee as "monitor and judge" of the peace process's implementation .

although longstanding official u.s. policy opposes the settlements as "obstacles to peace" and insists that existing settlement blocs should not prejudice final - status negotiations , arab critics routinely charge that u.s. support of israel indirectly supports settlement activity .

the obama administration chose to make a settlement freeze ( pursuant to the roadmap ) one of the cornerstones of its approach to restarting the peace process .

public u.s. and israeli disagreement over the prospect of a settlement freeze lasted through summer 2009 and continued into the fall .

although the issue's centrality to the resumption of final - status negotiations was downgraded somewhat at the september 2009 trilateral meeting in new york , president obama nevertheless reaffirmed the importance of "real action" on restraining settlement activity .

differences have surfaced over what constitutes the type of settlement construction that would be subject to a freeze .

at various points israel has sought to exclude the following from a potential freeze: ( 1 ) construction projects already contracted , ( 2 ) construction within the bounds of existing communities ( building "up" but not "out" ) , ( 3 ) planning and permitting for construction that would begin following the end of a freeze , and ( 4 ) construction in east jerusalem .

israel also seeks to make an exception for so - called "natural growth," even though the roadmap explicitly calls for including it in a freeze .

israel has claimed that during the bush administration , the united states and israel reached an unwritten understanding that "israel could add homes in settlements it expected to keep [once a final resolution was reached] , as long as the construction was dictated by market demand , not subsidies. .

the accounts of former bush administration officials diverge in their characterization of u.s. - israel talks on the subject , but the obama administration has insisted that if understandings ever existed , it is not bound by them .

some observers , particularly arabs , assert that a settlement freeze should not be subject to negotiation .

they believe that israel is obligated to stop settlement construction because of its agreement to the terms of the roadmap , if not on other moral and legal grounds , seeking to reinforce their point by asking whether israel would countenance the palestinians negotiating down their security obligations under the roadmap .

the willingness of the obama administration to accept the partial and temporary moratorium on settlement building announced by israel in october 2009 ( see " obama's cairo speech and subsequent diplomacy " above ) may have been at least partly due to concerns in congress that the public debate over settlements had lasted too long and could damage u.s. - israeli relations , and / or that the administration's initial expectations were too drastic .

in may 2009 , a letter from 329 members of congress called on president obama to work "closely and privately" with israel on "areas of disagreement," and 76 senators signed a different letter to the president urging continued close relations with israel .

in june , politico quoted democratic congressman robert wexler , a member of the house foreign affairs subcommittee on the middle east and south asia , as saying that a freeze should apply "only to settlements outside israel's security fence , or wall , and should exclude territory that appears likely to ultimately remain part of israel. .

in august , while leading a delegation of 29 democratic members of congress in jerusalem , the jerusalem post reported that house majority leader steny hoyer "felt that there was more acceptance [in congress] of jewish construction in east jerusalem than in the settlements in the west bank. .

given the structure of israeli society and politics , it may be difficult to maintain a settlement freeze or any other external restraint on settlement activity for an indefinite period of time .

settlers affect the political and diplomatic calculus through ( 1 ) influence over key voting blocs in israel's coalition - based parliamentary system ( although they do not all share the same ideology or interests , settlers constitute about 6% of the israeli population — approximately 450,000 out of 7.2 million total ) ; ( 2 ) renegade actions to foment public protest and even violence ; and ( 3 ) what they represent for some symbolically , emotionally , and even spiritually as guardians of the last frontier for a country whose founding and initial survival depended on pioneering spirit in the face of adversity .

during the public debate of summer 2009 , the netanyahu government's announcement of new plans for construction and repeated insistence that outside actors will not dictate israeli policy demonstrated the government's sensitivity to these domestic concerns , or , at least , its willingness to claim that these concerns are constraints on its ability to comply with u.s. demands for a freeze .

some analysts have suggested that the obama administration and congress consider going beyond rhetoric to apply various forms of pressure on israel in order to compel it to restrain settlement activity .

loan guarantees figured prominently in the last significant u.s. - israeli diplomatic standoff over settlements — between president george h.w .

bush and prime minister yitzhak shamir in 1991 .

current legislation authorizing loan guarantees through fy2010 permits the u.s. government to make reductions in the guarantees equal in amount to israeli expenditures on settlement activity .

however , most analysts believe that any potential reductions are unlikely to have any practical financial effect on israel .

determining the proper role of arab states in israeli - palestinian affairs can be a challenge .

many observers believe that arab states are uniquely positioned to provide key incentives to israel and support to the palestinians .

while most arab states want to be seen as supporting a positive solution to the palestinian question because it is an issue of deep concern for their populations , they often differ with the international community and with one another on what they should do and how they should do it .

as discussed above ( see " obama's cairo speech and subsequent diplomacy " ) , the obama administration has encouraged arab states to take measures to gradually normalize their relations with israel .

many members of congress support the administration's efforts on this front , and believe that any israeli efforts to reduce or halt settlement building should be met reciprocally by normalization measures from arab states .

some small gulf arab and north african states that had ties with israel in the 1990s were reportedly willing in summer 2009 to renew them in the event of an israeli settlement freeze , but other arab states were unwilling to consider normalization under these conditions .

saudi arabia explained its position by insisting that because of past failures with incremental confidence - building measures , the "focus must be on the final settlement and on the final peace," as outlined in the arab peace initiative .

in addition to normalization with israel , observers have proposed other ways in which arab states could play a constructive role in the peace process , including: providing financial and political support to the palestinian authority and its leaders and to palestinian refugees ( through organizations such as the u.n .

relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east , or unrwa ) ; investing or encouraging investment by their companies and citizens in west bank industry and infrastructure ; halting or reducing smuggling into gaza ; facilitating talks aimed at ending palestinian factional and territorial division ; encouraging the plo to resume final - status negotiations without preconditions , and , if the negotiations resume , publicly supporting the plo and its leaders if they decide to make difficult concessions on final - status issues ( such as refugees and jerusalem ) .

many analysts believe that arab states have played an inconsistent role thus far .

egypt has been active in brokering palestinian unity talks , but with little concrete progress to show for its efforts .

arab states ( especially gulf states ) provided large amounts of aid to the hamas - led pa government in 2006-2007 after the united states and european union withdrew their aid , but following the reinstitution of u.s. and eu aid in mid - 2007 , most of them reduced contributions .

routinely , they make generous pledges ( including over $1.8 billion dollars in the wake of the 2008-2009 gaza conflict ) of aid to the palestinians , but often fulfill them only in part and after significant delay .

their reluctance to fulfill pledges may stem from misgivings over "picking sides" in palestinian factional disputes and from concerns that without imminent prospects either for domestic political unity or for progress on the peace process , any money contributed could be a waste .

on the part of the gulf states in particular , reluctance may also stem from a feeling that they are less responsible historically for the palestinians' current situation than israel , the united states , and europe .

however , several of the west bank investment projects — housing developments , industrial parks , superstores , entertainment complexes — that have been completed or been brought to various stages of proposal or construction in and around ramallah , bethlehem , jericho and the northern west bank in the past three years in an effort to jumpstart private sector development have been backed by gulf states or their citizens .

also , both palestinian mobile phone providers , jawwal / paltel and the newly - established wataniya , are majority - owned by gulf state investment companies .

