although much progress has been made in achieving the ambitious goals that congress established more than 35 years ago to restore and maintain the chemical , physical , and biological integrity of the nation's waters , long - standing problems persist , and new problems have emerged .

water quality problems are diverse , ranging from pollution runoff from farms and ranches , city streets , and other diffuse or "nonpoint" sources , to "point" source discharges of metals and organic and inorganic toxic substances from factories and sewage treatment plants .

the principal law that deals with polluting activity in the nation's streams , lakes , estuaries , and coastal waters is the federal water pollution control act ( p.l .

92-500 , enacted in 1972 ) , commonly known as the clean water act , or cwa .

it consists of two major parts: regulatory provisions that impose progressively more stringent requirements on industries and cities to abate pollution and meet the statutory goal of zero discharge of pollutants ; and provisions that authorize federal financial assistance for municipal wastewater treatment plant construction .

both parts are supported by research activities , plus permit and enforcement provisions .

programs at the federal level are administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; state and local governments have major day - to - day responsibilities to implement cwa programs through standard - setting , permitting , enforcement , and administering financial assistance programs .

the water quality restoration objective declared in the 1972 act was accompanied by statutory goals to eliminate the discharge of pollutants into navigable waters by 1985 and to attain , wherever possible , waters deemed "fishable and swimmable" by 1983 .

although those goals have not been fully achieved , considerable progress has been made , especially in controlling conventional pollutants ( suspended solids , bacteria , and oxygen - consuming materials ) discharged by industries and sewage treatment plants .

progress has been mixed in controlling discharges of toxic pollutants ( heavy metals , inorganic and organic chemicals ) , which are more numerous and can harm human health and the environment even when present in very small amounts — at the parts - per - billion level .

moreover , efforts to control pollution from diffuse sources , termed nonpoint source pollution ( rainfall runoff from urban , suburban , and agricultural areas , for example ) , are more recent , given the earlier emphasis on "point source" pollution ( discharges from industrial and municipal wastewater treatment plants ) .

overall , data reported by epa and states indicate that 45% of river and stream miles assessed by states and 47% of assessed lake acres do not meet applicable water quality standards and are impaired for one or more desired uses .

in 2006 epa issued an assessment of streams and small rivers and reported that 67% of u.s. stream miles are in poor or fair condition and that nutrients and streambed sediments have the largest adverse impact on the biological condition of these waters .

approximately 95,000 lakes and 544,000 river miles in the united states are under fish - consumption advisories ( including 100% of the great lakes and their connecting waters ) , due to chemical contaminants in lakes , rivers , and coastal waters , and one - third of shellfishing beds are closed or restricted , due to toxic pollutant contamination .

mercury is a contaminant of growing concern — as of 2003 , 45 states had issued partial or statewide fish or shellfish consumption advisories because of elevated mercury levels .

the last major amendments to the law were the water quality act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-4 ) .

these amendments culminated six years of congressional efforts to extend and revise the act and were the most comprehensive amendments since 1972 .

authorizations of appropriations for some programs provided in p.l .

100-4 , such as general grant assistance to states , research , and general epa support authorized in that law , expired in fy1990 and fy1991 .

authorizations for wastewater treatment funding expired in fy1994 .

none of these programs has lapsed , however , as congress has continued to appropriate funds to implement them .

epa , states , industry , and other citizens continue to implement the 1987 legislation , including meeting the numerous requirements and deadlines in it .

the clean water act has been viewed as one of the most successful environmental laws in terms of achieving its statutory goals , which have been widely supported by the public , but lately some have questioned whether additional actions to achieve further benefits are worth the costs .

criticism has come from industry , which has been the long - standing focus of the act's regulatory programs and often opposes imposition of new stringent and costly requirements .

criticism also has come from developers and property rights groups who contend that federal regulations ( particularly the act's wetlands permit program ) are a costly intrusion on private land - use decisions .

states and cities have traditionally supported water quality programs and federal funding to assist them in carrying out the law , but many have opposed cwa measures that they fear might impose new unfunded mandates .

many environmental groups believe that further fine - tuning is needed to maintain progress achieved to date and to address remaining water quality problems .

initially following enactment of amendments in 1987 , no major cwa legislative activity occurred .

in the 104 th congress ( 1995 ) , the house passed a comprehensive reauthorization bill that was opposed by the clinton administration and environmental groups ; it was not enacted .

since then , no comprehensive reauthorization legislation has been introduced , but beginning in the 106 th congress , a number of bills dealing with specific water quality issues in the law have been enacted — especially , legislation to reauthorize several existing cwa programs .

since the 107 th congress , one of the dominant cwa issues has been water infrastructure financing — that is , extension and modification of provisions of the act authorizing financial assistance for municipal wastewater treatment projects .

house and senate committees have approved bills and the house passed bills in the 110 th and 111 th congresses , but none has been enacted .

the remainder of this report discusses cwa issues of particular interest in the 111 th congress , beginning with discussion of two issues that were prominent — water infrastructure funding , and regulatory protection of wetlands .

it then describes several other issues that also received attention .

it concludes with a discussion of water quality appropriations and water infrastructure as part of economic stimulus legislation in 2009 .

the year 2007 marked the 35 th anniversary of passage of the clean water act and 20 years since the last major amendments to the law .

while , as noted , there has been measurable clean water progress as a result of the act , observers and analysts agree that significant water pollution problems remain .

however , there is less agreement about what solutions are needed and whether new legislation is required .

several key water quality issues exist: evaluating actions to implement existing provisions of the law , assessing whether additional steps are necessary to achieve overall goals of the act that have not yet been attained , ensuring that progress made to date is not lost through diminished attention to water quality needs , and defining the appropriate federal role in guiding and paying for clean water infrastructure and other activities .

for some time , efforts to comprehensively amend the act have stalled as interests have debated whether and exactly how to change the law .

many issues that might be addressed involve making difficult tradeoffs between impacts on different sectors of the economy , taking action when there is technical or scientific uncertainty , and allocating governmental responsibilities among federal , state , local , and tribal entities for implementing the law .

these factors partly explain why congress has recently favored focusing legislative attention on narrow bills to extend or modify selected cwa programs , rather than taking up comprehensive proposals .

other factors also have been at work .

these include a general reluctance by most members of congress to address controversial environmental issues in view of the slim majorities held by political parties in the house and the senate ; and a lack of presidential initiatives on clean water issues ( neither the clinton nor the bush administration proposed cwa legislation ) .

in addition , for some time after the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , congress was more focused on security , terrorism , and iraq war issues than on many other topics , including environmental protection .

as a result of the 2006 mid - term elections and changed congressional leadership beginning in 2007 , many observers expected that the 110 th congress would pursue oversight of clean water and other environmental programs .

greater interest in environmental issues was apparent , but no comprehensive legislation was enacted .

a particular legislative focus was water infrastructure financing legislation , specifically reauthorization of the act's financial aid program ( discussed next in this report ) .

also on the congressional agenda was consideration of the geographic reach of the clean water act over the nation's waters and wetlands , in light of court rulings — including two supreme court decisions — that have narrowed the law's regulatory jurisdiction , but in ways that are somewhat unclear .

the 2008 election encouraged many policymakers and stakeholders to anticipate much greater attention to environmental issues , including clean water , by the 111 th congress and the obama administration .

during the 2008 presidential campaign , candidate obama supported several issues , including preservation of wetlands , great lakes restoration legislation , water conservation , regulation of large animal feeding operations , and full funding of clean water infrastructure assistance programs .

funding for water infrastructure projects , discussed next in this report , received early attention in the 111 th congress in light of interest in utilizing increased investment in public works projects — including wastewater — in order to stimulate the faltering u.s. economy , but the obama administration did not present specific legislative proposals concerning water quality .

as discussed below , the 111 th congress considered a number of water quality issues through oversight and legislation .

two bills amending the cwa were enacted and are discussed .

one dealt with extending a moratorium for cwa permitting of certain vessels ( p.l .

111-215 ) , and the other dealt with ensuring that federal agencies and departments pay localities for reasonable costs associated with managing stormwater pollution from federal properties ( p.l .

111-378 ) .

several other issues affecting efforts to achieve the goals and objectives of the clean water act drew interest during the 111 th congress through oversight and legislation .

two bills were enacted — a bill concerning pollutant discharges from vessels , and another dealing with federal agencies' responsibility to pay for stormwater charges .

clean water issues also were addressed by congress in the context of appropriations .

president bush's fy2009 budget was presented on february 5 , 2008 .

overall , the budget sought $7.1 billion for epa programs and activities , 5% less than congress appropriated for fy2008 .

the request included a number of reductions for water quality programs .

it sought $555 million for the clean water srf program ( 20% below the fy2008 level ) and , as in previous budgets , requested no funding for congressionally earmarked water infrastructure grants .

in addition , the budget asked for 8% less for nonpoint pollution management grants ( $184.5 million , compared with $200.8 million in fy2008 ) and sought no funding for the targeted watershed grants program , a competitive grant program that provides funding for community - driven watershed restoration projects ; it received $10 million in fy2008 appropriations .

in june 2008 , a house appropriations subcommittee approved a bill with fy2009 funds for epa .

the bill included $850 million for clean water srf capitalization grants ( $295 million above the administration's request and $161 million above the fy2008 level ) and $180 million for congressionally earmarked water infrastructure grants .

no further action occurred before the start of the new fiscal year , on october 1 , 2008 .

however , at the end of september , congress and the president agreed to legislation providing partial - year funding for epa and most other agencies and departments .

this bill , the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing resolution act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) , provided funding through march 6 , 2009 , at fy2008-enacted levels ( i.e. , $689 million for clean water srf grants ) .

a second short - term cr was enacted on march 6 ( p.l .

111-6 ) , while congress was finishing consideration of a full - year omnibus fy2009 appropriations bill that president obama signed on march 11 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

it provided $689 million in regular appropriations for the full year , but congress also provided $4.0 billion more in economic stimulus funds , which are discussed next .

the 2009 omnibus appropriations act also included $183.5 million for earmarked water infrastructure grants .

as the economy slid into recession in 2008 , and fiscal problems began to affect all levels of government , states and cities have increasingly looked to the federal government for assistance in addressing the nation's faltering economic conditions .

as a result , interest in using federal government spending to stimulate u.s. economic recovery intensified , and soon after taking office in january 2009 , president obama urged congress to enact a multi - billion dollar fiscal stimulus bill .

among the options that were under discussion , many favored making accelerated investments in the nation's public infrastructure in order to create jobs while also meeting infrastructure needs .

legislative focus centered on providing supplemental appropriations for a wide range of government programs , including the clean water srf program .

because of the urgency of responding to the economic downturn , emphasis was on providing funds for projects that could move to construction quickly , which are often referred to as "shovel ready" or "ready to go" projects .

to support arguments for generous spending levels in a stimulus bill , interest groups came forward with lists and estimates of "ready to go" projects .

for example , state and local water agencies reportedly identified from $9 to $20 billion in wastewater treatment projects that are "ready to go. .

legislators moved quickly on these issues , because president obama urged passage of economic stimulus legislation by mid - february 2009 .

on january 28 , 2009 , the house passed h.r .

1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act , providing supplemental appropriations for a number of existing federal infrastructure and other programs , including $6 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants .

on february 10 , the senate passed an amended version of the legislation , providing $4 billion for clean water srf grants , and on february 13 , the house and senate agreed to a reconciled version of the legislation providing $4 billion for clean water srf grants that will be available through september 30 , 2010 .

president obama signed the bill into law on february 17 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

clean water srf funds provided in the bill were distributed to states according to the existing cwa state - by - state formulation that applies to regular srf appropriations , but the bill waived the cwa requirement that states provide a 20% match to the federal capitalization grant .

also , the legislation allowed states to provide assistance to communities in the form of negative interest loans , principal forgiveness , grants , or a combination .

states were to give preference to activities that can start and finish quickly , with a goal that at least 50% of the funds go to activities that could be initiated within 120 days of enactment .

further , states were to give priority to wastewater projects that could proceed to construction within 12 months of enactment , and epa was directed to redistribute any srf capitalization grant funds that were not under contract or construction within that time .

the legislation also directed states to use at least 20% of their capitalization grants to fund projects that address green infrastructure , water or energy efficiency improvements , or other environmentally innovative activities .

the supplemental clean water srf funds provided by p.l .

111-5 were nearly six times larger than funds appropriated to states in the regular fy2009 appropriations act .

most state and local government officials welcomed the help provided by the stimulus funds in addressing long - standing infrastructure needs , but they noted that significant funding needs will remain even after the stimulus money has been spent .

despite the tight deadlines specified in the law , all states were able to meet the requirement that funds be under contract or construction by the one - year anniversary in february 2010 ; thus , epa did not re - distribute any funds to other states .

president obama delivered details of the administration's fy2010 budget request on may 7 , 2009 .

he requested $10.5 billion in total funding for epa .

the most significant investments in the fy2010 budget included funds for water infrastructure .

specifically , the budget sought $2.4 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants , nearly 2.5 times more than fy2009 appropriations .

epa estimated this funding level would finance 1,000 clean water projects .

the budget also sought new funding for great lakes restoration efforts — requesting $475 million for multiple programs and projects , including remediation of contaminated sediments ( the great lakes legacy act would not be separately funded ) .

about one - half of the total would be provided by epa to other agencies for their great lakes programs and projects , such as the department of agriculture and department of the interior .

congress reached final agreement on legislation providing epa's fy2010 appropriation at the end of october 2009 , several weeks after the start of the new fiscal year .

congress agreed to provide $2.1 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants and $187 million for congressionally directed water infrastructure special project grants .

while providing substantial funding for wastewater projects , the bill also imposed conditions on how the money could be used .

building on requirements in the 2009 economic stimulus legislation , the bill directed that not less than 30% of the clean water srf capitalization grants in excess of $1 billion be used to provide additional subsidization in the form of negative interest loans , forgiveness of principal , or grants .

also , to the extent there were sufficient applications , not less than 20% of funds provided under a state's srf program were to be used for green infrastructure , water efficiency , or energy efficiency improvements .

as passed , the bill included language requiring application of the davis - bacon act's prevailing wage provisions for clean water projects .

in november 2009 , epa issued policy guidance stating the agency's interpretation that , under the language as passed , prevailing wage rules would apply not only to assistance agreements funded with fy2010 appropriations , but also to all assistance agreements executed on or after october 30 , 2009 , and prior to october 1 , 2010 .

industry groups and some states responded that , by applying the davis - bacon requirements retroactively , as well as forward , the policy memo was unnecessarily broad and would needlessly delay some projects .

criticism of epa's guidance on davis - bacon applicability contributed to the senate's failure to take action on cwa water infrastructure reauthorization legislation , s. 1005 , discussed above .

the bill supported the president's $475 million request for great lakes restoration .

in connection with these funds , the house and senate appropriations committees directed epa to develop plans for spending the money and also directed epa to report annually to congress on program accomplishments and specific funding levels for participating federal agencies .

president obama signed the bill on october 30 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-88 ) .

president obama presented his fy2011 budget request to congress on february 1 , 2010 .

overall , the president's budget called for a freeze on non - security discretionary expenditures at epa and other federal agencies .

consequently , the total request for epa was $10.02 billion , compared with $10.3 billion enacted for fy2010 .

the fy2011 request sought $2.0 billion for clean water srf capitalization grants , which was $100 million less than fy2010 , but still an increase above recent years' funding levels .

as in the 2009 economic recovery legislation and the fy2010 regular appropriations , the president's budget requested that states use 20% of their capitalization grants for "green infrastructure" projects and also use 30% of assistance in the form of additional subsidization ( such as loan forgiveness ) to communities that face difficulties in paying for infrastructure projects .

one item that drew some congressional attention was the president's request for great lakes restoration .

this funding would continue the initiative created in the fy2010 budget to target the most significant environmental problems of the great lakes ecosystem and to coordinate the work of multiple federal agencies in restoring the lakes .

the budget requested $300 million for these activities in fy2011 , because most of the $475 million appropriated in fy2010 was still uncommitted and unspent as of february 2010 , when the fy2011 budget request was submitted .

only 8% of the 2010 funds had been obligated by that time , and some of that year's funds won't be spent until 2011 , according to epa .

congress took only limited action on fy2011 funding for epa before the start of the new fiscal year on october 1 , 2010: a house appropriations subcommittee approved a bill in july , but no further action followed .

at the end of september 2010 , the house and senate passed a continuing resolution to extend fy2010 funding levels for epa and other federal agencies and departments until december 3 , 2010 , because no fy2011 appropriations bills had been enacted by october 1 .

president obama signed the continuing resolution on september 30 ( p.l .

111-242 ) .

two other short - term continuing resolutions were passed after december 3 ( p.l .

111-290 and p.l .

111-317 ) , while the house and senate attempted to resolve appropriations issues for some portion or all of the remainder of fy2011 .

at the end of december , congress passed a fourth continuing resolution that extends fy2010 funding levels for epa and other agencies and departments through march 4 , 2011 ( p.l .

111-322 ) .

thus , final resolution of fy2011 appropriations will occur early in the 112 th congress .

