research on climate change has identified a wide array of sources that emit "greenhouse gases" ( ghgs ) — compounds that trap the sun's heat , with effects on earth's climate .

the largest sources of these emissions , particularly in developed economies , are electric utilities and the transportation sector .

in the united states , electricity generation accounts for about 40% of the emissions of carbon dioxide , the principal greenhouse gas , or about one - third of the emissions of the six major ghgs combined .

the transportation sector , including cars , trucks , buses , trains , ships , and aircraft , accounts for roughly one - third of u.s. co 2 emissions , or 28% of the six ghgs combined .

aircraft account for about 10% of the u.s. transportation sector's ghg emissions , or 2.6% to 3.4% of total u.s. ghg emissions .

in the united states , aviation emissions have grown more slowly than those of other transportation sectors , and slightly less than the emissions of the economy as a whole over the last two decades , but worldwide aviation has been among the faster - growing sources of ghg emissions .

according to the commission of the european union , emissions from international aviation increased by almost 70% between 1990 and 2002 .

the united nations intergovernmental panel on climate change ( ipcc ) , in a 1999 study that is still widely cited , projected that the impact of aircraft emissions on climate would be 2.6 to 11 times as large in 2050 as it was in 1992 .

if , as many argue , ghg emissions must be reduced 50% to 80% in that time period , emissions from aviation would need to be drastically reduced to provide a proportional share of the targeted reduction .

u.s. emissions from aircraft have run counter to the worldwide trends and projections .

since 1990 , aircraft ghg emissions have declined as a percentage of total u.s. emissions ( see table 1 ) .

the biggest factor in the decline was a 54% decrease in emissions from domestic military operations , which more than offset increases in domestic commercial and general aviation emissions .

emissions from domestic operation of commercial aircraft grew 13% between 1990 and 2007 .

that figure was well below the growth in air travel: according to the air transport association ( the association that represents the domestic airlines ) passenger - miles traveled domestically on u.s. commercial airlines increased 74% between 1990 and 2007 and cargo revenue - ton miles increased 136% .

two types of efficiency increases contributed to the relatively slow growth in u.s. commercial aircraft emissions .

first , load factors ( the percentage of seats occupied ) increased to 79.8% in 2007 , compared with 60.4% in 1990 .

second , fuel efficiency itself increased , as older , less efficient aircraft were retired in favor of newer , more efficient models .

these savings can be substantial .

for example , american airlines estimates that the 18-year old md - 80s currently flying use 35% more fuel than the boeing 737-800 aircraft that are to replace them over the next two years .

epa's inventory of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions and sinks shows that domestic flights of all kinds ( military , commercial aircraft , and general aviation ) accounted for about 10% of the ghg emissions from the u.s. transportation sector in 2006 — 2.6% of overall u.s. ghg emissions .

aviation's impact on climate may be greater than these figures suggest , however , for two reasons .

first , emissions resulting from international transportation are not currently included in the u.s. emission totals .

these emissions totaled 52.7 million metric tons in 2007 .

if they were included in the u.s. aviation statistics , emissions from aircraft of all types would have accounted for 3.4% of the u.s. ghg total .

second , the bulk of the aviation sector's emissions occur high in the atmosphere , where their impact on climate is greater than that of emissions at ground level .

according to a number of sources , the total impact of aviation could be around twice the impact of carbon dioxide alone when this factor is taken into account .

emissions from jet aircraft also lead to the formation of cirrus clouds , as the condensation trails ( contrails ) of water vapor and sulfur particles emitted from engines at high altitudes form ice crystals that persist as clouds under some atmospheric conditions .

scientists are uncertain how to measure the occurrence and impact of such clouds , but they are reasonably certain that the clouds add to the greenhouse effect of aircraft emissions , perhaps substantially .

thus , while the precise share of aviation in total greenhouse gas emissions depends on what is included , and the impact of some emissions is unclear , there is little doubt that aviation is a significant contributor to u.s. and world ghg emissions .

as policy makers consider whether the federal government should regulate aircraft ghg emissions ( versus continuing to rely solely on market forces to determine the level of emissions ) , some have turned their attention to the potential for regulation under the clean air act .

in december 2007 , epa received two petitions requesting that it exercise that authority to regulate ghg emissions from aircraft engines .

epa has not responded to these petitions , nor has it promulgated regulations to control co 2 from any source , to date .

in 2003 , responding to an earlier petition to regulate ghgs from cars and trucks , the agency maintained that it did not have authority under the clean air act to do so .

that determination was challenged by massachusetts and other petitioners , and in a 2007 decision , the u.s. supreme court found that ghgs are air pollutants within the clean air act's definition , and thus , epa has authority to regulate them if it finds that they "cause , or contribute to , air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. .

using the authority of section 231 of the act , the epa administrator may propose emission standards applicable to any air pollutant from any class of aircraft engines which in the administrator's judgment causes , or contributes to , air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

the administrator is required to consult with the faa administrator and hold public hearings before finalizing such standards .

the president may disapprove of such standards if the secretary of transportation finds that they would create a hazard to aircraft safety .

the december 2007 petitions request that epa make a finding that aircraft ghg emissions do endanger public health or welfare , and that the agency adopt regulations that allow a range of compliance approaches: these might include emission limits , operational practices , fees , a cap - and - trade system , minimizing engine idling time , employing single engine taxiing , or use of ground - side electricity measures to replace the use of fuel - burning auxiliary power units at airport gates .

the aircraft petitions are among several others that epa has received to regulate ghg emissions from cars and trucks , ships , and nonroad engines and vehicles .

as a result , whatever decision is made ( for any one of these sectors ) is considered likely to affect the decisions regarding all the others — ultimately , a large portion of the economy .

furthermore , as soon as greenhouse gases become "subject to regulation" under any section of the act , new stationary sources , such as electric generating units , will be required to install best available ghg control technology under the act's new source review / prevention of significant deterioration provisions .

given the relative size of aircraft emissions as compared to power plants , cars , and trucks , aviation was never likely to be the first sector whose ghg emissions epa would regulate .

thus , not surprisingly , epa has taken no action on the aircraft petitions , to date .

the agency is moving ahead with regulation of ghg emissions from cars and trucks , however: on may 19 , at a press conference in the white house rose garden , the president announced that epa would proceed to set greenhouse gas emission standards for new motor vehicles , in coordination with new fuel efficiency standards to be established by the national highway traffic safety administration .

a formal set of proposed standards appeared in a joint epa - nhtsa notice in the september 28 , 2009 federal register .

both epa and the president have made clear that , despite their action under existing authority , they support legislation targeted more specifically at ghgs , and would prefer that congress enact a bill addressing ghg emissions specifically rather than epa using its current authority .

new legislation might be more efficient — clearly allowing sources in different industries to trade emission allowances to each other , for example — and it might avoid challenge in the courts if congress were specific regarding the authority it was giving epa to control ghg emissions .

the current language of the act , while arguably providing regulatory authority , is sufficiently vague that legal challenges are considered almost a certainty as epa proceeds .

this might delay implementation of controls .

the two options — proceeding under the clean air act or supporting new legislation — are not mutually exclusive , however .

existing epa authority under the clean air act can be used as a backstop , while congress considers granting new authority .

in the meantime , epa's development of regulations is among the factors motivating congress and interested parties to agree on a legislative approach .

ghg legislation has been a high priority of the current congress .

attention has centered on legislation ( h.r .

2454 in the house ) that would cap emissions of ghgs economy - wide and establish an allowance trading system for major emitters .

 ( for a general discussion of how such cap - and - trade systems work , see crs report rl34502 , emission allowance allocation in a cap - and - trade program: options and considerations , by [author name scrubbed] , especially appendix a. ) .

as noted , aviation is considered a significant source of ghg emissions .

nevertheless , the aviation sector has not generally been targeted directly by the climate change bills introduced in congress to date .

an exception was the reported version of h.r .

2454 , the waxman - markey bill .

as reported by the house energy and commerce committee in may , the bill would have required epa to promulgate best achievable control technology standards for emissions of ghgs from new aircraft and new engines used in aircraft by december 31 , 2012 .

this requirement was removed from the version of the bill that passed the house june 26 .

instead , the house - passed version encourages the development of a global framework for the regulation of ghg emissions from civil aircraft within the international civil aviation organization .

and , instead of direct regulation , the bill would deal with aviation emissions indirectly: by including the refining sector in its overall emissions cap , it would address the aviation sector's emissions "upstream. .

capping emissions from fuels upstream of the air carriers and eventually lowering the cap more than 80% , as the bill would do , could have several effects: first , it would provide an incentive for refiners to produce lower - carbon fuels ; second , it would increase the price of fuels , as refiners either purchased additional allowances for their emissions or were forced to reduce production , in essence rationing fuels through a higher price in order to stay beneath the emissions cap ; third , as the cost of fuel increased , the demand for fuel - efficient aircraft would increase ; and fourth , consumers of aviation services ( airline passengers and shippers of freight ) would have incentives to replace higher - cost air transportation with lower - cost alternatives ( eg , video - conferencing by business and government entities , increased reliance on lower - emission forms of transport , greater reliance on local sources of goods , etc. ) .

the cost of air travel and of air freight has been reduced substantially since its inception , as aircraft have become more efficient and airlines have reduced other costs in competitive markets .

according to ata , the cost of domestic air travel in real ( inflation - adjusted ) terms has declined by 51.9% since 1978 .

by contrast , controlling ghg emissions , if it were done , would likely increase the price of air travel and air freight , reducing demand in comparison to a business - as - usual ( i.e. , without ghg controls ) scenario .

greenhouse gas emission controls of some sort may affect u.s. aviation in the next few years , be they specific controls on engine emissions , emission caps applied to the sector as a whole , upstream caps ( on fuel refiners ) , or carbon taxes .

depending on their stringency , the effects of most of these approaches could ripple through the economy , providing additional incentives for aircraft manufacturers to improve the fuel efficiency of aircraft , raising the cost of air travel and air freight , and providing further pressure to improve the air traffic control system .

u.s. airlines and air freight companies , like many other sectors , would prefer that they be allowed to address the ghg issue through voluntary measures .

unlike some other sectors , they have achieved substantial increases in fuel economy over the last three decades or more , and in the current recession , their ghg emissions are at roughly their 1990 levels .

compared to other means of transportation , in fact , u.s. commercial aviation's record on ghg emissions over the last two decades is much better .

as shown in table 2 , ghg emissions from u.s. commercial aviation increased less than those of any other segment of the transportation market , despite the demand for aviation services ( measured in passenger - miles traveled ) increasing at a faster pace than the other sectors .

but the sector is still an important source of emissions , and its projected growth indicates that it may outstrip the economy as a whole's rate of emission growth in future years .

thus , it is likely to be included in some fashion in any mandatory economy - wide approach to reducing ghg emissions .

on a practical level , reducing emissions from aviation may be complicated: the sector is composed of tens of thousands of mobile emission sources ; thus , direct controls on engines or aircraft face obstacles that do not apply in industries composed of fewer and stationary emission sources .

even monitoring the relevant emissions for this sector is difficult .

the sector's emissions affect climate in several ways .

controlling only co 2 emissions might leave other impacts of aircraft on climate unaffected .

more research is needed to identify the precise effects of some of these , such as the impact of contrails on cirrus cloud formation , and the effect of such clouds on climate change .

the sector's impressive progress in making itself more energy - efficient in recent years poses obstacles as well: improving load factors was relatively easy when they were at 60% ; at the current level , roughly 80% , one begins to approach the limits of further improvement .

some means of emission reduction are beyond the industry's control , including the pace of modernization of the air traffic control system , and the degree to which aeronautical research and engine modifications can reduce fuel consumption .

in both cases , emission reduction may depend , at least in part , on the actions of government agencies — the faa and nasa , in particular .

according to ata , funding for nasa and faa aviation environmental r&d programs has been cut by approximately 50 percent in the past 10 years .

finally , the sector faces controls from foreign countries , particularly the european union .

international negotiations for a post - kyoto - protocol emissions control scheme may give rise to emission limits in other countries , as well .

as discussed , congress and the administration have a number of options , including several forms of legislation ; regulation by epa under the existing clean air act is another possibility .

if the administration so chooses , the existing clean air act might prove a particularly important tool to bring interested parties to the table , while providing a backdrop to consideration of legislation by congress .

