the foreign assistance act of 1961 ( p.l .

87-195 ; 22 u.s.c .

2151 et seq .

 ) , enacted at the behest of president kennedy , sought to organize and implement u.s. foreign assistance programs with a commitment to long - range economic assistance to the developing world .

the president , in a "special message to the congress on foreign aid," delivered march 22 , 1961 , described the u.s. foreign aid programs emerging from world war ii as [b]ureaucratically fragmented , awkward and slow , its administration is diffused over a haphazard and irrational structure covering at least four departments and several other agencies .

the program is based on a series of legislative measures and administrative procedures conceived at different times and for different purposes , many of them now obsolete , inconsistent and unduly rigid and thus unsuited for our present needs and purposes .

its weaknesses have begun to undermine confidence in our effort both here and abroad .

president kennedy went on to note the declining prestige of the united states' foreign aid apparatus and the negative impact of that decline on administering and staffing programs abroad .

the president also cited the uneven and undependable short - term financing of programs and the resulting disincentive for long - term efficient planning .

congress and the executive branch worked together to enact the foreign assistance act of 1961 to address these shortcomings at a time when much of the developing world was emerging as newly independent states , when those new nations were , "without exception ... under communist pressure," and when "the free industrialized nations" found themselves in a position "to assist the less - developed nations on a long - term basis ... [as they find themselves] on the threshold of achieving sufficient economic , social and political strength and self - sustained growth to stand permanently on their own feet. .

though the original foreign assistance act of 1961 lengthened the authorization time frame for funding development assistance to five years , other programs were authorized for shorter periods .

the act still required occasional reauthorization legislation to renew programs beyond that original time frame , and congress retained its role of appropriating funds .

the original act authorized the funding levels shown in table 1 .

through 1985 , congress regularly enacted new authorization legislation or amended the original act to update authorization time frames , and to incorporate newer programs and authorities .

from 1986 on , however , congress turned more frequently to enacting freestanding authorities that did not amend the 1961 act , and included language in annual appropriations measures to waive the requirement to keep authorizations current .

thus , sections in the foreign assistance act of 1961 , in many instances , do not refer to authorization beyond fiscal years 1986 and 1987 ( unless the program was added to the act by an amendment enacted after that period ) , but programs are continued through appropriations .

 table 3 presents the authorities enacted in the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , and the corresponding appropriations that fund those authorities in the current foreign assistance appropriations act .

the left - side column of table 3 cites sections of the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as amended , that authorize programs , and provides the latest year for which authorization is enacted .

sections that establish a need for such a program — in the form of policy or finding statements , for example — are not cited .

the foreign assistance act of 1961 is organized in a conventional manner , however , so those sections that state policy , findings , program requirements , or implementing structure can be found in the text of the law in sections proximate to the authorizing section .

all of the foreign assistance act of 1961 is stated in the united states code , beginning at 22 u.s.c .

2151 .

for each section that states the president's power to authorize funds , the relevant u.s. code citation and year of enactment is included here .

in nearly all cases , these sections have been substantially amended , or rewritten altogether , subsequent to enactment .

this table reflects the language as amended .

though the sections generally afford the president the authority to furnish whatever assistance the section establishes , section 622 ( a ) and ( c ) ( 22 u.s.c .

2382 ( a ) , ( c ) ) of the act states that nothing contained in this act shall be construed to infringe upon the powers or functions of the secretary of state... .

under the direction of the president , the secretary of state shall be responsible for the continuous supervision and general direction of economic assistance , military assistance , and military education and training programs , including but not limited to determining where there shall be a military assistance ( including civic action ) or a military education and training program for a country and the value thereof , to the end that such programs are effectively integrated both at home and abroad and the foreign policy of the united states is best served thereby .

in many instances , the president has delegated his authority to the secretary of state , the administrator of the united states agency for international development , or some other appropriate office holder .

delegations of authority are to be found , either in whole text or as a reference , in the u.s. code , at sections corresponding to the section of the foreign assistance act of 1961 that states the relevant authority .

the right - side column of table 3 states appropriations levels that correspond to the authorized program , as enacted in the department of state , foreign operations , and related programs appropriations act , 2012 ( division i of the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 ; p.l .

112-74 ; 125 stat .

786 at 1164 ) .

the general provisions title in an appropriations act usually states conditions for administering the appropriations .

in table 3 , general provisions sections that state conditionality and terms that might be applicable to the aid being provided are also listed , and a statute citation is provided to assist the reader who might wish to read in further detail .

general provisions measures that apply to the entire appropriations act are cited only at chapter 1 — policy , development assistance authorizations ; they are numerous and apply to most authorities .

such general provisions sections prohibit assistance for reasons relating to terrorism , military overthrows , and debt arrearages , to name a few .

