for over 30 years , the federal communications commission ( fcc or commission ) required broadcast licensees to present controversial issues of public importance and to do so in a manner that was fair and balanced .

this requirement came to be known as the "fairness doctrine. .

in practice , it required broadcasters to identify issues of public importance , decide to cover those issues , and then to afford the best representatives of the opposing views on the issue the opportunity to present their case to the community .

many broadcasters complained that the fairness doctrine was overly burdensome and inhibited their ability to cover issues of public importance .

those in favor of the doctrine believed that it ensured vibrant discussion over the public airwaves .

after a number of proceedings examining the effects of the fairness doctrine on broadcasters , the fcc abolished the doctrine in 1987 .

the fcc reasoned that increased competition in the marketplace , first amendment concerns , and evidence that the fairness doctrine actually chilled speech rather than facilitating it justified abandoning the policy .

discussion continues among scholars and lawmakers regarding the fairness doctrine's effectiveness , constitutionality , and reinstatement .

some believe the fairness doctrine should be resurrected to promote public discourse , while others believe the doctrine should never be reinstated because it inhibits the free exchange of ideas .

for example , as recently as the 109 th congress , bills were introduced in congress to reinstate the fairness doctrine .

on the other hand , in the 111 th congress , there have been a number of bills introduced that would prevent the fcc from reinstating the fairness doctrine .

this report will discuss the history of the fairness doctrine , enforcement of the doctrine by the fcc , abolition of it by the fcc , efforts to effect and to prevent its reinstatement , and potential constitutional issues with reinstating the doctrine as applied to broadcasters and as applied to satellite and cable television providers .

it will be updated as warranted .

since the repeal of the fairness doctrine , debate among legislators regarding whether to reinstate the doctrine has continued .

below are the bills related to the fairness doctrine that were introduced in the most recent congresses , as well as a discussion of the recent correspondence between the chairman of the house subcommittee on communications and technology and chairman genachowski .

this bill would deprive the fcc of the authority to re - promulgate or reinstate the fairness doctrine .

these bills are identical to the house bill of the same name .

section 10 of the district of columbia voting rights act of 2009 , as it was passed by the senate , would create a new section in the communications act , section 303a .

section 303a would prevent the fcc from reinstituting "the requirement that broadcasters present or ascertain opposing viewpoints on issues of public importance" or "any similar requirement that broadcasters meet programming quotas or guidelines for issues of public importance. .

section 9 of the same bill makes clear that "[n]othing in section 303a shall be construed to limit the authority of the commission regarding matters unrelated to a requirement that broadcasters present or ascertain opposing viewpoints on issues of public importance. .

these sections , taken together , appear to prevent the fcc from reinstating the fairness doctrine , or any similar requirement upon broadcasters in the future .

this bill would deprive the fcc of the authority to re - promulgate or reinstate the fairness doctrine .

on may 31 , 2011 , chairman upton of the house subcommittee on communications and technology , along with other members of the energy and commerce committee , sent a letter to the chairman of the fcc urging the commission to remove the rules in the code of federal regulations that reference the fairness doctrine , as well as the political - editorial and personal attack rules ( 47 c.f.r .

§§ 73.1910 , 76.209 , 76.1612 , 76.1613 ) .

while these rules are largely regarded as dead letters , the chairman , nonetheless , asked that , in light of president obama's executive order asking agencies to remove unwarranted regulations , the commission begin with removing these regulations that most agree should no longer be enforced .

on june 6 , 2011 , chairman julius genachowski responded indicating that commission staff is expected to recommend the removal of these regulations from the code of federal regulations .

chairman genachowski also expressed his support for the removal of those regulations .

the letter also identified a number of statutory provision that congress might consider amending or removing due to their obsolescence .

