severe thunderstorms and tornadoes affect communities across the united states every year , causing fatalities , destroying property and crops , and disrupting businesses .

state and local governments are typically the first to respond to the consequences of extreme weather events , but the federal government has responsibilities for forecasting and issuing warnings to citizens and communities lying in harm's way .

when severe weather catastrophes overwhelm the resources of state and local governments , the stafford act authorizes the president to issue major disaster or emergency declarations , resulting in the distribution of a wide range of federal aid to those affected .

also , u.s. department of agriculture programs , such as federal crop insurance and emergency disaster loans , can help farmers recover financially from severe weather disasters even without a presidential disaster declaration .

many observers note that although the number of lives lost each year to natural hazards in the united states has decreased , the costs of major disasters continues to rise .

according to the national science and technology council: "due to changes in population demographics and more complex weather - sensitive infrastructure , americans today are more vulnerable than ever to severe weather events caused by tornadoes , hurricanes , severe storms , heat waves , and winter weather. .

whether this assertion is accurate , and whether a trend of increasing costs due to extreme thunderstorms and tornadoes exists , are matters of debate ( see discussion below , for example , on "normalizing" costs of tornadoes ) .

however , despite well - documented improvements in severe thunderstorm and tornado detection and warning systems over the past 100 years , outbreaks of these types of storms still have the capability of causing enormous damage and loss of life in the united states in the 21 st century .

for example , in 2011 a series of tornado and severe weather outbreaks caused over 550 fatalities in the united states , and approximately $28 billion in total property damage .

the total fatalities in 2011 were the most since modern record - keeping began in 1950 , and 2011 ties with 1936 as the second - deadliest year for tornado deaths ( in 1925 , 794 tornado - related deaths were reported ) .

nearly 1,700 tornadoes were reported in 2011 , including 59 "killer tornadoes," according to the storm prediction center of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , making 2011 one of the top three most active tornado years since 1950 .

the active 2011 year was followed , however , by a year with far fewer reported tornadoes ( 939 ) .

in fact , 2012 and 2010 had 22 and 21 "killer tornadoes," respectively , resulting in 70 deaths in 2012 and 45 deaths in 2010 .

in 2013 , the january through april number of reported tornadoes ( 114 reported , 101 reports still pending ) was running well below the 1991-2010 average tornado count for that four - month period ( 300 tornadoes ) .

however , on may 20 , 2013 , the town of moore , oklahoma , was struck by a large and extremely destructive tornado ( ranked ef - 5 , the most destructive on a scale of 0-5 ; ef rankings , or intensity scale , for tornadoes are discussed in appendix ) .

preliminary reports indicate dozens of fatalities due to this single tornado .

although it is too early in 2013 to tell whether the may 20 tornado is an anomaly , or represents the beginning of an active and deadly tornado season , it does confirm that the bulk of damage and fatalities are caused by the largest and most powerful tornadoes ( ef - 4 and ef - 5 ) , even though the large majority of tornadoes that are reported each year are ef - 0 through ef - 3 .

this report discusses issues that may be of interest to congress in three general categories: ( 1 ) forecasting and issuing warnings for severe thunderstorms and tornadoes ; ( 2 ) the role of mitigation ; and ( 3 ) the effect of climate change .

it also describes the role of the national weather service in forecasting severe weather and communicating the risk to communities and individuals .

the appendix describes in more detail the risk these hazards pose to communities and individuals ; where , when , how , and why they occur in the united states ; and what damage they may cause .

this report focuses on the risk from severe thunderstorms and tornadoes to the public and infrastructure , the federally sponsored forecast and warning systems , federally backed efforts to improve the scientific understanding of severe weather phenomena , and efforts to mitigate the risk of catastrophe .

congress has oversight and funding responsibilities for the federal agencies charged with these tasks .

at issue is whether those programs are effective at reducing damage , injuries , and loss of life from severe thunderstorms and tornadoes .

also at issue is the concept of disaster resilience ; namely , those precautions and strategies — such as improved building materials and structural systems — that decrease the vulnerability of communities and individuals to severe thunderstorms and tornadoes .

the federal role in supporting programs of hazard mitigation , such as those included in the national windstorm impact reduction act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-360 ) , has been a concern for congress .

authorization for the windstorm impact reduction program expired at the end of fy2008 , and it is not clear whether the program achieved any of the goals specified in the legislation .

legislation to reauthorize appropriations and make changes to the statute was introduced on april 26 , 2013 ( h.r .

1786 ) .

the house has not taken action on the bill .

projections of a changing climate for the united states and the possibility of a more intense hydrologic cycle ( eg , more intense storms , rainfall , heat waves , and other phenomena ) have raised questions about whether the costs of severe weather disasters will continue to rise in the future .

observers note that extreme events , more than shifts in average climate conditions , drive changes in natural and human systems .

according to the u.s .

global change research program: in the future , with continued global warming , heat waves and heavy downpours are very likely to further increase in frequency and intensity .

substantial areas of north america are likely to have more frequent droughts of greater severity .

hurricane wind speeds , rainfall intensity , and storm surge levels are likely to increase .

the strongest cold season storms are likely to become more frequent , with stronger winds and more extreme wave heights .

another issue for congress may be distinguishing how much of the higher costs of severe weather - related disasters may be due to changing demographics in hazard - prone areas from the effects of any increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events due to climate change .

congress may consider several options for potentially reducing the costs from the impacts of severe thunderstorms and tornadoes: improving detection and warning systems ; fostering efforts to build more resilient buildings and infrastructure ; and supporting research and development to better understand why and where severe thunderstorms and tornadoes occur , as well as other measures .

whether and how climate change is influencing or could affect the frequency and intensity of thunderstorms and tornadoes is not yet evident , although some commentators ascribe a more extreme and violent climate to the influence of human - induced climate change .

thus it is not clear whether long - term efforts to mitigate greenhouse gas - induced global warming — such as by reducing emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases — could also mitigate damage to property and reduce injuries and losses of life from severe thunderstorms and tornadoes .

enhancing the scientific understanding of how and why severe thunderstorms and tornadoes form , and improving the accuracy and timeliness of forecasting and warning systems , will likely provide individuals and communities in the united states better information to help them avoid damage and injury from severe weather events .

the role of the federal government in weather and climate research , thunderstorm and tornado forecasting , and issuing warnings is substantial .

spending on weather forecasts and warnings comprises the bulk of the nws budget , which is itself the largest component of noaa's annual budget .

several other federal agencies contribute to the weather and climate enterprise , including nsf , nasa , the u.s. geological survey , and others .

the federal investment in weather - related response and recovery , including programs at the department of agriculture and fema , is also substantial .

many observers and stakeholders call for increased funding for improving the understanding of physical processes that produce extreme events , such as severe thunderstorms and tornadoes , and how these processes change with climate .

observers and stakeholders are broadly in agreement about the types of r&d needed , such as integrated data and observation systems , improved remote sensing capabilities , better modeling capability , and others .

even if funding increased substantially , however , it may not necessarily lead to significant decreases in damages , injuries , or deaths from severe thunderstorms and tornadoes .

shifting populations , changes in wealth density , and construction of dense infrastructure in areas prone to severe weather could offset improvements in forecasting and warning systems: ...the potential for considerable loss of life and property due to tornadoes continues to exist , especially in highly vulnerable regions of the country .

further , the increasing population and migration patterns of this population suggest that the overall vulnerability and risk to humans and their property may amplify in the future despite improvements in forecasting , detection , and warning dissemination .

 ( references omitted. ) .

in addition , implementing hazard mitigation strategies may include developing and enforcing land - use planning and zoning laws , which are traditionally state and local issues and not congressional concerns per se .

how federal agencies disseminate the results of federally sponsored r&d , from activities such as those originally authorized in the national windstorm impact reduction program , to states and local communities , may be more squarely in the purview of congress , and more directly addressed through oversight of the programs and annual appropriations for the participating agencies .

this appendix discusses why severe thunderstorms and tornadoes are threats to some areas of the country and not others , and why they occur during some parts of the year and not others .

it also describes the role of the national weather service ( nws ) in forecasting and issuing warnings , and its relationship to private forecasters and the news media in providing clear and consistent messages to the public at risk .

thunderstorms and tornadoes affect u.s. citizens and communities every year , albeit rarely with the same level of widespread destruction as a major hurricane or flood .

although floods are one consequence of severe thunderstorms , floods that cause widespread and prolonged destruction are typically not annual events in the united states .

major floods , such as those that affected parts of the mississippi river region in the midwest in 2008 and in 1993 , are the result of many factors and are not solely caused by heavy rains from severe thunderstorms .

severe thunderstorms compared to tropical storms such as hurricanes , thunderstorms are small and short - lived , but can still be dangerous .

an average thunderstorm is 15 miles in diameter and lasts an average of 30 minutes .

thunderstorms occur much more frequently than large tropical storms .

there are an estimated 100,000 thunderstorms in the world each year , of which 10% are severe .

a severe thunderstorm is defined by the nws as one that produces hail at least three - quarters of an inch in diameter , has winds of 58 miles per hour or higher , or produces a tornado .

severe thunderstorms may produce lightning , high winds , hail , flash floods , and tornadoes , any of which may be a hazard to people and property .

strong , straight - line winds can knock down trees and power lines , and can sometimes cause damage equal to that caused by many tornadoes .

downbursts — outward bursts of damaging winds on or near the ground — can cause wind shear and lead to aircraft accidents .

tornadoes ( discussed separately below ) , the most destructive phenomenon associated with thunderstorms , can destroy structures and cause fatalities .

risks from severe thunderstorms severe thunderstorms can produce lightning , high winds , hail , and heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding .

all of these phenomena may pose a risk to people and property depending on their location and the storm's intensity .

lightning lightning is commonly considered the most dangerous and most frequently encountered weather hazard .

between 1977 and 2006 , an average of 62 people were killed each year by lightning in the united states .

lightning - caused fatalities are often highest each year in florida .

lightning is also the primary cause of wildfires , which threaten natural resources , homes , businesses , and lives , particularly in the west .

noaa's national severe storms laboratory estimates that lighting causes approximately $4 billion - $5 billion in damage each year , affecting buildings , communications systems , power lines , and electrical systems .

high winds damage caused by severe straight - line winds during thunderstorms is more common than damage caused from tornadoes .

during severe thunderstorms , straight - line wind speeds may reach up to 100 miles per hour ( damaging winds are classified as those exceeding 50-60 mph ) .

estimates of the annual amount of damage caused by high winds are not provided in this report because wind damage from tropical storms , thunderstorms , and tornadoes are often reported together .

damaging winds can develop with little or no advanced warning .

microbursts — one category of damaging winds — are dangerous to aviation and can occur in an isolated rain shower or thunderstorm .

downbursts or microbursts may produce wind shear — a variation in wind speed and / or direction over a short distance — which can slow airspeed and cause an aircraft to lose altitude when a plane is taking off or landing and is near the ground .

hail although florida typically experiences the most thunderstorms in the united states each year , nebraska , colorado , and wyoming normally experience the most hail storms .

crops are particularly vulnerable to hail damage ; even relatively small hail can severely damage plants in minutes .

hail greater than three - quarters of an inch in diameter is considered severe and potentially damaging to aircraft .

hail also damages vehicles , roofs of buildings and homes , and landscaping .

damage from hail approaches $1 billion in the united states each year .

hail has been known to cause injury to humans , and occasionally has been fatal .

flash floods floods are a common and widespread natural hazard in the united states .

as discussed in this report , flash floods can cause significant damage and fatalities , but they result from short - lived thunderstorms , and not from a prolonged weather pattern that produces higher than normal amounts of precipitation over several days or weeks .

flash floods are short in duration .

they are most commonly associated with thunderstorms , severe weather , and melting snow or ice .

flash floods can occur within minutes or a few hours of excessive rainfall , such as that from a severe thunderstorm or a series of thunderstorms occurring over the same location .

because flash floods can occur suddenly and with little warning , they are the most dangerous types of floods ; typically most flood - related deaths each year in the united states are caused by flash floods .

it is difficult to assess the costs of actual damage from flash floods each year ; cost estimates may vary widely , and the actual costs may not consistently correlate to preliminary estimates .

where and when severe thunderstorms form thunderstorms occur most frequently over the florida peninsula and in other parts of the southeast , although the most severe weather threat from thunderstorms extends from texas to southern minnesota along the great plains and midwestern united states .

thunderstorms are most likely to occur in the spring and summer and during the afternoon and evening .

in the great plains , most thunderstorms occur in the afternoon and at night ; and along the gulf coast , southeastern united states , and western states they occur most frequently in the afternoon .

the greatest potential for severe weather develops in geographical regions that are subject to warm , humid air at low levels , while dry , conditionally unstable air prevails aloft .

thunderstorms form during the summer in the southern great plains when a southerly flow of warm , very moist air from the gulf of mexico meets with a dry , westerly current aloft .

the thunderstorms that form in colorado , arizona , and new mexico are due to orographic lifting — ascending airflow caused by the rocky mountains .

few thunderstorms occur along the west coast of the united states because this region is frequently influenced by cooler , maritime air masses that suppress convectional uplift over land .

how and why thunderstorms form a thunderstorm forms when moist , unstable air is vertically lifted in the area by unequal warming of the earth's surface , orographic lifting due to a topographic obstruction ( such as a mountain or mountain range ) , or the presence of a weather front .

three types of thunderstorms can produce severe weather: a squall line , a multicell storm , and a supercell storm .

squall line a squall line is a line of storms with a continuous , well developed gust front — a boundary that separates a cold downdraft of a thunderstorm from warm , humid surface air — at the leading edge of the line .

severe weather frequently occurs near the updraft / downdraft interface at the storm's leading edge .

downburst winds are the main threat .

hail as large as golf balls along with gustnadoes — weak and short lived tornadoes — can occur .

flash flooding can occur when the squall line slows down or even becomes stationary , with thunderstorms forming parallel to the line and repeatedly moving across the same area .

multicell storm a multicell storm consists of a group of cells moving as a single unit , with each cell in a different stage of the thunderstorm life cycle .

as the multicell storm evolves , individual cells take turns at being the most dominant .

new cells tend to form along the upwind ( typically western or southwestern ) edge of the cluster , with mature cells located at the center and dissipating cells found along the downwind ( eastern or northeastern ) portion of the cluster .

multicell storms come in a variety of shapes , sizes , and intensities .

they are stronger than single cell thunderstorms , but less severe than supercell storms .

each cell in a multicell storm lasts about 20 minutes ; however , the multicell cluster may persist for several hours .

most flash floods occur during multicell storm events .

supercell storm a supercell storm is defined as a storm with a persistent rotating updraft in which the entire storm behaves as a single entity , rather than as a group of cells .

these supercell storms are the most dangerous and rarest of the thunderstorms ; they produce strong downbursts of 80 mph or more and damaging hail , and they can last for hours .

some are very prolific precipitation producers , whereas others produce very little precipitation that reaches the ground .

the leading edge of the precipitation from a supercell is usually light rain .

heavier rain falls closer to the updraft with torrential rain and / or large hail immediately north and east of the main updraft .

severe weather tends to form near the main updraft , typically towards the rear of the storm .

most large and violent tornadoes come from supercell storms .

tornadoes tornadoes — the most violent storms on earth — can sometimes produce winds that exceed 300 mph .

they are the destructive products of severe thunderstorms , and second only to flash flooding as the cause for convective storm related fatalities .

risks from tornadoes damages from violent tornadoes seem to be increasing , similar to the trend for other natural hazards .

according to some insurance industry analysts , losses of $1 billion or more from single tornado events are becoming more frequent .

insurance industry analysts indicate that tornadoes , severe thunderstorms , and related weather events ( such as hailstorms , but not hurricanes or earthquakes ) have caused nearly 57% , on average , of all insured catastrophe losses in the united states in any given year since 1953 .

fatalities caused by tornadoes have declined significantly since the 1930s , generally because of improved forecasting , warning systems , and increased public awareness of the tornado risk .

however , some researchers suggest that the decline is unlikely to continue and may have already stopped .

these findings attribute the stalled decline to increasing vulnerability due to demographic factors , rather than shortcomings in tornado forecasts and warnings .

the results would suggest that there are limits to the number of potential lives saved by improvements in forecasting ability and warning systems , and that social , behavioral , and demographic factors may play an increasingly important role in tornado - related fatalities .

other stakeholders , however , emphasize the need for increased investment in observations , computing power , research , and weather modeling to improve the nation's resilience to severe weather .

since 1950 , violent tornadoes were responsible for 67.5% of all tornado deaths in the united states , yet comprise only 2.1% of all tornadoes .

the number of fatalities caused by less violent tornadoes is also significant , and some studies suggest that the percentage of fatalities caused by less violent tornadoes has increased since the 1970s .

 ( see below for an explanation of how violent tornadoes and less destructive tornadoes are classified: the f - scale and enhanced f - scale. ) .

where and when tornadoes form tornadoes have been reported on all continents except antarctica ; however , they occur most commonly in north america and particularly in the united states .

they can occur in all 50 states but they form most commonly in three regions: ( 1 ) a swath of the midwest extending from the texas gulf coastal plain northward through eastern south dakota ( known as "tornado alley" ) ; ( 2 ) an area that extends across the gulf coastal plain from south texas eastward to florida ( known as "dixie alley" ) ; and ( 3 ) an area located in eastern iowa , south - central indiana , western pennsylvania , and central arkansas ( a smaller "tornado alley" ) .

see figure a - 1 .

tornadoes occur mostly during spring and summer , and usually during the late afternoon and early evening .

however , they can occur on any day of the year , at any hour .

the united states averages approximately 1,200 tornadoes per year — the highest average annual number in the world .

 ( the actual number of recorded tornadoes per year varies , depending on the source of information. ) .

how and why tornadoes form a tornado is a narrow , violently rotating column of air that extends from the base of a thunderstorm to the ground .

tornadoes develop from severe thunderstorms in warm , moist , unstable air along and ahead of cold fronts .

there are two types of tornadoes , those that come from a supercell thunderstorm and those that do not .

tornadoes that form from supercell thunderstorms are the most common , usually the largest , and the most dangerous .

in supercell thunderstorms , a rotating updraft is essential to development of a tornado .

rotation of the updraft can be caused by wind shear , which occurs when winds at two different levels above the ground blow at different speeds or in different directions .

an invisible tube of air begins to rotate horizontally , and rising air within the thunderstorm tilts the rotating air from horizontal to vertical , resulting in rotation that extends through much of the storm .

once the updraft is rotating and being fed by warm , moist air flowing in from the ground level , a tornado can form .

the mechanisms that cause tornadoes to form from supercell storms are not known precisely , and it is not currently possible to predict which supercell thunderstorms will produce tornadoes and which will not .

based on observations , approximately 20% of supercell thunderstorms produce tornadoes .

a non - supercell tornado forms from a vertically spinning parcel of air near the ground , about 1-10 kilometers in diameter , that is caused by wind shear from a warm , cold , or sea breeze front , or from a dryline — the interface between warm , moist air and hot , dry air .

when an updraft moves over the spinning parcel of air and stretches it , a tornado can form .

this type of tornado formation commonly occurs in eastern colorado , where cool air descending from the rocky mountains toward the west collides with hot dry air from the great plains .

land - falling tropical storms and hurricanes can also generate non - supercell tornadoes .

classifying tornadoes: the f - scale the fujita or f - scale was developed to provide a method for estimating the intensity of tornadoes , and was intended to relate the degree of damage to the intensity of wind .

the original f - scale was used for over three decades , but its limitations prompted the development of a new scale , called the enhanced f - scale , or ef - scale .

the ef - scale is intended to be a more robust and precise method of assessing tornado damage than the original f - scale .

the ef - scale calibrates tornado damage using 28 different types of damage indicators , such as the type of construction ( eg , anchored versus unanchored houses , mobile homes , schools , garages , barns , skyscrapers , transmission towers , and others ) .

even with the improvements over the original f - scale , the ef - scale represents only estimates of wind speed , based on damage , and not measurements of actual wind speeds in tornadoes .

actual tornado wind speeds are still largely unknown .

table a - 1 compares the original f - scale with the ef - scale currently used by meteorologists and wind engineers .

