congressional commissions are formal groups established by congress to provide independent advice , make recommendations for changes in public policy , study or investigate a particular problem or event , or perform a specific duty .

usually composed of policy experts chosen by members of congress and / or officials in the executive branch , commissions may hold hearings , conduct research , analyze data , investigate policy areas , or make field visits as they perform their duties .

most commissions complete their work by delivering their findings , recommendations , or advice in the form of a written report to congress .

occasionally , legislation submitted by commissions will be given "fast track" authority in congress .

although no legal definition exists for what constitutes a "congressional commission," in this report , a congressional commission is defined as a multi - member independent entity that ( 1 ) is established by congress , ( 2 ) exists temporarily , ( 3 ) serves in an advisory capacity , ( 4 ) is appointed in part or whole by members of congress , and ( 5 ) reports to congress .

these five characteristics effectively serve to differentiate a congressional commission from a presidential commission , an executive branch commission , or other bodies with "commission" in their names .

over 100 congressional commissions have been established since 1989 .

throughout american history , congress has found commissions to be useful tools in the legislative process , and legislators continue to use them today .

by establishing a commission , congress can potentially provide a highly visible forum for important issues and assemble greater expertise than may be readily available within the legislature .

complex policy issues can be examined over a longer time period and in greater depth than may be practical for legislators .

finally , the non - partisan or bipartisan character of most congressional commissions may make their findings and recommendations more politically acceptable , both in congress and among the public .

critics argue that many congressional commissions are established by legislators seeking "blame avoidance," and take difficult decisions out of the hands of congress .

other observers have suggested that commissions are undemocratic , with their members neither electorally accountable to the public nor their meetings and decisionmaking processes public .

finally , some critics see commissions as financially inefficient , arguing that the costs of establishing a commission outweigh potential benefits , especially since their findings and recommendations may be ignored by congress .

congressional commissions can be categorized as either policy commissions , investigatory commissions , or commemorative commissions .

most congressional commissions are policy commissions , such as the united states commission on north american energy freedom , that study particular public policy problems and typically report their findings to congress along with recommendations for legislative or executive action .

far fewer commissions are investigative commissions , such as the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states , that are established to examine past events .

a small number of commissions are commemorative commissions , such as the abraham lincoln bicentennial commission , that plan , coordinate , and oversee celebrations of people or events , often in conjunction with milestone anniversaries .

the temporary status of congressional commissions and short time period they are often given to complete their work product makes it important that legislators craft statutes creating congressional commissions with care .

statutes establishing congressional policy commissions generally include language that states the mandate of the commission , provides a membership structure and appointment scheme , defines member compensation and other benefits , outlines the commission's duties and powers , authorizes funding , and sets a termination date for the commission .

a variety of options are available for each of these organizational choices .

legislators can tailor the composition , organization , and arrangements of a commission , based on particular goals .

as a result , individual commissions often have organizational structures and powers quite different from one another .

in the past , confusion has arisen over whether particular entities are "congressional commissions. .

there are several reasons for this confusion .

first , the term "congressional commission" is not defined by law ; observers might disagree as to whether an individual entity should be characterized as such .

second , many different entities within the federal government have the word "commission" in their name , such as regulatory commissions , presidential advisory commissions , and advisory commissions established in executive agencies .

conversely , many congressional commissions do not have the word commission in their name ; instead , they are designated as boards , advisory panels , advisory committees , task forces , or by other terms .

in this report , a congressional commission is defined as a multi - member independent entity that ( 1 ) is established by congress , ( 2 ) exists temporarily , ( 3 ) serves in an advisory capacity , ( 4 ) is appointed in part or whole by members of congress , and ( 5 ) reports to congress .

this definition differentiates a congressional commission from a presidential commission , an executive branch commission , or other bodies with "commission" in their names , while including most entities that fulfill the role commonly perceived for commissions: studying policy problems and reporting findings to congress .

each of these characteristics is discussed below .

this report attempts to identify all congressional commissions established between the 101 st and 114 th congress .

a large number of bills creating congressional commissions are introduced in congress each session .

during the 114 th congress , bills have been introduced that would have created more than 20 congressional commissions .

similar numbers of bills have been proposed in previous congresses .

most of these bills proposing commissions are not enacted .

congressional commissions can be generally placed into one of three categories .

most congressional commissions are policy commissions , temporary bodies which study particular policy problems and report their findings to congress .

less common are investigative commissions , which are similar in structure to policy commissions but tasked with reviewing specific events .

c ommemorative commissions are entities established to commemorate a person or event , often to mark an anniversary .

table 2 reports the total number and percentage of each type of commission identified in the lis database search of the 101 st through 114 th congresses .

throughout american history , congress has found commissions to be useful tools in the legislative process .

commissions may be established , among other things , to cope with increases in the scope and complexity of legislation , to forge consensus , to draft bills , to promote inter - party communication , to address issues that do not fall neatly within the jurisdictional boundaries of congressional committees , and to bring together recommendations .

these goals can be grouped into six categories: expertise , issue and political complexity , consensus building , non - partisanship , solving collective action problems , and visibility .

congressional commissions have been criticized by both political and scholarly observers .

these criticisms chiefly fall into three groups .

first , critics often charge that commissions are an "abdication of responsibility" on the part of legislators .

second , commissions are undemocratic , replacing elected legislators with appointed decisionmakers .

third , critics also argue that commissions are financially inefficient ; they are expensive and their findings often ignored by congress .

statutes establishing congressional policy commissions generally include language that states the mandate of the commission , provides a membership structure and appointment scheme , defines member compensation and other benefits , outlines the commission's duties and powers , authorizes funding , and sets a termination date for the commission .

a wide variety of options are available for each of these organizational choices .

legislators can tailor the composition , organization , and working arrangements of a commission , based on the particular goals of congress .

as a result , individual congressional commissions often have an organizational structure and powers quite different from one another .

the following are key considerations for congress in forming a commission .

the tables that follow provide information on the 107 congressional commissions identified by the database search of the 101 st through 114 th congresses .

for each commission , the following information is provided: the name of the commission ; the type of commission ; and the public law creating the commission and date of enactment .

