the u.s. farm sector is vast and varied .

it encompasses production activities related to traditional field crops ( such as corn , soybeans , wheat , and cotton ) and livestock and poultry products ( including meat , dairy , and eggs ) , as well as fruits , tree nuts , and vegetables .

in addition , u.s. agricultural output inc ludes greenhouse and nursery products , forest products , custom work , machine hire , and other farm - related activities .

the intensity and economic importance of each of these activities , as well as their underlying market structure and production processes , vary regionally based on the agro - climatic setting , market conditions , and other factors .

as a result , farm income and rural economic conditions may vary substantially across the united states .

however , this report focuses singularly on aggregate national net farm income and the status of the farm debt - to - asset ratio as reported by the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) economic research service ( ers ) .

annual u.s. net farm income is the single most watched indicator of farm sector well - being , as it captures and reflects the entirety of economic activity across the range of production processes , input expenses , and marketing conditions that have prevailed during a specific time period .

when national net farm income is reported together with a measure of the national farm debt - to - asset ratio , the two summary statistics provide a quick and widely referenced indicator of the economic well - being of the national farm economy .

according to ers , net farm income is forecast at $63.4 billion in 2017 , up 3% from last year ( table 1 ) .

the forecast rise in 2017 net farm income comes after three consecutive years of decline from 2013's record high of $123.8 billion .

the 2017 net farm income forecast is substantially below the 10-year average of $86.4 billion ( figure 1 ) .

in inflation - adjusted dollars , the 2017 forecast is the second lowest since 2003 ( figure 2 ) .

net cash income is also projected to be up in 2017 but by a larger share ( 12.5% ) , driven largely by sales from previous years' inventory , to $100.4 billion .

since the record highs of 2013 , net farm income and net cash income have fallen by 49% and 26% , respectively ( figure 1 ) .

u.s. agricultural exports have been a major contributor to farm income , especially since 2005 .

as a result , the sharp downturn in those exports that followed 2014's peak of $152.3 billion both coincided with and deepened the downturn in farm income that started in 2015 .

usda projects u.s. agricultural exports at $139.8 billion in 2017 , up 8% from 2016's total ( figure 18 ) , due largely to an improving economic outlook in several major foreign importing countries .

usda also projects that u.s. agricultural imports will be higher , at $116.2 billion ( +3% ) , with a resulting agricultural trade surplus of $23.6 billion ( +42% ) .

the u.s. farm income and asset - value situation and outlook suggest a relatively stable financial position heading into 2017 for the agriculture sector as a whole but with considerable uncertainty regarding the downward outlook for prices and market conditions for the sector and an increasing dependency on international markets to absorb domestic surpluses: farm asset values — which reflect farm investors' and lenders' expectations about long - term profitability of farm sector investments — are projected to be up 4% in 2017 to a nominal $3,075 billion ( table 3 ) .

in inflation - adjusted terms ( using 2009 dollars ) , farm asset values peaked in 2014 ( figure 22 ) .

higher farm asset values are expected in 2017 due to strength in real estate values ( +4.6% ) that more than offsets a decline in non - real - estate values ( - 5.1% ) .

real estate traditionally accounts for the bulk of total value of farm sector assets — nearly an 81% share .

crop land values are closely linked to commodity prices .

the leveling off of crop land values in 2017 reflects mixed forecasts for commodity prices ( corn , soybeans , and cotton lower ; wheat , rice , and livestock products higher ) and the uncertainty associated with international commodity markets ( figure 23 ) .

meanwhile , total farm debt is forecast to rise to $390 billion in 2017 ( +4.4% ) .

farm equity ( or net worth , defined as asset value minus debt ) is projected to be up 2.8% , at $2,621 billion in 2017 , after having declined slightly in 2016 .

the farm debt - to - asset ratio is forecast to be higher in 2017 , at 12.7% , still a relatively low value by historical standards ( figure 24 ) .

farm household wealth is derived from a variety of sources .

a farm can have both an on - farm and an off - farm component to its balance sheet of assets and debt .

thus , the well - being of farm operator households is not equivalent to the financial performance of the farm sector or of farm businesses because of other stakeholders in farming , such as landlords and contractors , and because farm operator households often have nonfarm investments , jobs , and other links to the nonfarm economy .

the following set of eight charts ( figure 28 to figure 35 ) presents usda data on monthly farm prices received for several major farm commodities — corn , soybeans , wheat , upland cotton , rice , milk , cattle , hogs , and chickens .

the data is presented in both nominal and indexed formats to facilitate comparisons .

three tables at the end of this report ( table 1 to table 3 ) present aggregate farm income variables that summarize the financial situation of u.s. agriculture .

in addition , table 4 presents the annual average farm price received for several major commodities , including the usda forecast for the 2016 / 2017 marketing year .

