congress has been considering providing relief to americans who have become increasingly worried about their financial security .

among the options , some have proposed reducing or eliminating the penalties on certain transactions in tax - advantaged retirement accounts .

the accounts include individual retirement accounts ( iras ) and qualified defined contribution ( dc ) plans such as 401 ( k ) plans , 403 ( b ) plans , and 457 ( b ) plans .

two proposals have been suggested: ( 1 ) suspending the penalty tax for withdrawals from iras and dc plans that applies to individuals under the age of 59½ ; and ( 2 ) suspending the penalty tax for not taking required minimum distributions ( rmds ) from these plans , which would primarily affect individuals aged 70½ and older .

although the proposals may temporarily ease individuals' financial concerns , there are potential drawbacks to be considered .

suspending the penalties might alter the participant's behavior away from the congressional intent that these plans provide for financial security in retirement and not be used for either pre - retirement expenses or as tax - free asset transfers to heirs .

suspending the penalty for early withdrawals would potentially leave individuals fewer assets in retirement from which to draw income .

suspending the penalty for failure to take required distributions would provide an incentive to use retirement accounts as permanent tax shelters or for intergenerational bequests .

one of the proposals has been enacted into law .

in december 2008 , the house and senate passed h.r .

7327 , which suspends the rmd requirement for calendar year 2009 .

on december 23 , 2008 , president george w. bush signed this bill into law ( p.l .

110-458 ) .

workers benefit from tax - advantaged accounts because they are funded with pre - tax income .

the u.s. treasury estimates that the amount of the tax deduction in fy2012 to fy2016 received by 401 ( k ) plan participants will be $356.2 billion and by ira holders will be $80.5 billion .

because the accounts are funded with pre - tax income , the accounts then have a larger base from which to accumulate investment returns compared to non - tax advantaged accounts .

an additional advantage is that the funds accumulate tax - free earnings .

income tax is paid on the contributions and accrued investment earnings when they are withdrawn .

to ensure that the accounts provide income during retirement , individuals with these accounts face penalty taxes for using the accounts for most expenses prior to the age of 59½ or for failing to take required distributions after the age of 70½ .

some policy analysts have suggested various proposals to eliminate or suspend the 10% early withdrawal penalty in certain circumstances .

in general , the proposals would add a paragraph to 26 u.s.c .

§ 72 ( t ) to eliminate the penalty in a particular circumstance .

note that with each provision added to 26 u.s.c .

§ 72 ( t ) the accounts increasingly operate more like general tax - deferred savings accounts and less like tax - deferred retirement accounts .

the proposals include eliminating or suspending the 10% early withdrawal penalty for public safety employees who retire before the age of 55 , workers who are unemployed , individuals affected by natural disasters , homeowners at risk of having their mortgage foreclosed , individuals who receive a hardship distribution from a retirement plan , victims of ponzi schemes ; and individuals who have qualified adoption expenses .

policymakers have suggested various proposals to eliminate or suspend the rmd requirements .

these proposals would suspend the rmd requirement through 2012 ; eliminate the rmd requirement ; or raise the required beginning date , which would raise the age at which individuals must begin taking their rmds .

section 72 ( t ) of the internal revenue code states that , if distributions from a qualified retirement plan made before the age of 59½ are "part of a series of substantially equal periodic payments," they are not subject to the 10% penalty that otherwise would apply .

under this exception to the 10% early withdrawal penalty , an account owner can begin taking distributions from a retirement plan at any age ; however , these distributions can be taken only from a plan sponsored by a former employer or from an ira .

the distributions also ( 1 ) must be paid at least once each year ; ( 2 ) must be based on the life expectancy of the plan participant or the joint life expectancy of the participant and a designated beneficiary ; and ( 3 ) must not be modified before the later of five years after the first distribution or the date on which the plan participant reaches the age of 59½ .

the internal revenue service has defined in regulation the forms of distribution that it will consider to be "substantially equal periodic payments" and therefore will not be subject to the 10% tax penalty otherwise applicable to early withdrawals .

the irs has approved three methods for calculating substantially equal periodic payments .

they are the minimum distribution method , also called the life expectancy method ; the amortization method , which amortizes an account balance using life expectancy tables and a "reasonable" interest rate ; and the annuitization method , which divides the account balance by an annuity factor based on a "reasonable" mortality table and interest rate .

for any individual , each of the three methods may produce a different distribution amount .

as its name implies , the minimum distribution method will usually result in the smallest annual distribution .

it is also the only one of the three methods in which the amount of the distribution is likely to vary from year to year .

the distribution amount varies both because of changes in the remaining account balance and changes in the account owner's remaining life expectancy .

the amortization method and the annuitization method usually produce distributions that are similar in size because the same economic and demographic variables determine the distribution amounts under both of these methods .

the distribution amount is calculated annually under the minimum distribution method .

under the amortization and annuitization methods , this calculation is typically performed only before the first distribution and the distribution remains unchanged from year to year .

one way to receive a larger annual distribution than would result from the minimum distribution method , but smaller than the distribution produced by either of the other two methods , is to "segment" one's retirement accounts into two or more iras .

distributions can then be taken from one ( or more ) of them while leaving the others intact .

according to one authoritative source , "irs rulings have consistently allowed taxpayers to take periodic payments from one or more plans and not others. .

the minimum distribution method under the minimum distribution method , the annual distribution in any year is determined by dividing the account balance for that year by the account owner's remaining life expectancy , ( or the joint life expectancy of the account owner and his or her designated beneficiary ) as published in a life expectancy table that has been approved by the irs .

because the account balance and the account owner's remaining life expectancy change from year to year , the distribution amount also will change each year under this method .

although the amount of the distribution will change each year under the minimum distribution method , the irs treats the resulting distributions as substantially equal periodic payments for purposes of section 72 ( t ) .

once the distributions have begun , however , the account owner may neither stop receiving payments nor switch to one of the other two methods until the later of ( 1 ) five years after the first distribution or ( 2 ) the date on which the plan participant reaches the age of 59½ .

terminating or altering the distributions before the later of these two dates will result in a penalty of 10% ( plus interest ) being levied retroactively on all distributions that have been made from the plan .

the amortization method under the amortization method , the amount of the annual distribution is based on the account owner's remaining life expectancy in the year of the first distribution and a "reasonable" rate of interest .

 ( if the account owner has a designated beneficiary , the distribution is based on their joint life expectancies in the year of the first distribution. ) .

under this method , the account balance and remaining life expectancy are determined only for the first distribution year .

the annual distribution is the same amount in each succeeding year .

the risk to the account owner who chooses the amortization method is that a declining account balance might result in the account being exhausted in fewer years than he or she had expected when the distributions began .

the annuitization method under the annuitization method , the distribution amount is determined by dividing the account balance by an annuity factor .

this factor represents the present value of an annuity of $1 per year beginning at the taxpayer's current age and continuing for the life of the account owner ( or the joint lives of the account owner and a designated beneficiary ) .

the annuity factor must be derived from life expectancy tables published by the irs and an interest rate that does not exceed 120% of the federal mid - term rate .

under this method , the account balance , the annuity factor , and the interest rate are determined only once , for the first distribution year .

the resulting annual payment is the same amount in each succeeding year .

in private letter rulings , the irs generally has allowed the distribution amount to be adjusted annually to account for changes in life expectancy and account balance .

the irs also has issued private letter rulings that allow the annual distribution to be increased for inflation .

a private letter ruling , however , applies only to the individual who requested it .

these rulings cannot be relied upon by other taxpayers as legally binding statements of irs policy .

examples consider a 55-year - old unmarried individual with no designated beneficiary who began taking substantially equal periodic payments in october 2008 .

the two relevant variables for determining the distribution amount under the minimum distribution method are the account balance and the account owner's remaining life expectancy , which for a 55-year - old is 29.6 years .

assume an account balance of $100,000 on september 30 , 2008 , the first - year distribution would be $3,378 , which is derived by dividing the account balance by the individual's remaining life expectancy .

in each succeeding year , the annual distribution amount would be determined by the same process — dividing the remaining account balance ( which may have increased or decreased depending on investment returns ) by the individual's remaining life expectancy , which will decrease each year .

because the minimum distribution method takes into account changes in both the account balance and remaining life expectancy , the annual distribution amount will change from year to year under this method .

under the amortization method , the annual distribution for an individual in the circumstances described above would be $5,824 .

the annual distribution under this method is determined the same way that a loan repayment is calculated .

the account balance is analogous to the principal of the loan , the term is the person's remaining life expectancy in the year that the first distribution is made , and the interest rate is equal to or less than 120% of the mid - term federal interest rate in either of the two months immediately preceding the first distribution .

under the amortization method , the amount of the annual distribution is determined once , before the first distribution , and it remains the same from year to year .

under the annuitization method , the annual distribution for an individual in the circumstances described above also would be $5,824 .

the variables that determine the annual distribution under the annuitization method are , as under the amortization method , the individual's remaining life expectancy and an interest rate .

as a result , the distribution amounts under these two methods are likely to be nearly the same , provided that similar interest rates are used .

the distribution amount is easier to compute under the annuitization method because the interest rate and life expectancy factors have been combined into a single number called an annuity factor .

there is a single annuity factor for each possible combination of interest rate and term ( life expectancy ) .

these factors are readily available in published sources such as mcgraw - hill's compound interest annuity tables and archer's compound interest and annuity tables .

to find the annual distribution amount , the account balance is simply divided by the annuity factor appropriate to the individual's age and the applicable rate of interest .

revenue ruling 2002-62 both the amortization method and the annuitization method of calculating substantially equal periodic payments result in distribution amounts that are constant from year to year and that are larger than the initial distribution that results from the minimum distribution method .

in october 2002 , the irs released revenue ruling 2002-62 , which allows taxpayers to make a one - time switch from either the amortization method or the annuitization method to the minimum distribution method of calculating the annual distribution from their retirement plans .

the smaller distributions that result from this switch will prevent retirement accounts from being depleted as rapidly as would occur under either of the other two methods .

revenue ruling 2002-62 also states that if an account owner takes periodic payments ( sepps ) and his or her account is exhausted before the age of 59½ , the irs will not treat this as a "modification" of the method of distribution and will not assess the 10% penalty and retroactive interest changes that otherwise would be levied .

an interest rate of up to 120% of the federal mid - term rate for either of the two months immediately preceding the month in which the distribution begins can be used under either the amortization or annuity methods .

a distribution can be based on the account balance on december 31 of the previous year or any date in the current year prior to the first distribution .

in subsequent years , under the minimum distribution method , the distribution can be based on the value either on december 31 of the prior year or on a date within a reasonable period before that year's distribution .

distributions can be based on any one of the three life expectancy tables published by the irs in publication 590 .

 ( the single life expectancy table yields the highest annual distribution ) .

also , a new mortality table for the annuity method , published in appendix b of revenue ruling 2002-62 , must be used for sepps starting on or after january 1 , 2003 .

the new tables reflect increases in life expectancy and decreasing mortality .

