the u.s. supreme court recognized in 1803 that in order to maintain a society governed by laws , a legal remedy should accompany each legal right .

toward this end , courts apply various remedies to ensure effective enforcement of constitutional rights .

for example , courts sometimes order retrials to remedy violations of defendants' trial - by - jury or assistance - of - counsel rights .

a remedy that excludes impermissibly obtained evidence from use at a criminal trial — the "exclusionary rule" — similarly protects constitutional rights .

the exclusionary rule typically applies in cases involving violations by law enforcement of rights guaranteed by the fourth or fifth amendments to the u.s. constitution .

it differs from remedies such as retrial , because in addition to retrospectively redressing injustice , its major aim is prospective deterrence of government misconduct .

in theory , although it only actually redresses violations when probative evidence is found , the exclusionary rule also protects innocent people by deterring unwarranted privacy intrusions .

the rule operates to prohibit the introduction at trial of probative evidence that would be admissible if collected in a constitutionally permissible manner .

because the excluded evidence is frequently incriminating , many believe that its application aids criminals in escaping punishment .

for this reason , the rule has long been controversial .

in past cases , the supreme court has defended the rule as a necessary corollary to the constitutional rights it protects .

more recently , a division has emerged .

some justices adhere to the view of the rule as constitutionally required .

other justices express concerns about the cost to society of freeing criminals who would likely be convicted if the excluded evidence was admitted .

over the past several decades , the supreme court has narrowed the scope of the exclusionary rule in fourth amendment cases — that is , in cases involving illegal searches or seizures .

the court's 2009 decision in herring v. united states furthers this trend .

because herring is the first supreme court decision that rejects the exclusionary rule in the context of police error regarding a warrant , the decision has made news headlines and prompted debate about whether the herring decision appropriately limits the exclusionary rule's reach .

the fourth amendment to the u.s. constitution provides a right "of the people to be secure in their persons , houses , papers , and effects , against unreasonable searches and seizures. .

as a general rule , "reasonableness" requires law enforcement officers to demonstrate "probable cause" and obtain a warrant ( unless a recognized warrant exception applies ) before conducting searches or seizures .

for example , under the general rule , a police officer may not arrest a person unless a judicial magistrate has issued a warrant , based on evidence establishing sufficient probable cause , for that person's arrest .

likewise , a police officer typically may not search a person's belongings without first obtaining a warrant that describes , with sufficient particularity , the property for which sufficient evidence justifies a search .

the constitution does not explicitly provide a remedy that applies when governmental actors violate a citizen's fourth amendment right .

to deter fourth amendment violations , courts apply the exclusionary rule , which "is often the only remedy effective to redress a fourth amendment violation. .

in the fourth amendment context , the exclusionary rule requires a trial court to forbid the prosecution's use of evidence obtained as a result of an unconstitutional search or seizure .

for example , if a police officer arrests a person in violation of constitutionally mandated procedures ( i.e. , without a warrant or a warrant exception ) , then the exclusionary rule requires a trial court to suppress any contraband the officer discovered during the search incident to that arrest .

although the exclusionary rule protects constitutional rights , a question remains regarding its status — that is , is it constitutionally required in the fourth amendment context ? .

in past fourth amendment cases , the supreme court has stated that the exclusionary rule is "of constitutional origin. .

in other cases , the court has characterized the rule as a "judicially created remedy ... rather than a personal constitutional right. .

this distinction affects congress's authority to alter the exclusionary rule statutorily .

congress may not reduce a constitutionally guaranteed remedy but could potentially alter a rule that lacks constitutional status .

regardless , the court has narrowed the exclusionary rule's reach in fourth amendment cases throughout the past several decades .

for example , it has barred courts' use of the rule in civil cases , grand jury proceedings , and parole revocation hearings .

arguably , the most important narrowing trend has been the court's development of the good - faith exception .

the supreme court introduced what has come to be known as the good - faith exception in united states v. leon .

in leon , the court held that the exclusionary rule does not apply when police officers act with "objectively reasonable reliance" on a search warrant later found to be invalid .

language in the opinion embraced a cautionary "balancing" approach to the exclusionary rule in which the benefits of exclusion ( namely any deterrence effect on unconstitutional police action ) must outweigh the costs ( namely the risk that a guilty person will escape justice because evidence is excluded at trial ) before the court will apply the rule to new factual circumstances .

police officers in leon , acting on a tip about drug activity in a particular home , investigated the license plate number and connections of a man who exited the home holding a small paper sack .

the officers then observed people coming and going from the residences of several people connected to that man , including the home of leon , the respondent in the case , whom the man had listed as his employer and who had a criminal record .

based on these observations , the officers obtained a warrant from a magistrate to search three homes and several automobiles .

the subsequent search uncovered illegal drugs and other evidence .

at trial , a federal district court held that the warrant was not supported by probable cause ; thus , the search violated the fourth amendment .

applying the exclusionary rule remedy , the district court suppressed the evidence of drugs found in the homes and cars .

on appeal , the supreme court held that suppression is inappropriate in cases , such as leon , where the violation occurred despite a police officer's "objectively reasonable reliance" — for example , on a warrant that is actually invalid .

by creating an exception to the exclusionary rule , the leon court arguably opened the door to permitting evidence in cases involving multiple types of fourth amendment violations .

however , the leon decision itself addressed only the particular circumstance in which a warrant exists but was invalidly issued based on insufficient probable cause .

the leon opinion , including several exceptions to the good - faith exception articulated in the case , evidences a holding that only addresses that particular context .

to justify its holding , the leon court noted the logical inconsistency between exclusion in cases involving non - police errors and the rule's traditional deterrence rationale , stating: "penalizing the officer for the magistrate's error , rather than his own , cannot logically contribute to the deterrence of fourth amendment violations. .

based on the court's reliance on this rationale , one might argue that the court did not originally anticipate an extension of the good - faith exception to cases involving police error .

the supreme court has extended the leon good - faith exception in relatively minor ways over the past several decades .

in a 1995 case , illinois v. krull , the court applied the exception where police officers had searched an auto dealer's list of licenses pursuant to a statute that courts later struck down as unconstitutional .

several years later , in arizona v. evans , the court applied leon to evidence obtained after an arrest based on a facially valid warrant that the clerk of the court had neglected to show had been quashed seventeen days earlier .

until recently , these extensions had involved police reliance on errors made by actors — for example , the clerk of the court in evans and the legislative branch in krull — not the police themselves .

furthermore , in a 2004 case , groh v. ramirez , the court seemed to draw an explicit line between police errors and errors made by other actors .

police officers in groh searched a home where they suspected that the owners had stored illegal weaponry .

the court of appeals held that the search warrant , which a magistrate had signed but the officers had themselves prepared , violated the constitutional requirement that property to be searched be described with particularity ; thus , the officers' search violated the homeowners' fourth amendment rights .

on appeal , the supreme court declined to apply the good - faith exception to the exclusionary rule , because it found that the officers' search pursuant to a warrant that failed to list property to be searched was not a "reasonable" mistake .

in so holding , the court stressed that the officer in groh was himself responsible for the fourth amendment violation .

however , only two years after groh , the court declined to find any distinction between police error and third - party errors .

in michigan v. hudson , it held that police officers' violation of the "knock and announce" rule did not trigger the exclusionary rule .

knock and announce , an "ancient" procedure derived from common - law , constitutional , and statutory sources , protects occupants' privacy by requiring police officers to wait a short while after knocking and announcing their presence before entering a residence for which they have a warrant .

the rule is viewed as a less stringent requirement than the warrant or probable cause requirements under the fourth amendment , and the hudson court noted that it is "unnecessary" in various circumstances .

because the court limited its opinion in hudson to knock and announce violations , it was unclear after that case whether the court would extend the good - faith exception to more serious police errors , such as those involving warrants or warrant exceptions .

in herring v. united states , a 2009 case , the supreme court for the first time applied the good - faith exception in a case involving police error regarding a warrant .

officers arrested the defendant , bennie dean herring , outside of an impound lot where herring had come to retrieve an item from his truck .

an officer at the lot , recognizing herring , called the county warrant clerk to determine whether an outstanding arrest warrant applied to him .

the warrant clerk found no such warrant but agreed to inquire about warrants in a neighboring county .

the clerk then identified as active an arrest warrant in the neighboring county , although it was in fact no longer active .

after learning about the warrant , two officers followed herring from the impound lot , arrested him , and performed a search incident to arrest .

the officers discovered methamphetamine in herring's pocket and an illegal pistol in his vehicle .

because the arrest warrant was actually invalid , both parties in herring admitted that a fourth amendment violation had occurred .

the disagreement in the case centered on whether the exclusionary rule should apply to suppress the evidence obtained as a result of the violation .

extending the good - faith exception , the court held that the exclusionary rule should not apply .

the court also announced a new test for the exception: "to trigger the exclusionary rule," police conduct must be "sufficiently deliberate" and the police must be "sufficiently culpable. .

the court emphasized that this "analysis of deliberateness and culpability" is objective: a court should ascertain not whether the police officer in question acted with good intentions , but rather "'whether a reasonably well trained officer would have known that the search was illegal' in light of 'all the circumstances.' .

in rejecting the exclusionary rule in herring , the court appeared to embrace the view that it is not constitutionally required in the fourth amendment context .

quoting hudson v. michigan , the court emphasized that the exclusionary rule is a "'last resort'" rather than a "necessary consequence of a fourth amendment violation. .

it then applied a cost - benefit analysis similar to the approach in leon , stating that in order for the exclusionary rule to apply , "the benefits of deterrence must outweigh the costs. .

in contrast , dissenting justices in herring cited cases in which the court has viewed the exclusionary rule as "inseparable" from the fourth amendment , suggesting that the remedy of exclusion has constitutional status .

starting from this different philosophical foundation , the dissenters rejected the cost - benefit approach as inappropriate and would instead have applied the exclusionary rule in all cases where it has " any power to discourage" law enforcement misconduct .

dissenters also highlighted the substantive distinction between errors made by judicial branch personnel and errors made by police , noting three specific distinctions: ( 1 ) the exclusionary rule historically aims to deter police , rather than judicial , misconduct ; ( 2 ) no evidence suggests that court employees are "inclined to subvert the fourth amendment" ; and ( 3 ) because judicial officers have no stake in the outcome of particular criminal investigations , "there [is] 'no basis for believing that application of the exclusionary rule ... [would] have a significant effect on court employees.' .

for those reasons , the four dissenting justices would not have extended the good - faith exception to situations involving police conduct regarding a warrant .

although the herring decision broadens the good - faith exception to the exclusionary rule and has shifted the analysis to one of "deliberateness and culpability," the scope of its impact remains to be seen .

for example , although it is perhaps difficult to imagine recordkeeping errors that would meet the court's "deliberate and culpable" test , the herring court suggested that "reckless[ness] in maintaining a warrant system," such as a recordkeeping system that routinely led to false arrests , could justify application of the exclusionary rule .

thus , although most recordkeeping and clerical errors made by police will no doubt fit within the relatively broad parameters of the good - faith exception as interpreted in herring , lower courts will likely decline to apply herring in situations where defendants demonstrate knowledge or ongoing patterns of wrongdoing by law enforcement officers .

in addition to broadening the good - faith exception , the herring decision appears to further the trend toward interpreting the exclusionary rule as lacking constitutional status .

one important outcome of this might be greater congressional authority to legislate changes to the fourth amendment exclusionary rule .

congress has occasionally considered legislation that would expand or contract the exclusionary rule's reach .

because congress may always guarantee a greater right than the constitution demands as a minimum , congress clearly may expand the remedy of exclusion .

in contrast , whether congress has the authority to restrict the remedy of exclusion depends upon the status of the remedy vis - à - vis the constitution .

if , as herring appears to indicate , the exclusionary rule lacks constitutional status , then legislation restricting the right — for example , legislation expanding the herring holding — is likely constitutionally permissible .

if , on the other hand , the exclusionary rule is a constitutionally required remedy in fourth amendment cases , as the herring dissenters suggested , then congress would lack the authority to narrow the scope of the remedy .

