in december 2008 , the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) announced that the economy was in a recession and that the recession began in december 2007 .

however , some economists and forecasters have been concerned that a combination of factors might make this economic contraction much worse than other post - war slowdowns .

at first , economic instability seemed limited to the housing sector as housing values decreased in many markets , forcing some subprime and highly leveraged home owners into foreclosure .

the problems that began in housing , quickly spread to banking and financial services and were compounded earlier in 2008 by spikes in energy prices .

the solvency of automobile manufacturers rapidly deteriorated , possibly due in part to tight credit policies , rising unemployment , and high fuel costs .

national unemployment rose steadily throughout 2008 reaching 7.2% in december .

many states also face large tax revenue decreases , forcing them to consider reducing medicaid eligibility and spending , just when the demand for additional public sector health care is expanding to fill the gap left when unemployed individuals no longer can afford employer - based health insurance for their families .

although by themselves the problems in housing , financial services , manufacturing , and energy sectors might not force the economy into recession , taken together these problems have contributed to the emergence of a recession and , if the underlying fundamentals have changed as some forecasters suspect , perhaps a prolonged , global economic slow down that could have widespread impact on living standards here and abroad .

policymakers quickly moved to prevent the instability in housing and financial services from spilling over into the broader economy .

looking to the future , members of congress and the obama administration have sought additional mechanisms to stimulate economic activity .

various approaches have been considered to ensure that a stimulus package could reach many different segments of the economy , provide a sustained economic boost , and wide spread job growth .

some stimulus proposals have included infrastructure spending , revenue sharing with states , middle class tax cuts , business tax cuts , unemployment benefits , and food stamps .

on january 22 , 2009 the house committee on energy and commerce marked - up and approved selected health components of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , h.r .

1 ) .

the full house amended and approved h.r .

1 on january 28 , 2009 .

arra included approval of an amendment to division b , title v , medicaid provisions , that removed a provision that would have given states the option to cover family planning services under medicaid .

similar legislation to h.r .

1 was introduced in the senate ( arra , s. 350 ) and referred to the committee on finance , where a markup of selected health components was approved on january 27 .

the senate committee on finance mark - up of s. 350 and approved s.amdt .

98 , which was offered as a substitute for h.r .

1 .

s.amdt .

98 was amended further before being approved by the full senate , where an s.amdt .

570 was offered in the nature of a substitute h.r .

1 .

on february 10 , 2009 .

table 1 displays a summary of medicaid provisions in h.r .

1 and s.amdt .

570 .

additional detail on major provisions and differences between h.r .

1 and s.amdt .

570 include the following: fmap .

although the house - passed and senate finance versions of a temporary increase in the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) are broadly similar , they differ on the degree to which funds are targeted at states experiencing unemployment rate increases and whether the temporary fmap increase applies to expenditures for individuals who are eligible for medicaid because of an increase in a state's income eligibility standards .

unemployed covered under medicaid .

under h.r .

1 , but not s.amdt .

570 , states would have a temporary option to cover unemployed workers under medicaid .

states would receive 100% fmap for this temporary medicaid expansion for both medical services and related administrative expenditures .

medicaid regulations moratoria .

h.r .

1 includes a 60-day extension until july 1 , 2009 , of moratoria on six controversial medicaid regulations , and a new moratorium on a seventh regulation .

s.amdt .

570 does not have a provision to extend the medicaid moratoria .

dsh allotment increases .

h.r .

1 would temporarily , but uniformly , increase states' dsh allotments by 2.5% for fy2009 and fy2010 .

s.amdt .

570 also would increase temporarily states' dsh allotments , but the enhanced allotments would be provided only to low - dsh states ( states with dsh spending below 3% of their total medicaid expenditures in fy2006 ) .

states with higher dsh spending would not receive enhanced allotments under s.amdt .

570 .

medicare special workload agreements .

s.amdt .

570 includes a provision that would require the hhs secretary , in consultation with the ssa commissioner , to negotiate agreements with states on the medicare special disability workload program .

h.r .

1 does not have a similar provision .

medicaid indian protections .

h.r .

1 and s.amdt .

570 both include provisions that would exempt indians from medicaid and schip cost sharing and premiums as well as provide for the creation of a tribal technical advisory panel within cms .

under s.amdt .

570 , in order to receive medicaid payment , managed care entities would need to fulfill certain conditions .

the senate amendment would also apply specific provisions affecting medicaid managed care to schip .

tma and qi extensions .

h.r .

1 would extend the work - related transitional medical assistance ( tma ) program through december 2010 .

similar to h.r .

1 , s.amdt .

570 would extend the work - related tma program through december 2010 , as well as the qualified individual ( qi ) program through the end of 2010 .

oig and gao .

under s.amdt .

570 , but not h.r .

1 , funds would be appropriated to oig for medicaid integrity activities related to increased recession spending .

also under s.amdt .

570 and not h.r .

1 , gao would be tasked with preparing a report on the effect of recessions since 1974 on medicaid .

nh prompt pay .

under s.amdt .

570 , states would need to comply with medicaid's prompt payment rules to receive recessionary fmap increases .

sunset .

under s.amdt .

570 , all of the provisions in title iii , subtitle d , other provisions , would sunset at the end of the recession period , december 31 , 2010 , including indian protections ( sec .

3301 , 3302 , 3303 ) and nursing home prompt pay requirements ( sec .

3304 ) .

for a discussion of the medicaid provisions approved in the joint house and senate conference agreement , see crs report r40223 , american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) : title v , medicaid provisions , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , h.r .

1 ) is intended to stimulate additional economic activity in selected industrial sectors to save existing and create new jobs , reduce taxes , invest in future technologies , and fund infrastructure improvements .

in addition , arra contains provisions to provide temporary support to families and individuals in need by providing additional unemployment compensation benefits , short - term access to medicaid , financial assistance for individuals eligible under cobra to purchase health insurance through their former employer , temporary increases in federal medicaid matching rates for states , and other medicaid changes .

on january 26 , 2009 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) issued a preliminary estimate of the impact of h.r .

1 as it was reported to the house .

the medicaid provisions in the version of h.r .

1 introduced in the house , were in two titles , title iii , health insurance assistance , and title v , state fiscal relief , of division b , direct spending .

cbo preliminarily estimated that the medicaid provisions in h.r .

1 , as approved by the house , would increase federal spending by $37 billion in fy2009 and $100.1 billion over the five - year period fy2009-2013 .

on january 28 , 2009 , cbo issued estimated budget impacts of the house - approved version of arra .

these estimates do not include separate line items for all medicaid provisions , but summarize spending by titles .

cbo indicated that their preliminary individual provision estimates did not change from the introduced version of h.r .

1 to the house - approved version .

the medicaid provisions in title iii and title v of the house - approved version of arra included: title iii — health insurance assistance: temporary optional medicaid coverage for the unemployed .

title v — state fiscal relief: temporary increase in medicaid federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) , moratoria on certain regulations , transitional medical assistance ( tma ) , protections for indians under medicaid and the children's health insurance program ( chip ) , consultation with indian health programs , temporary increase in disproportionate share hospital ( dsp ) allotments .

title iv , health information technology , in the house - approved version of arra , also includes medicaid provisions related to health technology .

on january 27 , 2009 , an economic stimulus bill s. 336 , american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , was introduced in the senate and referred to the committee on appropriations .

a related stimulus bill , s. 350 , with the same name , was introduced on january 29 , 2009 , and referred to the committee on finance .

the committee on finance amended and approved s. 350 on january 30 , 2009 .

on february 2 , 2009 , s. 350 was combined with provisions from s. 336 and an amendment , s.amdt .

570 , was offered as a replacement for the house - approved stimulus bill , h.r .

1 .

the full senate approved s.amdt .

570 on february 10 , 2009 .

medicaid provisions in title iii and title v of senate - approved arra included: title iii — health insurance assistance: extension of transitional medical assistance ( tma ) .

extension of the qualified individual ( qi ) program .

premiums and cost sharing protections under medicaid , eligibility determinations under medicaid and chip , and protection of certain indian property from medicaid estate recovery .

rules applicable under medicaid and chip to managed care entities with respect to indian enrollees and indian health care providers and indian managed care entities .

consultation on medicaid , chip , and other health care programs funded under the social security act involving indian health programs and urban indian organizations .

application of prompt pay requirements to nursing facilities .

period of application ; sunset .

title v — state fiscal relief: temporary increase in medicaid federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) .

extension and update of special rule for increase of medicaid dsh allotments for low - dsh states .

payment of medicare liability to states as a result of the special disability workload project .

funding for the department of health and human services office of the inspector general .

gao study and report regarding state needs during periods of national economic downturn .

cbo prepared estimates of the effect of s.amdt .

570 on federal spending .

in its analysis , cbo did not make separate estimates for each medicaid provision contained in division b , direct spending .

cbo estimated that all s.amdt .

570's title iii , health insurance assistance , provisions would increase direct spending by $28.6 billion over the period fy2009-fy2019 .

the medicaid provisions in title iii by themselves would increase federal spending by $2.6 billion over the same 10-year period fy2009-2019 .

cbo estimated that the s.amdt .

570's title v , state fiscal relief , provisions would increase federal expenditures by $36 billion in fy2009 and by $90 billion over 10 years from fy2009-2019 .

this report follows the organization of the medicaid provisions in the house - passed version of arra , so the house - passed provisions are presented first , with comparable senate provisions following , unless the house - passed version of arra does not have a comparable provision to the senate version ; then the senate provisions are presented first .

this report will not be updated .

for additional information on arra conference agreement's medicaid provisions , see crs report r40223 , american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) : title v , medicaid provisions , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

s.amdt .

570 .

sec .

5003 .

payment of medicare liability to states as a result of the special disability workload project .

under this provision , within three months after enactment of this law , the secretary , in consultation with the social security commissioner , would negotiate an agreement on a payment amount to be made to each state for the medicare special disability workload ( sdw ) project .

payments to states would be subject to certain conditions: states would waive the right to file or be a part of any civil action in any federal or state court where payment was sought for liability related to the medicare sdw project ; states would release the federal government from any further claims for reimbursement of state expenditures arising from the sdw project ; states that are parties to civil actions in any federal or state court seeking reimbursement for the sdw project , would be ineligible to receive payment under this provision while such action is pending or if it is resolved in a state's favor .

in negotiating with states , the secretary and ssa commissioner would use the most recent federal data available , including estimates , to determine the amount of payment to be offered to each state that elects to enter into an agreement with the secretary .

the payment methodology would consist of the following factors: the number of sdw cases that were eligible for benefits under medicare and the month when these cases initially became eligible ; the applicable non - federal share of medicaid expenditures made by states during the period these cases were eligible ; and other factors determined appropriate by the secretary and the ssa commissioner in consultation with states .

however , as a condition of payment under a negotiated agreement for sdw cases , states would not be required to submit individual paid medicaid claims ( data ) .

to make payments to states for the sdw project , $3 billion would be appropriated for fy2009 from money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated .

aggregate payments to states could not exceed $3 billion .

payments to states would be provided within four months from the date of enactment of arra .

an sdw case would be defined as an individual determined by the ssa commissioner to have been eligible for benefits under title ii of the ssa for a period during which such benefits were not provided to the individual and who was , during all or part of such period , enrolled in medicaid .

cbo estimated that the medicare sdw provision would increase federal spending by $3 billion in fy2009 , with no effect beyond fy2009 .

h.r .

1 does not have a provision comparable to s.amdt .

570 's payment of medicare liability to states as a result of the special disability workload project .

s.amdt .

570 .

sec .

5004 funding for the department of health and human services office of the inspector general .

under this provision , the health and human services office of the inspector general ( hhs oig ) is to receive $31.25 million to ensure the proper expenditure of federal funds .

these funds are appropriated from any money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated and are available throughout the recession period ( defined as october 1 , 2008- december 31 , 2010 ) .

amounts appropriated under this provision would be available until september 30 , 2012 , without further appropriation , and would be in addition to any other amounts appropriated or made available to hhsoig .

cbo has not estimated the effect of the oig funding on federal spending .

h.r .

1 does not have a provision comparable to s.amdt .

570 's funding for the department of health and human services office of the inspector general .

s.amdt .

570 .

sec .

5005 .

gao study and report regarding state needs during periods of national economic downturn .

under this provision , the comptroller general of the united states , the government accountability office ( gao ) , would study the current ( on the date of enactment of the legislation ) economic recession as well as previous national economic downturns since 1974 .

gao would develop recommendations to address states' needs during economic recessions , including the past and projected effects of temporary increases in the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) during these recessions .

by april 1 , 2011 , gao would submit a report to appropriate congressional committees that would include the following: recommendations for modifying the national economic downturn assistance formula for temporary medicaid fmap adjustments ( a "countercyclical fmap," as described in gao report number , gao - 07-97 ) , to improve the effectiveness of the countercyclical fmap for addressing states' needs during national economic downturns: what improvements are needed to identify factors to begin and end the application of a countercyclical fmap ; how to adjust the amount of a countercyclical fmap to account for state and regional variations ; and how a countercyclical fmap could be adjusted to better account for actual medicaid costs incurred by states during economic recessions .

analysis of the impact on states of recessions , including declines in private health insurance benefits coverage ; declines in state revenues ; and maintenance and growth of caseloads under medicaid , schip , or any other publically funded programs that provide health benefits coverage to state residents .

cbo has not specifically estimated the effect of the gao study and report on federal spending .

h.r .

1 does not have a comparable provision to s.amdt .

570 's gao study and report regarding state needs during periods of national economic downturn .

