industry observers have raised concerns about perceived gaps in food import safety over the past few years .

one particular area of concern focuses on imported goods that are released into the united states market after the food and drug administration ( fda ) detains them under an import alert .

generally , these goods may be released into the market after an importer "provides evidence that the entry is in compliance with federal laws and regulations. .

the proof can be provided by private laboratories that have tested samples of the detained imported goods , and importers can present results indicating that the goods are fda - compliant .

currently , the fda does not have express statutory authority to regulate the private laboratories that sample or test these imported goods , although the fda regulates the importer and imported products .

this report focuses on proposals for fda regulation of the private laboratories that analyze imported , fda - regulated goods .

it provides background on the relationship between the fda and the private laboratories , as well as information about agency and bush administration proposals and legislative responses in the 110 th congress ( particularly the dingell draft , s. 2418 , h.r .

5904 , and h.r .

5827 ) to the current lack of regulation .

administrative responsibility for regulation of certain types of imported food is delegated to the fda under chapter viii of the federal food , drug and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) .

generally , the ffdca provides that an article must be refused admission into the united states , with some exceptions , on the following bases: [i]f it appears from the examination of [samples of food , drugs , devices , and cosmetics which are being imported or offered for import into the united states] or otherwise that ( 1 ) such article has been manufactured , processed , or packed under insanitary conditions ... , or ( 2 ) such article is forbidden or restricted in sale in the country in which it was produced or from which it was exported , or ( 3 ) such article is adulterated , misbranded , or in violation of section 505 .

under the ffdca , the fda can automatically detain a product without physically examining it .

automatic detention occurs as a result of the issuance of import alerts , which "identify problem commodities and / or shippers and / or importers and provide guidance for import coverage," such as if "those products or shippers ... have met the criteria for automatic detention. .

importers whose products have been detained because of import alerts can petition for the release of their products by presenting testimony from private , or third - party , laboratories that shows that their products are compliant .

in order to do this , they submit either their products or samples of their products for testing to the private laboratories .

for the products to be released , the private laboratories must then present test results that indicate that the products do not violate the fda's entry standards .

the test results can be returned to the importer , who will give it to the fda , or the lab can turn in the results directly to the fda .

the fda may then use this data "to determine whether the imported food complies with the [ffdca] and can be released into the united states. .

the fda has recognized these private laboratories as an integral part of food import safety .

according to the fda , the third - party labs help ensure that the food reaching the market complies with agency standards and allow agency laboratory resources to be devoted to other regulatory matters .

however , there has been criticism regarding the autonomy given to the importers and private laboratories .

such criticism varies from the manner in which the samples are collected for testing to the reporting of test results by the importers to the fda .

for example , at a 1998 hearing before a senate governmental affairs subcommittee , a former customs broker testified regarding the abuses of the private laboratory system in relation to the product samples given to the private laboratory .

he recounted how some importers selected samples for testing that were from shipments that had not been detained or they submitted multiple samples for testing until a sample was found to be compliant .

as the fda has noted , "[b]oth of these activities permit importers to market adulterated or misbranded foods in the united states , representing a health hazard. .

another example occurred early in 2008 , when the chairman of a private laboratory that samples and tests fda - regulated goods testified at a house energy and commerce subcommittee hearing .

his testimony concerned encounters with importers who deleted information from test results that evidenced fda violations and then submitted the altered results to the fda , as well as suggestions for improving the fda's regulation of imported foods via the use of laboratories and existing fda programs .

additionally , he stated that the fda should be able to visit and audit laboratories at their physical location at any time .

currently , the fda may conduct voluntary , on - site assessments of such laboratories .

recent agency , administration , and legislative proposals address various ways to curb the potential for such abuses by monitoring private laboratories .

the fda office of regulatory affairs publishes a laboratory manual with a section on private laboratory guidance .

the guidance "seeks to establish a uniform , systematic , and effective approach to ensuring that private labs performing analyses on fda - regulated imported commodities submit scientifically sound data. .

to that end , the guidance provides recommendations on sampling techniques , information regarding the training and experience of private lab analysts , considerations for reviewing the analytical packages , and suggested criteria for collecting audit samples .

in general , a guidance document is a type of policy statement , "issued by an agency to advise the public prospectively of the manner in which the agency proposes to exercise a discretionary power. .

general statements of policy do not "impose any rights and obligations," nor do they "establish a 'binding norm'" because they are "not finally determinative of the issues or rights to which [they are] addressed. .

in april 2004 , the fda proposed a rule to regulate imported food product sampling services and private laboratories .

it was withdrawn without comment on august 5 , 2005 .

some of the recommendations from the fda's laboratory guidance were put forth in the proposed rule .

the proposed rule would have required "samples to be properly identified , collected and maintained. .

the proposed sampling requirements outlined specific provisions for identification , collection , and documentation from the time the sample was collected to the time the sample was delivered to a private laboratory .

particularly , the proposed rule placed an emphasis on an "independent" execution of the sampling , to ensure that the sampling and the tests are conducted without the importer's influence .

it went further to require "laboratories to use validated or recognized analytical methods , and to submit analytical results directly to fda. .

it purposefully omitted a laboratory accreditation requirement .

in november 2007 , the fda prepared a report entitled the food protection plan .

the fda's plan is integrated with a separate plan , prepared for president bush by the interagency working group on import safety , called an action plan for import safety .

both reports highlight how the bush administration would like to improve food import safety .

the food protection plan recommends legislation that would give the fda the authority to accredit private laboratories .

the action plan for import safety notes that the fda plans to issue guidance "that would set standards for the sampling and testing of imported products , including the use of accredited private laboratories submitting data to fda to assist in evaluating whether an appearance of a violation may be resolved. .

several bills introduced in the 110 th congress addressed the issue of private laboratory regulation .

one common theme among these legislative proposals is the accreditation or certification of private laboratories .

representative dingell of the house committee on energy and commerce began circulating a bill in draft form in april 2008 .

the draft sought to alter the ffdca in a variety of ways , including by requiring new sampling and testing protocols for food shipments .

the dingell draft would have added a new section to the ffdca dedicated to the testing of food shipments .

the new section would have addressed three areas of food shipment testing: ( 1 ) testing in facilities that manufacture , process , pack , or hold food that would not have been certified under the provisions that the bill would have established ( in which case accredited laboratories would conduct sampling and testing of each shipment and simultaneously submit the sampling results electronically to the health and human services ( hhs ) secretary and the facility owner ) ; ( 2 ) testing in like facilities that would have been certified under the bill's provisions ( accredited laboratories would conduct sampling and testing of shipments "on a periodic basis specified by the secretary" and submit the sampling results electronically to the hhs secretary and the facility owner ) ; and ( 3 ) accreditation of laboratories by the hhs secretary "for the purpose of conducting sampling and testing. .

the section would have required the secretary to establish a standard for accreditation and mandated that all certified and non - certified facilities submit all their samples to accredited labs only .

the accredited labs would then return the results simultaneously to the fda and to the importer .

the eat safe act was introduced by senator casey in december 2007 .

the bill would have required private laboratories that conduct tests on fda - regulated imports to be certified by the agency under a fee - funded certification and audit process developed by the fda .

laboratories would have had to submit to the agency the results of all tests conducted .

the safe feast act was introduced in april 2008 by representative costa .

in particular , it would have allowed the hhs secretary to recognize "qualified" laboratories to test imported foods , once the laboratories have established , to the recognizing agency's satisfaction , that they maintain internal quality systems and meet other criteria .

the secretary would also have been required to establish a registry of such laboratories .

alternative laboratories would have been allowed to test samples as well , but additional requirements , such as the submission of evidence to the secretary to establish the laboratory's qualifications and the submission to the fda of all testing results and data , would have been imposed on such laboratories .

this bill was introduced by representative roskam in april 2008 .

among other things , the bill would have required the addition of a section to the ffdca that would have required the hhs secretary to certify all private laboratories and sampling services that test imported fda - regulated goods .

laboratories would have had to allow audits and submit all test results directly to the fda .

in addition , importers , laboratories , and sampling services would have faced civil penalties for knowingly falsifying test results .

