scientific reports of reproductive failure among migratory birds exposed to ddt during the 1950s provided some of the earliest evidence that chemical pollutants in the environment might affect hormone - mediated processes in wildlife .

in 1996 , several scientists brought the endocrine disruptor hypothesis to public attention with the release of a book , our stolen future .

in the same year , congress directed the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) to develop and implement a program to screen all pesticides and suspect drinking water contaminants for endocrine - disrupting potential .

ten years later , the screening program was not yet launched , when scientists reported finding a large number of feminized male fish in the potomac river and other u.s. waters .

in response , congress held hearings and urged federal agencies to expedite related research .

in 2008 , the national toxicology program issued a report indicating scientific concern about fetal and child exposure to several chemicals with endocrine - disrupting potential .

in the same year , congress enacted legislation banning those chemicals in children's toys and child care articles .

h.r .

1523 / s. 593 and s. 753 in the 111 th congress would regulate certain uses of bisphenol a , another potential endocrine disruptor .

this report summarizes the science underlying the endocrine disruptor hypothesis , describes congressional actions , outlines epa's efforts to implement legislation , and discusses some policy issues that have been raised .

the report is intended to support congress as it considers legislation to control potential endocrine disruptors and as it oversees epa's programs .

with a few exceptions , the report does not discuss in detail all of the various specific chemicals that might be endocrine disruptors and particular source categories for such chemicals that might be in the environment .

several crs reports on specific chemicals and sources are referenced where relevant .

chemicals with the potential to disrupt endocrine systems are frequently present in the environment , particularly in rivers and streams , and in some consumer products .

exposure to high levels of some of these chemicals has been shown to harm insects , some vertebrate wildlife , and aquatic life by affecting reproductive and other hormone - dependent processes .

in controlled laboratory experiments , some scientists have found that relatively low levels of certain chemicals harm the endocrine systems of fish and wildlife , particularly when exposure is continuous , chemicals bioaccumulate , or animals are exposed simultaneously to several chemicals with similar effects .

fish studies provide the most compelling evidence that endocrine disruption might be occurring due to environmental exposures to contaminants .

reproductive or developmental problems potentially resulting from hormone exposure also have been observed in birds , polar bears , florida panthers , alligators , river otters , mink , and marine invertebrates .

some scientists have hypothesized that existing environmental levels of chemical pollutants might be harming human health by disrupting endocrine functions .

they point to increased rates of certain human health problems , demonstrated harm to human endocrine systems when people have been exposed to high levels of certain chemicals , and epidemiologic studies that have found statistical associations between exposure to environmental levels of potential endocrine disruptors and diabetes , malformations , sexual function , cognitive development , thyroid function , and other potentially hormone - mediated effects .

the environmental endocrine disruptor hypothesis is disparaged by other scientists , because known potential disruptors of endocrine function generally are present in the environment at very low levels , especially compared to the levels of hormones that are naturally present in the human body , as well as in some of the plants that humans eat .

many scientists who are not convinced there is an environmental problem nonetheless are concerned about the issue , because there are no measurements at all of environmental concentrations for most chemicals , people are known to be exposed to low levels of multiple environmental contaminants with endocrine - disrupting potential for which potential cumulative effects have not been assessed , and some studies suggest the public health consequences of exposure might be significant .

congress might be asked to consider various issues connected to the endocrine disruptor hypothesis .

in 1996 , congress mandated chemical screening for endocrine - disrupting potential .

the screening program has not yet been launched , and some argue that it should not be launched until the complete test battery is validated .

others are concerned about the extent to which epa might rely on animal experimentation in its screening program .

once the program is implemented , congress might consider whether statutes and regulations provide adequate authority and direction with respect to the influence of any findings of endocrine disruption on the regulation of specific chemicals , chemical groups , uses , or products .

