tracking changes in energy activity is complicated by variations in different energy markets .

these markets , for the most part , operate independently , although events in one may influence trends in another .

for instance , oil price movement can affect the price of natural gas , which then plays a significant role in the price of electricity .

since aggregate indicators of total energy production and consumption do not adequately reflect these complexities , this compendium focuses on the details of individual energy sectors .

primary among these are oil , particularly gasoline for transportation , and electricity generation and consumption .

natural gas is also an important energy source , for home heating as well as in industry and electricity generation .

coal is used almost entirely for electricity generation , nuclear and hydropower completely so .

renewable sources ( except hydropower ) continue to offer more potential than actual energy production , although fuel ethanol has become a significant factor as a transportation fuel .

wind power also has recently grown rapidly , although it still contributes only a small share of total electricity generation .

conservation and energy efficiency have shown significant gains over the past three decades , and offer encouraging potential to relieve some of the dependence on imports that has caused economic difficulties in the past as well as the present .

to give a general view of energy consumption trends , table 1 shows consumption by economic sector — residential , commercial , transportation , and industry — from 1950 to the present .

to supplement this overview , some of the trends are highlighted in figure 1 and figure 2 .

in viewing these figures , a note on units of energy may be helpful .

each source has its own unit of energy .

oil consumption , for instance , is measured in million barrels per day ( mbd ) , coal in million short tons per year , natural gas in trillion cubic feet ( tcf ) per year .

to aggregate various types of energy in a single table , a common measure , british thermal unit ( btu ) , is often used .

in table 1 , energy consumption by sector is given in units of quadrillion btus per year , or "quads," while per capita consumption is given in million btus ( mmbtu ) per year .

one quad corresponds roughly to one tcf of natural gas , or approximately 50 million tons of coal .

one million barrels per day of oil is approximately 2 quads per year .

one million btus is equivalent to approximately 293 kilowatt - hours ( kwh ) of electricity .

electric power generating capacity is expressed in terms of kilowatts ( kw ) , megawatts ( mw , equals 1,000 kw ) or gigawatts ( gw , equals 1,000 mw ) .

gas - fired plants are typically about 250 mw , coal - fired plants usually more than 500 mw , and large nuclear powerplants are typically about 1.2 gw in capacity .

table 1 shows that total u.s. energy consumption almost tripled since 1950 , with the industrial sector , the heaviest energy user , growing at the slowest rate .

the growth in energy consumption per capita ( i.e. , per person ) over the same period was about 50% .

as table 1 illustrates , much of the growth in per capita energy consumption took place before 1970 .

table 1 does not list the consumption of energy by the electricity sector separately because it is both a producer and a consumer of energy .

for the residential , commercial , industrial , and transportation sectors , the consumption figures given are the sum of the resources ( such as oil and gas ) that are directly consumed plus the total energy used to produce the electricity each sector consumes — that is , both the energy value of the kilowatt - hours consumed and the energy lost in generating that electricity .

as figure 2 shows , a major trend during the period was the electrification of the residential and commercial sectors and , to a lesser extent , industry .

by 2010 , electricity ( including the energy lost in generating it ) represented about 70% of residential energy consumption , about 80% of commercial energy consumption , and about a third of industrial energy consumption .

consumption of major energy resources — petroleum , natural gas , and coal , as well as nuclear and renewable energy — is presented in table 2 and figure 3 .

the historical trends show that petroleum has been and continues to be the major source of energy , rising from about 38% in 1950 to 45% in 1975 , then declining to about 40% in response to the energy crisis of the 1970s .

it remained in that range until the economic recession in 2008 , when it declined to about 36% .

natural gas followed a similar pattern at a lower level , increasing its share of total energy from about 17% in 1950 to over 30% in 1970 , then declining to about 25% in 1995 .

since then , unlike petroleum , natural gas has taken on a larger share of total energy consumption , rising to about 27% in 2013 .

much of that increased use of gas has taken place in the electric power sector , where most additions to generating capacity have been gas - fired .

consumption of coal in 1950 was 35% of the total , almost equal to oil , but it declined to about 20% a decade later .

by that time almost all coal consumption was for electric power generation .

coal's share declined even further in the early 1970s as utilities converted coal - fired plants to burn oil and gas for environmental reasons .

that era ended with the 1970s oil - embargoes , and coal remained at about 23% of total energy consumption until recent years , when natural gas began to replace it as a power - generating source .

about 40% of the energy consumed in the united states is supplied by petroleum , and that proportion remained approximately the same since 1950 , although in recent years it has declined to about 36% .

also unchanged is the almost total dependence of the transportation sector on petroleum , mostly gasoline .

the perception that the world is on the verge of running out of oil , widespread during the 1970s , has changed , however .

the rapid price increases at that time , aided by improved exploration and production technology , stimulated a global search for oil and resulted in large amounts of new reserves .

indeed , as concerns about tightening supply and continually increasing prices were at a peak , and world production of petroleum grew , proven reserves actually increased by about 50% between 1973 and 1990 .

some of the increase was in the western hemisphere , mostly in mexico , but most was located in the region that already dominated the world oil market , the middle east .

with prices essentially steady during the 1990s , the search for oil slowed , but additions to reserves during the decade exceeded the amount of oil pumped out of the ground .

by 2003 , improved technology for retrieving petroleum from oil sands in canada and , to a lesser extent , from heavy oil in venezuela led to significant production from these resources , and by 2005 , approximately 200 billion barrels of resources from oil sands and heavy oil were added to the total of proven world reserves , 20% of the total 1991 figure .

in more recent years , successful extraction of tight oil ( also called "shale oil" ) in the united states has added significantly to world resources estimates .

these trends are illustrated in figure 4 .

while overall energy consumption in the united states increased nearly three - fold since 1950 , electricity consumption increased even more rapidly .

in 2012 , the united states consumed approximately 12,000 kilowatthours per person .

annual power generation is 10 times what it was in 1950 .

figure 13 illustrates the trend .

throughout this period , until recently , coal was used to generate about half the rapidly increasing amount of electricity consumed .

petroleum became briefly important as a source of power generation in the late 1960s because it resulted in lower emissions of air pollutants , and consumption continued in the 1970s despite the price surge because natural gas was presumed to be in short supply .

by the 1980s , however , oil consumption by utilities dropped sharply , and in 2013 less than 1% of power generation was oil - fired .

natural gas generation has a more complicated history .

consumption by the electric power industry increased gradually as access by pipeline became more widespread .

with the price increase in oil in the 1970s , demand for gas also increased , but interstate prices were regulated , and gas availability declined .

in addition , federal energy policy viewed generation of electricity by gas to be a wasteful use of a diminishing resource .

the fuel use act of 1978 prohibited new power generators from using gas and set a timetable for shutting down existing gas - fired plants .

gas prices were later deregulated , resulting in increased production , and the fuel use act was repealed , but in the meantime generation of electricity from gas fell from 24% in 1970 to 12% in 1985 .

in the 1990s gas became more popular as technology improved , and as electricity producers faced tighter clean air act requirements .

by 2000 16% of total electric generation was gas - fired , and by 2013 the figure reached 27% .

most capacity additions since 1995 have been gas - fired , as illustrated in figure 14 .

nuclear power started coming on line in significant amounts in the late 1960s , and by 1975 , in the midst of the oil crisis , was supplying 9% of total generation .

however , increases in capital costs , construction delays , and public opposition to nuclear power following the three mile island accident in 1979 curtailed expansion of the technology , and many construction projects were cancelled .

the chernobyl disaster in april 1986 also contributed to anti - nuclear sentiment .

continuation of some construction increased the nuclear share of generation to 20% in 1990 , where it remains currently .

recently , some new projects have entered the licensing and construction stage , but the future of nuclear power remains in question .

the accident at fukushima , japan , in march 2011 contributed a further consideration regarding future construction .

 ( for more details on u.s. nuclear power activity , see crs report rl33558 , nuclear energy policy , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

construction of major hydroelectric projects has also essentially ceased , and hydropower's share of electricity generation has gradually declined from 30% in 1950 to 15% in 1975 and less than 10% in 2000 .

however , hydropower remains highly important on a regional basis .

in the last decade , a new trend has begun: the addition of wind energy .

as figure 14 illustrates , more than 50 gigawatts of wind energy electricity generating capacity has been added to the u.s. power grid since 2003 .

sources of power generation vary greatly by region ( see table 6 ) .

hydropower in the pacific coast states , for instance , supplies over 36% of total generation , and natural gas 38% .

other regions are heavily dependent on coal generation: the north central and east south central states , as well as the mountain states , generate more than 60% of their electricity from coal , whereas other regions , such as new england and the pacific coast , use relatively little coal .

the west south central region ( arkansas , louisiana , oklahoma , and texas ) generates 45% of its electricity from gas .

new england in the 1970s and 1980s was heavily dependent on oil - generated power ; in 2005 , despite an increased use of natural gas , oil produced 10% of new england's power , compared with the national average of 2.5% .

by 2013 , the proportion had dropped to less than 1% , and almost half new england's electric power was generated by gas .

the price of electricity varies by region , depending on the fuel mix and the local regulatory system , among other factors .

the nationwide average retail price to residential consumers increased during the 1970s energy crises but declined starting in the 1980s , as indicated by figure 15 .

an increase starting in 2000 resulted from the expiration in numerous regions of price caps that had been previously imposed when utilities were deregulated .

by 2010 prices had begun to level off again , in part because of the falling cost of natural gas to utilities ( see figure 16 ) .

consumption of coal has more than doubled since 1950 , but during that period coal as an energy source changed from a widely used resource to a single - use fuel for generating electricity .

 ( see table 7 . ) .

in 1950 the residential and commercial sector consumed almost a quarter of the total ; by 1980 less than 1% of coal went to those sectors .

in transportation , steam locomotives ( and some coal - fired marine transportation ) consumed 13% of coal ; by 1970 they were all replaced with diesel - burning or electric engines .

industry consumed 46% of coal in 1950 ; by 2000 less than 10% of coal was consumed by that sector .

meanwhile , the electric power sector , which consumed less than 20% of the half - billion tons of coal burned in 1950 , used more than 90% of the near - billion tons consumed in 2013 .

consumption of coal has declined in the last decade as utilities have stopped adding new coal - generated electric capacity ( see figure 14 ) .

a major supply of renewable energy in the united states , not counting hydroelectric power generation , is fuel ethanol , particularly for transportation .

consumption in the united states in 2011 reached about 14.0 billion gallons , mainly blended into e10 gasohol ( a blend of 10% ethanol and 90% gasoline ) .

this figure represents 10.2% of the approximately 136 billion gallons of gasoline consumption in the same year .

as figure 19 indicates , fuel ethanol production has increased rapidly in recent years , with the establishment of the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) , which requires the use of biofuels in transportation .

consumption of fuel ethanol has leveled off since the 2011 peak , largely because of barriers to the use of higher blends than e10 .

 ( for details see crs report r40155 , renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) : overview and issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

another rapidly growing renewable resource is wind - generated electric power , as shown in figure 20 .

the 168 billion kwh of wind energy produced in 2013 is about 4% of the 4,100 billion kwh of total electricity generation in that year .

most of the tables and figures in this report are derived from databases maintained by the energy information administration ( eia ) , an independent agency of the department of energy .

eia's website presents the complete text of its many statistical reports in pdf's and excel files .

eia's most frequently requested reports include the following: annual energy review: all the historical yearly energy data across fuels annual energy outlook: energy projections out to 2035 country analysis briefs: country - level energy overviews electric power monthly: monthly summary of electric power generation and capacity international energy annual: international historical yearly energy data across fuels international energy outlook: worldwide energy projections to 2025 monthly energy review: all the latest monthly energy data across fuels this week in petroleum: weekly prices and analytical summary of the petroleum industry weekly petroleum status report: weekly petroleum prices , production and stocks dat .

nuclear regulatory commission information digest: http: / / www.nrc.gov / reading - rm / doc - collections / nuregs / staff / sr1350 / .

updated annually , this official nrc publication ( nureg - 1350 ) includes general statistics on u.s. and worldwide nuclear power production , u.s. nuclear reactors , and radioactive waste .

american petroleum institute ( api ) : http: / / api - ec.api.org / newsplashpage / index.cfm .

the primary trade association of the oil and natural gas industry representing more than 400 members .

research , programs , and publications on public policy , technical standards , industry statistics , and regulations .

api: state gasoline tax reports: http: / / www.api.org / statistics / fueltaxes / index.cfm .

bloomberg.com , market data: commodities , energy prices: http: / / www.bloomberg.com / energy / index.html .

bp statistical review of world energy , http: / / www.bp.com / en / global / corporate / about - bp / energy - economics / statistical - review - of - world - energy - 2013.html .

bp energy outlook , http: / / www.bp.com / en / global / corporate / about - bp / energy - economics / energy - outlook.html .

displays four tables: petroleum ( $ / bbl ) for crude oil .

the generally accepted price for crude oil is "wti cushing $" which is listed third in the table .

petroleum ( ¢ / gal ) for heating oil and gasoline .

natural gas ( $ / mmbtu ) electricity ( $ / megawatt hour ) this site is updated two to three times per day .

aaa's daily fuel gauge report: http: / / www.fuelgaugereport.com / index.asp .

at - the - pump retail fuel prices for gasoline and diesel fuel .

gives average price for today , yesterday , a month ago and a year ago for wholesale and crude oil .

also displays line chart showing the averages for the previous 12 months .

national , state , and metropolitan data .

international energy agency: http: / / www.iea.org , world energy outlook and other publications .

the international energy agency is an autonomous body within the organization for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) .

it gathers and analyzes statistics and "disseminates information on the world energy market and seeks to promote stable international trade in energy. .

a subscription is required to access most of the information on this website , although a limited amount of information is available to nonsubscribers .

members of congress and their staff should contact crs for a copy of anything that requires a subscription .

