dependence on foreign sources of crude oil , concerns over global climate change , and the desire to promote domestic rural economies have raised interest in renewable biofuels as an alternative to petroleum in the u.s. transportation sector .

in response to this interest , u.s. policymakers have enacted a variety of policies , at both the state and federal levels , to directly support u.s. biofuels production and use ( although some of these policies have expired ) .

policy measures have included blending and production tax credits to lower the cost of biofuels to end users , an import tariff to protect domestic ethanol from cheaper foreign - produced ethanol , research grants to stimulate the development of new biofuels technologies , loans and loan guarantees to facilitate the development of biofuels production and distribution infrastructure , and , perhaps most important , minimum usage requirements to guarantee a market for biofuels irrespective of their cost .

as a result of expanding policy support , biofuels ( primarily corn - based ethanol and biodiesel ) production has grown significantly ( up over 600% ) since the early 2000s .

however , despite the rapid growth , u.s. biofuels consumption remains small as a component of u.s. motor fuels , comprising about 5.7% of total transportation fuel consumption ( on a gasoline - equivalent basis ) in 2012 .

initially , the most significant federal programs for supporting biofuels were tax credits for the production or blending of ethanol and biodiesel into the nation's fuel supply .

however , under the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) — first established in 2005 , then greatly expanded in 2007 ( as described below ) — congress mandated biofuels use .

in the long term , the expanded rfs usage mandate is likely to prove more significant than tax incentives in promoting the use of these fuels .

this report focuses specifically on the rfs .

it describes the general nature of the biofuels rfs and its implementation , and outlines some of the emerging issues related to the sustainability of the continued growth in u.s. biofuels production needed to fulfill the expanding rfs mandate , as well as the emergence of potential unintended consequences of this rapid expansion .

this report does not address the broader public policy issue of how best to support u.s. energy policy .

congress first established a renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) — a mandatory minimum volume of biofuels to be used in the national transportation fuel supply — in 2005 with the enactment of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact , p.l .

109-58 ) .

the initial rfs ( referred to as rfs1 ) mandated that a minimum of 4 billion gallons of renewable fuel be used in the nation's gasoline supply in 2006 , and that this minimum usage volume rise to 7.5 billion gallons by 2012 ( table 1 ) .

two years later , the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) superseded and greatly expanded the biofuels mandate to 36 billion gallons by 2022 .

in addition to gasoline , the expanded rfs ( referred to as rfs2 ) applies to most transportation fuel used in the united states — including diesel fuel intended for use in highway motor vehicles , non - road , locomotive , and marine diesel ( mvnrlm ) .

rfs2 directly supports u.s. biofuels production by providing a mandatory market for qualifying biofuels — fuel blenders must incorporate minimum volumes of biofuels in their annual transportation fuel sales irrespective of market prices .

by guaranteeing a market for biofuels , rfs2 substantially reduces the risk associated with biofuels production , thus providing an indirect subsidy for capital investment in the construction of biofuels plants .

as such , the expanding rfs is expected to continue to stimulate growth of the biofuels industry , particularly for the advanced and cellulosic biofuels categories that are potentially in short supply relative to their growing rfs mandates .

eisa was passed on december 19 , 2007 , and epa issued its final rule to implement and administer the rfs2 on february 3 , 2010 .

the new rule builds upon the earlier rule for rfs1 .

however , there are four major distinctions between rfs1 and rfs2: first and foremost , rfs2 increases the mandated usage volumes and extends the time frame over which the volumes ramp up through at least 2022 ( table 1 ) .

second , rfs2 subdivides the total renewable fuel requirement into four separate but nested categories — total renewable fuels , advanced biofuels , biomass - based diesel , and cellulosic biofuels — each with its own volume requirement or standard ( described below ) .

third , biofuels qualifying under each nested rfs2 category must achieve certain minimum thresholds of lifecycle greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emission performance , with exceptions applicable to facilities existing or under construction when eisa was enacted ( table 2 ) .

fourth , under rfs2 all renewable fuel must be made from feedstocks that meet a revised definition of renewable biomass , including certain land use restrictions .

the rfs is administered by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

epa issued its final rule for administering rfs1 in april 2007 .

this rule established detailed compliance standards for fuel suppliers , a tracking system based on renewable identification numbers ( rins ) with credit verification and trading , provisions for treatment of small refineries , and general waiver provisions .

epa rules for administering rfs2 ( issued in february 2010 ) built upon the earlier rfs1 regulations and include specific deadlines for announcing annual standards , as well as greater specificity on potential waiver requests and rin oversight .

most u.s. biofuel production is ethanol produced from corn starch .

as a result , as the u.s. ethanol industry has grown over the years , so too has its usage share of the annual corn crop .

in 2000 , national ethanol production was using about 6% of u.s. corn supplies ; by 2012 it was expected to use about 31% .

the principal co - product from ethanol production — distiller's dried grains or ddg — is useful as a relatively high - protein animal feed .

about 30% ( by weight ) of corn used for biofuels is left over from the production process in the form of ddgs .

the supply of ddgs has become more abundant in direct correlation with the expansion of the ethanol industry , and the u.s. livestock sector has learned how to incorporate this new feedstuff into animal and poultry rations , thus increasing both ddg value and average returns to ethanol production .

corn use for ethanol peaked at 5,019 million bushels in 2010 , then declined sharply to 4,648 million bushels during the severe drought of 2012 .

usda currently estimates 2013 corn use for ethanol at 4,900 million bushels .

under the expanded rfs , the 2015 corn ethanol cap of 15 billion gallons , coupled with the existing u.s. ethanol production capacity of nearly 15 billion gallons , suggests that ethanol will likely use a declining share — perhaps in the 25% to 30% range — of the volume of u.s. corn production ( adjusted for ddgs ) in the future , depending on yield and area developments , and petroleum market conditions .

the shift towards greater corn use for biofuels that occurred from 2006 to 2010 meant higher prices for other corn users , including both the livestock and export sectors ( figure 3 ) .

the biofuels - driven expansion in feedstocks production ( especially corn for grain and stover ) has heightened competition for available cropland between biofuels feedstocks and other field crops , and has resulted in more intense agricultural activity on u.s. cropland to meet growing demand for food , feed , and fuel resources .

this has consequences for several important agricultural markets , including grains — because corn competes with other grains for land ; livestock — because animal feed costs increase with the price of corn ; agricultural inputs — because corn is more input - intensive ( in terms of fertilizers and pesticides ) than other major field crops ; and land — because the value of cropland , as well as total harvested acreage , increases with commodity prices and returns per acre .

as recently as 2004 , over 60% of u.s. corn production was used as feed .

the feed share of corn declined to 40% in 2011 , but is expected to rebound slightly to 47% with the outlook for a record corn crop in 2013 .

there is continuing interest in expanding the u.s. biofuels industry as a strategy for promoting energy security and achieving environmental goals .

however , it is possible that increased biofuel production may place desired policy objectives in conflict with one another .

there are limits to the amount of biofuels that can be produced from current feedstocks , particularly corn , and questions about the net energy and environmental benefits they might provide .

further , rapid expansion of biofuels production based on traditional field crops such as corn may have many unintended and undesirable consequences for agricultural commodity costs , fossil energy use , and environmental degradation .

owing to these concerns , alternative strategies for energy conservation and alternative energy production ( including biofuels from nontraditional feedstock sources ) are widely seen as warranting consideration .

