the offices of the resident commissioner from puerto rico and the delegates to the house of representatives from american samoa , the district of columbia , guam , the u.s. virgin islands , and the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands are created by statute , not by the constitution .

because they represent territories and associated jurisdictions , not states , they do not possess the same parliamentary rights afforded members .

this report examines the parliamentary rights of the delegates and the resident commissioner in legislative committee , in the house , and in the committee of the whole house on the state of the union .

under clause 3 of rule iii , the delegates and the resident commissioner are elected to serve on standing committees in the same manner as representatives and have the same parliamentary powers and privileges as representatives there: the right to question witnesses , debate , offer amendments , vote , offer motions , raise points of order , include additional views in committee reports , accrue seniority , and chair committees and subcommittees .

the same rule authorizes the speaker of the house to appoint delegates and the resident commissioner to conference committees as well as to select and joint committees .

the delegates and the resident commissioner may not vote in or preside over the house .

although they take an oath to uphold the constitution , they are not included on the clerk's roll of members - elect and may not vote for speaker .

they may not file or sign discharge petitions .

they may , however , sponsor and cosponsor legislation , participate in debate — including managing time — and offer any motion that a representative may make , except the motion to reconsider .

a delegate or resident commissioner may raise points of order and questions of personal privilege , call a member to order , appeal rulings of the chair , file reports for committees , object to the consideration of a bill , and move impeachment proceedings .

under the rules of the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) , the delegates and the resident commissioner may not vote in the committee of the whole house on the state of the union .

in a change from the rules of the prior congress , however , they may preside over the committee of the whole .

under rules iii and xviii , as adopted in both the 110 th and 111 th congresses ( 2007-2010 ) , when the house was sitting as the committee of the whole , the delegates and resident commissioner had the same ability to vote as representatives , subject to immediate reconsideration in the house when their recorded votes had been "decisive" in the committee .

these prior house rules also authorized the speaker to appoint a delegate or the resident commissioner to preside as chairman of the committee of the whole .

these rules of the 110 th and 111 th congresses were identical in effect to those in force in the 103 rd congress ( 1993-1994 ) , which permitted the delegates and the resident commissioner to vote in , and to preside over , the committee of the whole .

these provisions were stricken from the rules as adopted in the 104 th congress ( 1995-1996 ) and remained out of effect until readopted in the 110 th congress .

they were again removed from house rules at the beginning of the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) .

at the time of the adoption of the 1993 rule , then - minority leader robert h. michel and 12 other representatives filed suit against the clerk of the house and the territorial delegates seeking a declaration that the rule was unconstitutional .

the constitutionality of the rule was ultimately upheld on appeal based on its inclusion of the mechanism for automatic reconsideration of votes in the house .

the votes of the delegates and the resident commissioner were decisive , and thus subject to automatic revote by the house , on three occasions in the 103 rd congress .

there were no instances identified in the 110 th congress in which the votes of the delegates and the resident commissioner were decisive .

in the 111 th congress , the votes of the delegates were decisive , and subject to an automatic revote , on one occasion .

the prior rule governing voting in the committee of the whole by delegates and the resident commissioner was not interpreted to mean that any recorded vote with a difference of six votes or fewer was subject to automatic reconsideration .

in determining whether the votes of the delegates and the resident commissi oner were decisive , the chair followed a "but for" test — namely , would the result of a vote have been different if the delegates and the commissioner had not voted ? .

if the votes of the delegates and resident commissioner on a question were determined to be decisive by this standard , the committee automatically rose and the speaker put the question to a vote .

the vote was first put by voice , and any representative could , with a sufficient second , obtain a record vote .

once the final result of the vote was announced , the committee of the whole automatically resumed its sitting .

