there is continued interest among members of congress , the obama administration , and nongovernmental organizations ( ngos ) to reform u.s. foreign aid .

this section provides background information concerning the history of modern u.s. foreign aid .

it continues with an explanation of the 2006 creation of the state department's "f bureau" and the position of director of foreign assistance ( dfa ) , who heads that bureau and serves as administrator of the united states agency for international development ( usaid ) .

next , the introduction discusses certain perceived problems with the so - called "f process. .

finally , this section provides an overview of congress's involvement in modern u.s. foreign aid .

while u.s. foreign assistance throughout its history often has been of keen interest to the executive branch , congress , and ngos , a renewed vigor in the debate on foreign aid policy and structure has surfaced in post - 9 / 11 years regarding foreign aid's role in meeting u.s. foreign policy and national security goals .

as a result , several studies have been published since 2001 that have called for reform to improve the foreign aid structure in washington and aid effectiveness in the field .

to this end , these studies have heightened congressional interest in , and encouraged a re - examination of , u.s. foreign assistance policies , programs , funding , and organizational structure .

the 14 studies assessed in this report are often referred to in aid reform discussions , and deal primarily with foreign aid reform issues ; they include books , senate committee reports , think - tank studies , ngo reports , and journal articles .

most of the studies considered present comprehensive approaches for foreign aid reform .

crs could not include every study and other publication related to such reform ; it believes , however , that these 14 studies contain a representative range of viewpoints and recommendations from the foreign aid community .

table 1 presents a matrix of foreign aid reform recommendations in the studies and other publications reviewed for this report .

the 14 documents , listed in alphabetical order by their respective short forms ( identified above and in appendix a and appendix b below ) appear along the left side of the matrix from top to bottom .

crs identified 16 key recommendations which appear in more than one of the studies .

the recommendations are located at the top of the matrix .

they range from a complete replacement of the basic authority of the u.s. government to provide most types of aid , namely , the foreign assistance act of 1961 , to various degrees of restructuring the foreign assistance apparatus and organization within the executive branch , to new ideas and methods of funding , allocating , and evaluating the effect of foreign assistance .

while recommendations have been divided into discrete categories , crs notes that each study's support of any given recommendation may contain slight variations from the same recommendation supported by another study .

a general discussion of the 16 key recommendations follows .

most development and foreign policy experts view u.s. foreign assistance as a valuable activity that addresses many important policy goals , including alleviating poverty and hunger overseas , acquiring a sense of self - worth by the american people , attaining a favorable image around the world , and promoting broader u.s. foreign policy and national security goals .

while the 14 studies surveyed by crs emphasize different aspects of the importance of u.s. foreign assistance , all agree that foreign assistance must be reformed to improve its effectiveness .

only one of the recommendation categories — enhancing civilian agency resources — has the support of all of the studies covered in this report .

the next two most - often cited recommendations are ( 1 ) raising development to equal status with diplomacy and defense ; and ( 2 ) increasing the emphasis of u.s. foreign aid to be more needs - based , with recipient governments taking ownership of both identifying needs and taking responsibility for using aid to meet them .

while these 14 studies do not heavily dwell on dod's growing role in u.s. foreign assistance , many of them refer to that issue , which some see as an undesirable "militarization of foreign aid. .

the role of congress in foreign aid should expand , according to half of the studies reviewed .

in addition to holding more foreign aid hearings , holding them earlier in the legislative process , and conducting greater oversight to encourage more effective coordination of policy and programming , some say congress should become involved early in the budget process , negotiating with the executive branch on funding levels before the budget arrives on capitol hill early each year .

some of the recommendations can be carried out by the executive branch with little or no congressional involvement , such as establishing a national foreign aid strategy , building on the f process , emphasizing needs - based aid , and monitoring aid impact .

most , however , would require congressional action .

for example , rewriting faa , creating a cabinet - level department for foreign aid , enhancing resources to civilian agencies , creating a unified budget , and increasing multilateral aid , among other options , would all require legislation .

some of the recommendation costs could become burdensome , such as creating a cabinet - level department for foreign assistance .

others could have minimal costs , such as increasing field versus d.c. input ; and some recommendations , such as creating a unified budget and improving agency coordination , could result in savings .

still other recommendations could encourage greater aid effectiveness , such as monitoring aid impact , balancing long - term versus short - term aid , increasing needs - driven aid and local ownership of aid programs , and multiyear funding .

since these studies were written for the purpose of making recommendations to reform u.s. foreign aid , it is not surprising that none of them recommend maintaining the status quo .

the 111 th congress is considering the wide array of foreign aid reform possibilities and will decide which path it thinks u.s. foreign aid should take .

it should be noted , however , that given the current economic environment and budget constraints along with the numerous other major concerns , such as two wars , health care , energy policy , and global warming , some members in the 111 th congress may prefer a continuation of the existing foreign aid structure with minor modifications and increased or adjusted resources where possible .

appendix a. crs summaries of reports adams — adams , gordon , "don't reinvent the foreign assistance wheel," foreign service journal , march 2008 .

mr. adams , distinguished fellow with the henry l. stimson center , writes that establishing the f bureau is good and should be built upon .

adams identifies some concerns about the f process , including that 1 ) regional desk officers are concerned that aid funding they hope for would go somewhere else ; 2 ) embassies feel left out of the process and demand greater transparency ; 3 ) usaid worries that development funds would migrate to different strategic purposes in the department of state ; 4 ) everyone feels f bureau's creation was rushed , the system is too top - down , and transparency is inadequate ; and 5 ) the relevant committees in congress believe that they were not consulted early on in the creation of the f bureau and have had to figure out how the new structure fit the budget accounts established by legislation .

he critiques some recommendations of others .

for example , he states that reviving and beefing up usaid would just take us back to those days when usaid and state bickered on a regular basis .

one side doesn't understand development ; the other side doesn't understand strategic purposes , he writes .

in addition , a cabinet - level department of development would worsen the problem by elevating disputes about assistance to senior policymakers , with state and defense likely to carry more weight — the new agency would further disperse the civilian tools of our overseas engagement , as more entities vie to have input on policy direction and control resources ; and foreign aid programs that have no or only partial development component , such as economic support funds ( esf ) , targeted assistance to the former soviet union , counternarcotics programs , counterterrorism , hiv / aids prevention and treatment , and peacekeeping training .

furthermore , development assistance does not have the heft and popularity among constituents and u.s. taxpayers .

the result of creating a separate department could be the exact opposite of the goal — a dwindling away of development assistance , rather that its growth , according to adams .

the author asserts that implementing no reform could lead us backward and lead , instead , to enhancing the role of the dod in delivering foreign assistance .

he says there is a need for more integrated , long - term strategic vision for our diplomacy and foreign assistance .

his recommendations follow: the state department's best option is to build on f ; state and usaid need to focus on making the process work better by assigning personnel who think strategically to the office of civil and foreign service and giving them training in planning , budgeting , and program management and evaluation ; there needs to be structured , systematic engagement between washington and the field with regional bureaus and country desks exercising their skills in programming and budgeting to review requests and set priorities .

this could include a pilot project ; and state and usaid need to work with congress before submitting budgets .

the state department needs to take further steps to: make the director of foreign assistance a second deputy secretary of state , conferring clout to the position .

the authority to implement this already exists in law , adams says , but the state department has not acted on it ; transfer responsibility for operational budgeting to one who can be a deputy secretary of state for operations .

this move would give congress better oversight and accountability , increasing its confidence and willingness for cooperation .

 ( this responsibility is currently divided between the under secretary for management and the resource management bureau , which lost its assistance budget function when f was created ) ; begin a pilot project in long - range strategic planning and budgeting , looking out over five years or more and defining resource requirements connected to long - term strategic objectives , something the f bureau does not do now .

the white house should mandate a foreign assistance strategic planning and budget planning process , based in f and connected to senior officials at the national security council ( nsc ) and the office of management and budget ( omb ) ; and beef up the resource planning capabilities inside the regional bureaus so that each has a robust capability to interact with the f process .

such steps will help state become a more effective foreign relations department , one in which development , public diplomacy , and humanitarian assistance all have equal standing with political and strategic relations as tools with which to engage the world .

amn — atwood , j. brian , m. peter mcpherson , and andrew natsios .

"arrested development , making foreign aid a more effective tool. .

foreign affairs , vol .

87 , no .

6 ( november / december 2008 ) , pp .

123-132 .

this journal article by three former usaid administrators argues that while u.s. foreign aid has increased from $10 billion in 2000 to $22 billion in 2008 , the organizational structure and statutes governing u.s. foreign aid policy have become "chaotic and incoherent due to 20 years of neglect. .

the article emphasizes the need to either create a cabinet - level agency for u.s. foreign aid or restore usaid's autonomy .

either measure would afford greater stature to the u.s. foreign assistance structure in order to influence u.s. trade , investment , and environmental policy , and budgetary independence .

woven throughout , the article suggests: possibly using the provisions of the millennium challenge act of 2003 as a basis for broader aid eligibility provisions , and rewriting the foreign assistance act of 1961 , as it is a "cold war artifact that has become obsolete" ; there is value in having development raised to the level of defense and diplomacy , which the bush administration did theoretically , but not in practice ; creating a cabinet - level agency for development or recreating such stature in usaid , via increased authority and resources ; giving usaid the authority to devise overall strategy on humanitarian and development assistance and coordinate activities of other agencies ; increasing field office input rather than centralizing aid programs in washington will improve effectiveness of aid programs ; customizing aid to the recipient countries to improve potential for success ; preventing funding of narrow , short - term aid programs at the expense of long - term development aid ; and increasing congress's role to include a mandate to establish a new usaid , make the executive branch accountable for results , and provide a new framework for legislators to earmark funds for specific purposes .

brk — brookings institution , foreign assistance: reinventing aid for the 21 st century , testimony by lael brainard , senior fellow and vice president and director , global economy and development , before the house subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs , january 23 , 2008 .

ms. brainard's testimony states that u.s. foreign aid is a critical tool for not only helping the world's poor , but also promoting u.s. national security , interests , and values .

the witness describes the outdated aid infrastructure and how it is based on cold war thinking .

the more than "fifty separate units sharing responsibility for aid planning and delivery in the executive branch , fifty objectives , along with poor communication and coordination," ms. brainard argues , produce inefficiencies , overlap , and result in units working at cross - purposes .

the witness provides the following recommendations to reform u.s. foreign aid and concludes that conditions are favorable now for fundamental aid reform .

elevate the development mission ; invest in civilian capabilities ; support country ownership ; achieve coherence across policies ( similar to that of u.k.'s cabinet - level department for international development ) ; reduce the number of agencies involved in foreign aid and clarify the remaining agencies' missions ; create a cabinet - level voice for development ( merging usaid into state would subordinate development to diplomacy ) .

she also asserts that congress has an integral role to play in holding hearings , mandating independent analysis of current operations , and seeking expert input on alternative organizational structures .

brk - csis — brookings - csis task force .

security by other means: foreign assistance , global poverty , and american leadership edited by lael brainard , 2007 .

security by other means contains 11 chapters that together provide an overall review of the current state and the history of u.s. foreign assistance from multiple authors and through several different analytical approaches .

chapter topics include organizing and unifying u.s. foreign assistance efforts , strengthening development assistance , examining humanitarian and hiv / aids assistance and the u.s. assistance role , providing assistance in areas of current or potential conflict , analyzing security and strategic assistance , creating a more effective congressional - executive relationship for u.s. foreign assistance , and providing historical analysis of previous u.s. attempts at foreign aid reform , as well as the experience of reform in the united kingdom .

the book closes with a chapter containing conclusions and recommendations .

the chapter states that u.s. hard power assets are currently stretched thin , requiring the use of soft power and foreign assistance to meet the security challenges facing the country .

the foreign assistance structure , however , lacks effectiveness due to fragmentation and incoherence , according to the author , despite massive increases in overall foreign assistance funding largely due to the wars and reconstruction in iraq and afghanistan .

in this last chapter , the brookings - csis task force makes several recommendations to create a unified framework for u.s. foreign assistance and to organize it for effectiveness .

it first calls for a unified framework that combines two concepts of foreign assistance across pertinent government actors , policy , and aid delivery: ( 1 ) a soft power tool to meet diplomatic and strategic ends , and ( 2 ) a development tool allocated according to policy effectiveness and human needs .

this framework would integrate different types of assistance — including aid to deal with security threats , development goals , humanitarian needs , and transnational threats such as the global hiv / aids epidemic — to ensure that they are not implemented in isolation , but are provided as a coherent whole , tailored to the needs and objectives in each recipient country .

necessary support for repressive regimes in order to combat security threats would be integrated within a comprehensive country assistance package that also addresses economic and political issues .

foreign assistance policy and programs would be carried out through coordinated interagency action , with a fully funded and operational office of the coordinator for stability and reconstruction , and an engaged national security council , leading the multi - agency effort .

under the framework , congress would integrate its committees that deal with the armed forces and foreign aid through joint hearings and other vehicles to allow for coherent policy and funding .

it would also extend oversight over foreign assistance programs in exchange for greater flexibility for state , dod , and usaid to adapt aid to changing conditions in the field .

the book next provides recommendations for improving effectiveness of u.s. foreign assistance through better governmental organization of foreign assistance agencies and authorities , and an effective executive branch relationship with congress .

the final chapter identifies six central challenges to organizing foreign assistance within the executive branch: proliferation of stand - alone initiatives and foreign aid authority resting with over 50 separate government units requires rationalization of agencies , improved coordination , and mission clarification .

restructuring program design must be driven by objectives and needs , not restrictive funding categories .

the united states must speak with one voice on foreign aid .

government must incentivize interagency cooperation and create a seamless web of foreign assistance , trade and investment , technical assistance , debt relief , and financial stabilization for coherence across all policies affecting poor countries .

the united states must invest in core foreign assistance competencies , including infrastructure and stabilization and reconstruction , rather than relying on megacontracts with private companies that fail to draw on institutional knowledge and experience .

the united states must truly elevate development alongside defense and diplomacy .

this chapter lays out four possible options for reorganizing u.s. foreign assistance: improving coordination while retaining decentralization , positioning usaid as an implementing arm of the state department , merging usaid into state , or creating a new department for global development .

this chapter recommends: creating a new department , as it is the only solution that can meet all the challenges identified for aid reform , the task force argues .

congress pass annual foreign assistance authorization legislation instead of relying on narrow earmarks , and tie detailed , transparent appropriations to authorizations or recommendations from authorizing committees .

increasing flexibility for the use of appropriated funds , by abolishing restrictive operating accounts , restoring a small presidential contingency fund , and rationalizing the funds reprogramming process to make it accountable and efficient .

cgd — center for global development .

modernizing foreign assistance for the 21 st century: an agenda for the next u.s. president .

march 2008 .

this article by the center for global development , a think - tank established in 2001 with a mission to reduce global poverty and inequality , states that the world has undergone significant changes since the post - world war ii era , when modern foreign assistance programs first emerged as a foreign policy tool .

it says that while the george w. bush administration took several steps toward increasing foreign assistance funding and establishing new programs , such as the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) and the millennium challenge account ( mca ) , these changes are not enough .

the author recommends that the next president: develop a national foreign assistance strategy that elevates global development as critical to our national interest and lays out the principal missions and mandates for foreign assistance ; reform the organizational structure by merging most foreign assistance programs and related development policy instruments into a new cabinet - level department and strengthen the organization by expanding and deepening the professional staff , revamping delivery mechanisms , and building a serious monitoring and evaluation system ; rewrite the foreign assistance act of 1961 to streamline procurement rules , earmarks , and restrictions , and to re - establish a strong partnership between the executive branch and congress that allows greater flexibility to executive aid agencies provided there is greater accountability and responsiveness to congress ; place a higher priority on multilateral channels of assistance ; and increase the quantity and improve the allocation of assistance , because , even with recent increases , u.s. foreign assistance is not great enough or unencumbered enough to meet our foreign policy goals .

the article goes on to assert that u.s. foreign assistance can be strengthened by improving the allocation of funding .

the study says that typically 44% of u.s. foreign assistance goes to just six countries , all allies in the war on terror or the war on drugs .

the other 56% of u.s. foreign aid goes to nearly 100 other countries , according to the author .

"one of the most striking patterns is that the united states provides 40% of its assistance to middle - income countries and just 34% to low - income countries .

on average other donors do the reverse.... " cge — center for u.s .

global engagement .

smart power: building a better , safer world — a policy framework for presidential candidates .

july 2007 .

this policy framework , intended for presidential candidates , asserts that the united states must work to build a "better , safer world" because u.s. national security , economic growth , and moral leadership are directly tied to conditions in developing countries and countries in crisis .

the united states must employ an integrated , "smart power" approach that would include all the tools of statecraft , including diplomacy , development , economic policy , defense , and intelligence capabilities .

cge explains that the united states first must invest in the smart power approach , which foremost involves increasing diplomacy and foreign assistance capacity and resources .

it asserts that current smaller investments in diplomacy and foreign assistance have already yielded important benefits , and that with increased resources and capabilities these benefits would grow .

the smart power framework proposes that the united states use an improved diplomatic capacity to develop more highly integrated relationships with other countries and institutions to effectively meet challenges of development and security , while at the same time placing the united states in a strong position of leadership on these issues .

cultural and exchange programs , as well as the peace corps , should be expanded , and cooperation with non - governmental organizations ( ngos ) , universities , and the private sector should be strengthened .

cge recommends that the administration: reorganize national foreign policy that currently is not integrated , and the pieces of which often either act at cross purposes or duplicate work ; authorize the president to develop a national security strategy that integrates diplomacy , development , economic policy , defense , and intelligence capabilities .

an overall national security budget should reflect this new integration in yearly appropriations requests ; elevate development to the level of defense and diplomacy in policy priority , and create a coherent foreign assistance strategy under the control of a new cabinet - level department , or other unifying innovation ; create a flexible and agile diplomatic and foreign assistance corps that possesses the language , technical , cultural , and managerial skills needed to implement programs and build alliances effectively in the field ; restructure the foreign service to align and cooperate better with regional military commands ; increase foreign assistance funding to address stability in latent - and post - conflict states and other concerns , including health , education , and democracy - building ; streamline the foreign assistance bureaucracy to make it flexible and able to meet challenges and crises as they arise ; amendments to the foreign assistance act should be made to implement this goal ; align trade and agricultural subsidy policies with foreign assistance strategies to avoid conflicts and inefficiencies ; and institute a quadrennial foreign assistance strategy review to articulate objectives and align them with budgets .

csis — center for strategic and international studies .

integrating 21 st century development and security assistance .

january 2008 .

this final report of the csis task force on nontraditional security assistance analyzes recent increased department of defense involvement in the provision of foreign assistance , specifically nontraditional security assistance including counter - terrorism capacity building , post - conflict reconstruction and stabilization , and humanitarian assistance .

the task force discusses dod's authority to provide foreign assistance , and the role of the new united states africa command ( africom ) in providing an opportunity for a new approach to the military's role in foreign assistance .

the report finds primarily that dod's involvement in nontraditional security assistance has skyrocketed while the department of state's and usaid's abilities to provide foreign assistance have eroded .

the task force recommends: an overall strategy — that dod continue to provide assistance for short - term contingency situations , but that an overall cross - agency strategy for security assistance be led by the state department ( namely , a fully - funded coordinator for reconstruction and stabilization in the office of the secretary of state ( s / crs ) ) with the dod role clearly defined and closely integrated into this overall strategy ; increased funding — as part of the overall strategy , state and usaid capabilities would be built up through increased funding to restore a balance among dod , the state department , and usaid ; and transparent plans and budgeting — providing cross - agency security assistance plans to congress in order to ensure effective oversight and development of efficient budgeting models for comprehensive assistance funding , as well as benchmarks and metrics for assessment of assistance programs .

help — the help commission report on foreign assistance reform , beyond assistance , december 7 , 2007 .

this bipartisan , congressionally mandated commission interviewed many of the world's foremost experts on foreign assistance .

"not one person appeared before this commission to defend the status quo," according to the report .

the commission states that it is in america's best interest to provide foreign aid , but it says the u.s. foreign assistance system is broken .

along with emphasizing long - term development as a valuable objective , the help commission recommends: congress and the white house should work together to rewrite the foreign assistance act of 1961 , reflecting new development goals and programs and aligning it with the post - 9 / 11 world ; more assistance targeted to private sectors in developing countries , because business should be the engine of growth in the developing world ; a new business model to engage new non - governmental partners — u.s .

foreign aid should be conducted in concert with local private or public partners that are committed to development ; alignment of america's trade and development policies , which often conflict .

for example , countries that are eligible for millennium challenge corporation funding often pay more in tariffs than they receive in aid ; strengthened management capacity of u.s. assistance agencies .

the united states should improve monitoring and evaluation , human resources , and procurement and contracting capabilities of agencies involved with foreign aid to improve the effectiveness of taxpayer dollars .

also , while the workload of foreign aid agencies has gone up , the staff has been cut , which hurts effectiveness of the programs ; reorganization of all u.s. international affairs functions to elevate foreign aid and development to equal status with defense and diplomacy .

a new department would include usaid and all other u.s. development agencies , or a newly reorganized department of state could include usaid ; and funding from the bottom up , based on the needs and commitment of developing countries and on the national and security interests of the united states .

to support its key findings , the commission also urges: forging a new executive / legislative branch relationship acknowledging the need for flexibility and accountability ; bolstering humanitarian efforts and establishing a $500 million humanitarian fund as a permanent facility ; creating a permanent $500 million foreign crisis fund ; simplifying the funding account structure for more clearly defined responsibility and authority ; clarifying dod's role in development assistance ; using public diplomacy and branding more effectively ; and emphasizing the importance of local infrastructure and agriculture .

interaction — why the u.s .

needs a cabinet - level department for global and human development , interaction policy paper , june 2008 .

this policy paper discusses the haphazard evolution of u.s. foreign assistance and asserts that nearly five decades after the beginning of modern u.s. foreign aid , it is badly broken and needs to be repaired .

within the context of its primary recommendation to create a cabinet - level department for global and human development that would elevate development to the level of defense and diplomacy , the report weaves other recommendations in , such as: emphasis on collaboration and cooperation , both with the recipient country , but also among other u.s. government foreign aid agencies and programs ; achievement of long - term objectives , which should not be sidetracked for short - term political agendas ; a rewriting of the foreign assistance act of 1961 to re - emphasize poverty reduction ; promotion of local self - sufficiency by providing needs - based aid and building local capacity ; and an increase in recruiting and training human resources to meet shortages , particularly in usaid .

oecd — organization for economic co - operation and development .

development assistance committee peer review of the united states .

december 2006 .

this oecd report provides an overview of u.s. foreign assistance , noting new initiatives such as the "3d" concept for u.s. foreign policy , transformational diplomacy at the state department , the new director of foreign assistance ( dfa ) position and foreign assistance framework ( faf ) , and the growing role of the defense department in providing foreign aid .

the report commends u.s. increases in overall official development assistance ( oda ) and the u.s. status as the largest donor of official humanitarian assistance .

the report notes the increase in oda , however , has been concentrated in assistance to iraq and afghanistan , and does not represent growing predictability in u.s. aid .

the oecd development assistance committee ( dac ) also finds deficiencies in many areas of the u.s. foreign assistance framework and strategy , including continuing organizational fragmentation and a lack of development policy coherence , as well as underutilization of multilateral avenues for delivery of assistance and coordination of development efforts .

a reduction in the prominence of usaid in the provision of oda , the diminishing importance of funding for economic development , and insufficient reliance upon results - based monitoring also figure among the report's concerns .

with regard to the role of congress , the report criticizes the current legislative web of earmarks and other directives , such as requiring use of u.s. products and services for aid ( so - called "tied aid" ) , which reduce assistance flexibility and the ability to cooperate with multilateral institutions and international assistance partners .

the dac recommends several steps to improve u.s. foreign assistance overall: raise development to an equal level with diplomacy and defense within u.s. foreign policy ; broaden the foreign assistance framework and the role of the dfa to oversee all government development actors , and improve public awareness of the importance of development programs ; improve u.s. aid volume and distribution efforts by creating a long - term plan for oda creating predictability and strategic allocation ; balance aid for crisis countries and countries requiring long - term development assistance ; play a stronger role in the multilateral assistance sphere ; adopt a long - term plan for humanitarian assistance , increasing coherence in humanitarian aid policy , reforming food aid , and integrating humanitarian aid with longer - term development activities ; and adopt a unified , results - based management approach , based on principles of the paris declaration on aid effectiveness for improved aid effectiveness .

oxfam — oxfam america , smart development , why u.s. foreign aid demands major reform , february 2008 .

this report asserts that reform is necessary for two primary reasons .

first , as development has become part of u.s. national security strategy , it has been increasingly integrated under military control in order to achieve short - term political and security goals .

short - term policy interests often are at the expense of longer - term development of the recipient country .

second , revamping u.s. foreign aid to strengthen recipient states and empower their citizens to free themselves from poverty and injustice will , in turn , make america safer .

"a more prosperous world with effective states accountable to their citizens is likely to be safer. .

the report discusses "the securitization of aid" saying , "the new u.s. army / marine corps counterinsurgency field manual argues for a radical shift in strategy where the primary objective of any counterinsurgency operation 'is to foster development of effective governance by a legitimate government.' .

the report discusses the increasingly military organization of aid , such as africom , and the heightened emphasis on security assistance in the budget , reflecting the increasing imbalance between short - term security and long - term development goals .

the study recommends the following reform actions: prioritize development as a principal , rather than subordinate , element of our national security alongside defense and diplomacy ; enact a new foreign assistance act ; create a new department of foreign assistance ; create a national development strategy ; rebuild usaid or create a new foreign aid agency ; increase nonproject aid to developing country governments that have credible and transparent and coherent development strategies ; allow for multiyear u.s. foreign aid commitments so countries can make plans for future ; and untie u.s. foreign aid .

sfrc1 — senate foreign relations committee , embassies as command posts in the anti - terror campaign , december 15 , 2006 .

points made in this committee report include: among other measures to strengthen u.s. embassies around the world , this report recommends that ambassadors should be charged with the decision whether to approve all humanitarian and development assistance , and other related programs , as well as all military - related programs implemented in - country , including assistance provided under the enlarged authority in section 1206 of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 ( p.l .

109-163 ) for dod to provide security assistance .

some countries receive between a quarter and half of their u.s. assistance in the form of security assistance , and section 1206 does not address immediate threats to the united states that cannot be included in the normal budget process .

therefore , the secretary of state should insist that all security assistance , including section 1206 funding , be included under the secretary of state's authority in the new process for rationalizing and prioritizing foreign assistance .

country team meetings organized by the director of foreign assistance should include military representatives in cases where the country is a recipient or potential recipient of military funding in order to get the civilian / military balance .

congress should fund the civilian foreign affairs agencies ( dos and usaid , in particular ) at a minimum to the level requested by the president .

the current 12:1 ratio of military to civilian foreign aid agencies risks the further encroachment of the military into areas where civilian leadership is more experienced .

the administration should develop a comprehensive budget for foreign assistance that incorporates economic , development , humanitarian , security and military assistance .

all foreign assistance programs should be funded through the foreign assistance accounts , as administered by the department of state .

the secretary of state should retain primary authority over its planning and implementation of both function 150 and function 050 assistance .

sfrc2 — senate foreign relations committee , embassies grapple to guide foreign aid , november 16 , 2007 .

this report finds that the united states has failed as a government to agree on the importance or strategy of u.s. foreign assistance .

it claims that overall agreement on foreign assistance between washington and overseas posts is lacking , and field complaints on the f process center on a lack of transparency , extra paperwork , differing priorities , and inconsistent demands with an underlying problem about money .

despite these concerns , embassy officials believe they are coping well and welcome new programs that bring additional funding to the host country .

the report recommends: the president should design a national foreign assistance strategy that explains both the national security requirement and the humanitarian imperative that drive the u.s. government's investment in foreign aid ; the president should task the secretary of state to work closely with the administrator of usaid to implement the president's foreign assistance strategy , giving the secretary of state explicit authority to ensure that all foreign aid is in the foreign policy interest of the united states ; the secretary of state , working with the usaid administrator , should garner the foreign assistance funds necessary to carry out the president's strategy ; the secretary of state should provide strategic direction , transparency , and overall accountability to foreign assistance .

the report states that her efforts to do so through the "f" process have been flawed in implementation ; usaid should be recognized for the indispensable role it plays in the effectiveness of u.s. development policy and should be strengthened and given resources to attract the world's best development experts ; ambassadors should take responsibility for the implementation of the president's foreign aid strategy , making certain that assistance is balanced and spent effectively in coordination with the host country and other donors ; the president should continue to request and congress should continue to provide funding for security assistance in the foreign affairs budget with some implementation by dod ; foreign assistance functions and authorities should not be migrated to dod due to inadequate budget requests for funding in the proper account ; and congress should play an important role in ensuring that foreign aid is well spent .

state — department of state , advisory committee on transformational diplomacy: final report of the state department in the 2025 working group , january 28 , 2008 .

the state 2025 working group expects that the world will radically change in the coming years and will require u.s. overseas presence , skilled personnel , knowledge , and policy insights as never before from the department of state .

the scale and complexity of anticipated global challenges and opportunities will demand a department that is significantly more robust , better resourced , and more strategically focused .

among the 10 recommendations in the report , those regarding u.s. foreign aid include: the state department should work with the usaid and other u.s. government agencies , other nations , and multilateral organizations .

specifically , it should integrate planning offices and technology infrastructures of state and usaid , merge overlapping bureaus and functions , and co - locate related offices and personnel in washington , d.c. to bring strategies and operations into alignment .

further , state should establish a senior - level responsibility and interagency authority for reconstruction and stabilization activities and fully develop state's planning and execution capacities in these areas .

both state and usaid should expand u.s. global presence , critical training and rotations , and improve their capacity to deploy integrated teams on short notice for short - term assignments .

specifically , among other things , the report recommends increasing the number of state's foreign service and civil service staff by 100% over 10 years , and increasing usaid's deployable staff resources by 100% in 3 years .

appendix b. bibliography ( adams ) adams , gordon , "don't reinvent the foreign assistance wheel. .

foreign service journal , vol .

85 , no .

3 ( march 2008 ) , pp .

41-50 .

 ( amn ) atwood , j. brian , m. peter mcpherson , and andrew natsios .

"arrested development , making foreign aid a more effective tool. .

foreign affairs , vol .

87 , no .

6 ( november / december 2008 ) , pp .

123-132 .

 ( brk ) witness statement of lael brainard , brookings institution .

u.s. congress .

house .

committee on appropriations .

subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs .

hearing on foreign aid reform .

110 th congress , 2 nd session , january 23 , 2008 .

at http: / / www.cq.com / display.do ? dockey= / cqonline / prod / data / docs / html / testimonychild / 110 / testimonychild110-000002661004.html@allchild&metapub=cq - testimonychild&searchindex=1&seqnum=4 .

 ( brk - csis ) brainard , lael , ed .

security by other means: foreign assistance , global poverty , and american leadership .

washington: brookings institution press and center for security and international studies , 2006 .

 ( cgd ) center for global development .

modernizing foreign assistance for the 21 st century: an agenda for the next u.s. president .

march 2008 .

at http: / / www.cgdev.org / content / publications / detail / 15561 / .

 ( cge ) center for u.s .

global engagement .

smart power: building a better , safer world — a policy framework for presidential candidates .

july 2007 .

at http: / / www.usglobalengagement.org / portals / 16 / ftp / center_for_us_global_engagement_policy%20framework.pdf .

 ( csis ) center for strategic and international studies .

integrating 21 st century development and security assistance .

january 2008 .

at http: / / www.csis.org / media / csis / pubs / 080118-andrews - integrating21stcentury.pdf .

 ( help ) united states commission on helping to enhance the livelihood of people around the globe .

beyond assistance: the help commission report on foreign assistance reform .

december 7 , 2007 .

at http: / / www.helpcommission.gov / portals / 0 / beyond%20assistance_help_commission_report.pdf .

 ( interaction ) american council for voluntary international action ( interaction ) .

why the u.s .

needs a cabinet - level department for global and human development .

interaction policy paper .

june 2008 .

at http: / / www.interaction.org / files.cgi / 6305_cabinet - level_rationale_paper.pdf .

 ( oecd ) organization for economic co - operation and development .

development assistance committee peer review of the united states .

december 2006 .

at http: / / www.oecd.org / dataoecd / 61 / 57 / 37885999.pdf .

 ( oxfam ) oxfam america .

smart development , why u.s. foreign aid demands major reform .

february 2008 .

at http: / / www.oxfamamerica.orgnewsandpublications / publications / briefing_papers / smart - development / smart - development - may2008.pdf .

 ( sfrc1 ) u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on foreign relations .

embassies as command posts in the anti - terror campaign .

committee print .

109 th congress , 2 nd session , december 15 , 2006 .

s.prt .

109-52 .

washington: gpo , 2006 .

 ( sfrc2 ) u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on foreign relations .

embassies grapple to guide foreign aid .

committee print .

110 th congress , 1 st session , november 16 , 2007 .

s.prt .

110-33 .

washington: gpo , 2007 .

 ( state ) department of state , advisory committee on transformational diplomacy: final report of the state department in the 2025 working group , january 28 , 2008 .

at http: / / www.state.gov / documents / organization / 99879.pdf .

