on december 20 , 2010 , the senate committee on foreign relations reported s.res .

680 ( amended ) proposing to express support for international tiger conservation efforts .

on december 17 , 2010 , the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation reported s. 3597 ( amended ) , including a provision that would identify critical habitat designated under esa authority as priority risk areas in which coast guard routing or other navigational measures are warranted to reduce the risk of oil spills and potential damage to natural resources .

on december 10 , 2010 , the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation reported s. 1748 ( amended ) , proposing to establish a research program for recovery of the southern sea otter .

increasing numbers of animal and plant species face possible extinction .

endangered and threatened species — and the law that protects them , the 1973 endangered species act ( esa , p.l .

93-205 , as amended ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 1531-1543 ) — are controversial , in part , because dwindling species are often harbingers of resource scarcity .

the most common cause of species' decline is habitat loss or alteration .

habitat loss occurs due to development , climate change , changes in land management practices , competition from invasive species , and other factors , nearly all related to economic , political , or social interests .

esa has been among the most contentious environmental laws because of its strict substantive provisions , which can affect the use of both federal and nonfederal lands and resources .

congress faces the issue of how to balance these interests ( which may fall on various sides of any given species controversy ) with the protection of endangered and threatened species and , as stated in esa , "the ecosystems upon which endangered species and threatened species depend. .

because of strong support and strong opposition , esa has not been reauthorized since the last authorization expired in 1992 .

in the 109 th congress , there were several unsuccessful attempts to enact comprehensive legislation that would have reauthorized esa .

consequently , congressional efforts in the 110 th and 111 th congresses focused on addressing specific controversial features of esa and on oversight of concerns such as the science used for making decisions and designation of critical habitat .

esa reauthorization has been on the legislative agenda since the funding authorization expired in 1992 , and bills have been introduced in each subsequent congress to address various aspects of endangered species protection .

below are descriptions of some of the issues that received attention in the 111 th congress .

on august 15 , 2008 , fws and nmfs ( i.e. , services ) issued proposed revisions to the section 7 consultation regulations .

the final version was published december 16 , 2008 , and took effect january 15 , 2009 .

however , section 429 of p.l .

111-8 authorized withdrawal of the regulations , which was done may 4 , 2009 .

the regulations would have revised the consultation process by ( 1 ) allowing already prepared documents to be used as a ba ; ( 2 ) allowing action agencies greater discretion to determine whether consultation applies ; ( 3 ) clarifying certain definitions ; and ( 4 ) making procedural changes to informal consultations .

the revised regulations also addressed climate change .

the services said that the modifications would "reinforce the services' current view that there is no requirement to consult on [greenhouse gas] emissions' contribution to global warming and its associated impacts on listed species. .

with limited exceptions , by law fws or nmfs must designate ch at the time a species is listed .

however , some critics argue that ch designation places undue burdens on landowners or that it has little conservation benefit .

others argue ( and the courts have largely agreed ) that fws and nmfs have misinterpreted and failed to enforce the current statute .

there are also disagreements over the value and timing of ch designation .

 ( see " critical habitat " above. ) .

esa requires that determinations of a species' status be made "solely on the basis of the best scientific and commercial data available. .

in several recent situations , legal , economic , and social disputes have resulted from actions under esa .

examples of these controversies include the florida panther , klamath river basin suckers and coho salmon , gray wolf , and sonoran desert bald eagles .

critics in some of these disputes suggest that the science supporting esa action has been insufficiently rigorous or mishandled by the agencies .

many rare and endangered species are little studied because they are hard to find or because it is difficult to locate enough of them to support definitive scientific research .

there may be little information on many species facing extinction , and only limited personnel or funds available to conduct studies on many of the less charismatic species , or those of little known economic import .

what should be done in such instances ? .

some suggest that considerations other than species conservation should prevail ; others seek to change the current posture of the law by changing the role of science .

these considerations are complicated by the cost and time required to acquire more complete data , particularly in connection with many lesser - known species .

esa does not elaborate on this question , but some assert that , given the protective purpose of esa — to save and recover species — and the wording of "best scientific ... data available," species that may be dwindling are to be given the benefit of the doubt and a margin of safety .

this is the position taken on pages 1-7 of the joint fws / nmfs endangered species consultation handbook , which states that efforts should be made to develop information , but if a biop must be rendered promptly , it should be based on the available information , "giving the benefit of the doubt to the species," with consultation possibly being reinitiated if additional information becomes available .

this phrase is drawn from h.rept .

96-697 , p. 12 ( 1979 ) , which states that the "best information available" language was intended to allow fws or nmfs to issue biops even when information was incomplete , rather than being forced to issue negative biops for lack of data .

the report also states that if a biop is rendered on the basis of inadequate information , the federal agency proposing an action has the duty to show that its actions will not jeopardize a species and a continuing obligation to make a reasonable effort to develop information , and that the statutory language "continues to give the benefit of the doubt to the species. .

section 515 of p.l .

106-554 , known as the information quality act or the data quality act , directs the office of management and budget ( omb ) to issue government - wide guidelines to federal agencies to ensure and maximize the quality , objectivity , utility , and integrity of information disseminated by federal agencies .

omb published final guidelines on february 22 , 2002 .

the department of the interior and fws have both issued additional guidelines that are available through their websites , and have established a process for interested persons to seek correction of information .

even before these latest guidelines were issued , fws had promulgated guidance on information quality and peer review procedures — issues that also have been addressed in recent legislation .

fws and nmfs developed an interagency cooperative policy on information standards under the endangered species act .

under this policy , fws and nmfs are to receive and use information from a wide variety of sources , including individuals .

submitted information may range from the informal — oral , traditional , or anecdotal — to peer - reviewed scientific studies , and hence the reliability of the information can vary widely .

agency biologists are to review and evaluate all information impartially for purposes of listing , ch designation , consultation , recovery , and permitting actions , and to ensure that any information used by the agencies to implement esa is "reliable , credible , and represents the best scientific and commercial data available. .

agency biologists are to document their evaluations of all information and , to the extent consistent with the use of the best scientific and commercial data available , use primary and original sources of information as the basis for recommendations .

in addition , agency managers are to review the work of fws and nmfs biologists to "verify and assure the quality of the science used to establish official positions , decisions , and actions. .

additionally , a companion document , the interagency cooperative policy for peer review in endangered species act activities , notes that , in addition to the public comments received on proposed listing rules and draft recovery plans , the services are also to formally solicit expert opinions and peer review to ensure the best biological and commercial information .

for listing decisions , the agencies are to solicit the expert opinions of at least three specialists and summarize these in the record of final decision .

special independent peer review can also be used when it is likely to reduce or resolve an unacceptable level of scientific uncertainty .

courts , in considering the "best data available" language , have held that an agency is not obliged to conduct studies to obtain missing data , but cannot ignore available biological information , especially if the ignored information is the most current .

nor may an agency treat one species differently from other similarly situated species , or decline to list a dwindling species and wait until it is on the brink of extinction in relying on possible but uncertain future actions of an agency .

"best scientific and commercial data available" is not a standard of absolute certainty , reflecting congress's intent that fws take conservation measures before a species is conclusively headed for extinction .

if fws does not base its listings on speculation or surmise or disregard superior data , the imperfections of the studies upon which it relies do not undermine those studies as the best scientific data available — "the service must utilize the best scientific ... data available , not the best scientific data possible. .

judicial review can also help ensure that agency decisions and their use of scientific data are not arbitrary or capricious and that regulations are rationally related to the problems causing the decline of a species , especially when other interests are adversely affected .

in arizona cattle growers association v. united states fish and wildlife service , the court stated that the evidentiary bar fws must clear is very low , but it must at least clear it .

in the context of issuing incidental take permits under section 10 ( a ) , this ruling means the agency must demonstrate that a species is or could be in an area before regulating it , and must establish the causal connection between the land use being regulated and harm to the species in question .

mere speculation as to the potential for harm is not sufficient .

an agency must consider the relevant facts and articulate a rational connection between these facts and the choices made .

in the absence of federal regulatory action on climate change , environmental groups are eyeing use of the endangered species act ( among other approaches ) as a means of restricting greenhouse gas emissions .

this approach is still in the embryonic stage .

the idea , as spearheaded by the center for biological diversity ( cbd ) , is to petition fws and nmfs to list as endangered or threatened various animals whose habitat is or will be adversely affected by climate change .

 ( cbd has already done so for several species , including the polar bear. ) .

once the species is listed , the argument would be made that sources of substantial greenhouse gas emissions , such as coal - fired power plants , cause an unlawful "take" of these species under esa section 9 by the effect such emissions have , via climate change , on the species' habitat .

this could force negotiation of an incidental take permit for the source with greenhouse gas - limiting terms and conditions .

note that "take" is defined in the esa to include "harm" to a member of a listed species , and "harm," in turn , is defined by regulation to include certain "significant habitat modification[s] or degradation[s]. .

as a result , federal agencies proposing to issue permits for the construction or modification of greenhouse gas sources would be required , the argument runs , to initiate section 7 consultation .

any effort to address climate change through the esa will encounter several obstacles , chief among them whether the causal link between greenhouse gas emissions and habitat harm is too attenuated to fall within the esa's prohibitions and requirements .

the esa also provides federal agencies with various tools to minimize esa / climate change conflicts , such as section 4 ( d ) "special rules" for threatened species .

in may 2008 , fws listed the polar bear as threatened , catapulting the above section 7 , section 9 , and 4 ( d ) - rule mechanisms to the fore .

in connection with the listing , fws opposed using the esa to address climate change .

first , it issued a 4 ( d ) rule for the polar bear specifically excluding from the section 9 take prohibition "any taking of polar bears that is incidental to , but not the purpose of ... an otherwise lawful activity. .

an effect of the exclusion appears to be that a coal - fired power plant could not be deemed to "take" polar bears through its greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions .

second , fws argued in the listing preamble that current scientific understanding has not established a causal connection between specific sources of ghg emissions and specific impacts to polar bears or their habitat , concluding that the section 7 consultation mechanism would not be triggered by federal actions leading to greater ghg emissions ( eg , permitting of fossil - fuel - fired power plants ) .

on october 22 , 2009 , the u.s .

fish and wildlife service proposed protecting more than 200,000 square miles of critical habitat for polar bear along the alaska coast .

in the 111 th congress , section 429 of p.l .

111-8 authorized the secretary of the interior to withdraw or reissue the december 2008 special rule that outlined protections afforded polar bears within 60 days of this measure's enactment ; the obama administration took this action on may 4 , 2009 .

the 111 th congress considered , but did not enact , several additional bills related to climate change and endangered species: section 11 of h.r .

2192 ; title iv , subtitle e , part 1 , subpart c , section 480 , of h.r .

2454 / h.r .

2998 ; division a , title iii , subpart c , section 370 , of s. 1733 ; and s. 1933 would have allocated funds to endangered species programs and to related funds to assist species' adaptation to climate change .

on may 18-21 , 2009 , the house committee on energy and commerce held hearings on h.r .

2454 and , on june 5 , 2009 , the house committee on energy and commerce reported ( amended ) h.r .

2454 ( h.rept .

111-137 , part i ) .

the house passed h.r .

2454 ( amended ) on june 26 , 2009 .

on october 27-29 , 2009 , the senate committee on environment and public works held a hearing on s. 1733 .

on february 2 , 2010 , the senate committee on environment and public works reported ( amended ) s. 1733 ( s.rept .

111-121 ) .

h.r .

1054 / s. 1395 would have amended the marine mammal protection act to allow imports of polar bear trophies taken in sport hunts in canada before the polar bear was listed as a threatened species under esa ; on september 22 , 2009 , the house natural resources subcommittee on insular affairs , oceans , and wildlife held a hearing on h.r .

1054 .

h.r .

5379 would have delisted the polar bear as a threatened species .

s. 724 would have amended esa to temporarily prohibit the secretary of the interior from considering global climate change as a natural or manmade factor in determining whether a species is threatened or endangered .

section 306 ( b ) of h.r .

1431 / s. 570 , section 503 of h.r .

2846 , and section 503 ( b ) of s. 1333 would have prohibited the impacts of greenhouse gases to be considered in esa implementation .

one express purpose of esa is to "provide a means whereby the ecosystems upon which endangered species and threatened species depend may be conserved" ( 16 u.s.c .

§ 1531 ( b ) ) .

as open space dwindles and increasing human populations put pressures on wildlands and natural resources , efforts to conserve species and their habitats may highlight underlying resource crises and economic conflicts .

public values and affected economic interests may be complex and sometimes at odds .

the situations described below have been the subject of recent congressional oversight and legislative interest .

controversy erupted in 2001 when the bureau of reclamation announced it would not release water from part of its klamath irrigation project to approximately 200,000 acres of farm and pasture lands within the roughly 235,000-acre project service area .

the operational change sought to make more water available for three fish species under esa protection — two endangered sucker species , and a threatened coho salmon population .

the klamath project straddles the oregon / california border and has been the site of increasingly complex water management conflicts involving several tribes , fishermen , farmers , environmentalists , and recreationists .

upstream farmers point to their contractual rights to water from the klamath project and to hardships for their families if water is cut off .

others assert that the downstream salmon fishery is more valuable and that farmers could be provided temporary economic assistance , while salmon extinction would be permanent .

still others assert that there are ways to serve all interests , or that the science underlying agency determinations is simply wrong .

specifically at issue is how to operate the bureau's project facilities to meet irrigation contract obligations without jeopardizing the three listed fish .

the trinity river diversion from the klamath basin to central california also has ramifications for the bureau's role in the central valley project ( cvp ) .

ten - year and annual operation plans , and associated biological assessments ( by the bureau ) and biops ( by fws and nmfs ) have been variously criticized and defended .

on july 31 , 2007 , the house natural resources committee held an oversight hearing on allegations of political intervention influencing scientific and policy decisions at the department of the interior , with respect to klamath river salmon .

a draft agreement was negotiated by 29 klamath river stakeholders and signed on september 30 , 2009 , to address conflicting water management objectives , including removal of four dams that block salmon and steelhead from historic spawning areas .

the parties to this agreement have indicated that they will seek legislative support from congress .

salmon protection in the pacific northwest presents many difficult choices , especially because of recent droughts and the connection between regional hydropower facilities and fishery management decisions .

nmfs officials have listed a total of 26 distinct population segments ( called evolutionarily significant units or esus ) of pacific salmon and steelhead trout as either threatened or endangered , and are working with state , local , and tribal officials , as well as the public , to implement recovery measures addressing habitat restoration and other concerns .

recent controversies and litigation have focused on three issues: ( 1 ) biops on operation of the many dams on the columbia and snake rivers ( federal columbia river power system ) , including the decision to retain ( or remove ) four dams on the lower snake river , and how properly to factor the presence of the dams into evaluations of jeopardy ; ( 2 ) whether salmon produced in hatcheries should be included in listed esus of pacific salmon ; and ( 3 ) the role and extent of ch designation in the recovery of pacific salmon .

in 2007 , the hatchery listing policy of nmfs was ruled invalid by a federal court , in part because the court found it scientifically questionable to include hatchery - raised fish under an act designed to protect wild fish .

decisions of the federal district court for oregon have invalidated nmfs's approach to evaluating jeopardy to salmon from dam operations on the columbia and snake rivers , and ordered increased spills of water to assist transit of juvenile salmon to the sea .

the obama administration is currently reviewing federal salmon and water management options for the columbia river basin before the federal court makes a decision on the most recent biop .

on october 7 , 2009 , nmfs announced availability of its draft central valley salmon and steelhead recovery plan for public comment .

in the 111 th congress , title x , subtitle a , of p.l .

111-11 authorized the implementation of the san joaquin river restoration settlement , providing for the reintroduction of chinook salmon .

on march 31 , 2009 , the house committee on natural resources held an oversight hearing on the california drought and actions by federal and state agencies to address impacts on lands , fisheries , and water users .

several additional measures were introduced but not enacted: h.r .

1672 and s. 668 would have directed county marine resources committees to assist in identifying local implications , needs , and strategies associated with the recovery of puget sound salmon ; on october 21 , 2009 , the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation reported ( amended ) s. 668 ( s.rept .

111-90 ) .

on december 7 , 2009 , the house committee on natural resources reported ( amended ) h.r .

1672 ( h.rept .

111-354 ) , and the house subsequently passed this measure ( amended ) .

s. 817 and h.r .

2055 would have established a salmon stronghold partnership program to protect wild pacific salmon .

on november 17 , 2010 , the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation reported s. 817 ( s.rept .

111-348 ) .

h.r .

2977 would have directed the bureau of reclamation to enter into an agreement with the national academy of sciences to study sustainable water and environmental management in the sacramento - san joaquin delta , california .

h.r .

3794 would have amended the central valley project improvement act to assist in efforts to avoid losses of juvenile anadromous fish .

h.r .

3999 would have directed the commissioner of the bureau of reclamation to initiate esa consultations on the cvp and the california state water project .

h.r .

3503 would have required a scientific analysis of federal salmon recovery efforts by the national academy of sciences and authorize removal of the four lower snake river dams by the army corps of engineers .

delta smelt ( hypomesus transpacificus ) is a small , slender - bodied fish found only in the san francisco bay and sacramento - san joaquin rivers delta in california ( bay - delta ) , where they were once abundant .

the species was listed as threatened under esa in 1993 and , in recent years , its abundance has declined to the lowest ever observed .

the decline has been attributed to a combination of several factors , including entrainment ( i.e. , entrapment ) in water export pumps , competition and predation from exotic fish species , toxic contaminants , changes in habitat size and quality , and changes in food supply .

the contribution of each factor in causing the species decline is controversial .

some contend that entrainment in water pumps is the primary cause , whereas others argue that all causes might be more or less equally responsible for the observed decline .

the delta smelt decline has significant consequences for the operation of the federal cvp and the state water project ( swp ) , which supply water to much of california .

if entrainment and / or adverse modification of delta smelt critical habitat by water pumps is largely responsible for the decline of delta smelt , changes in how these pumps are operated might be required to satisfy esa requirements .

these requirements could result in reduced pumping and less water for users .

in 2004 , the bureau of reclamation , which operates the cvp , issued a biological assessment ( ba ) of its proposal to increase pumping as part of a revised coordinated operational plan with the swp , known as ocap .

to address the impact of ocap on delta smelt , an esa section 7 consultation between fws and the bureau was conducted .

fws initially issued a no - jeopardy biop with regard to impacts on delta smelt by the operations of the cvp and swp in 2004 , and re - issued the biop in 2005 to address potential critical habitat issues of the delta smelt brought up by the bureau .

in may 2007 , the fws biop was found not to comply with esa with regard to delta smelt .

the bureau and fws reinitiated consultation based on new information on the delta smelt in 2007 .

while the consultation process was underway , the bureau implemented interim protective measures required by a court order issued in december 2007 .

a revised biop was issued december 15 , 2008 .

fws determined that the continued operation of water projects in the bay - delta as described in the ocap ba is likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the delta smelt and adversely modify its critical habitat .

along with the revised biop , fws outlined reasonable and prudent alternatives ( rpas ) intended to protect each life - stage and critical habitat of the delta smelt .

in the 111 th congress several measures were introduced but not enacted .

h.r .

856 would have authorized support for establishing a fish hatchery program for delta smelt in the sacramento - san joaquin delta and temporarily exempted two pumping plants from esa take restrictions .

on march 31 , 2009 , the house committee on natural resources held an oversight hearing on the california drought and actions by federal and state agencies to address impacts on lands , fisheries , and water users .

h.r .

2977 would have directed the bureau of reclamation to enter into an agreement with the national academy of sciences to study sustainable water and environmental management in the sacramento - san joaquin delta , california .

h.r .

3105 would have provided that operations of the cvp not be restricted by any esa biop , if such restrictions would result in water exports less than their historical maximum .

h.r .

3999 would have directed the commissioner of the bureau of reclamation to initiate esa consultations on the cvp and the california state water project .

esa regulations found at 50 c.f.r .

section 402.30 and section 402.40 are referred to as counterpart regulations .

these regulations allow certain action agencies to determine whether their actions jeopardize a listed species without having to consult as required by esa section 7 .

counterpart pesticide regulations were promulgated by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) for regulatory actions on pesticides .

under the regulations , when epa took action under the federal insecticide , fungicide , and rodenticide act ( fifra ; p.l .

80-104 ; 7 u.s.c .

§§ 136 , et seq .

 ) , epa decided whether a proposed fifra action was likely to adversely affect a listed species or critical habitat .

epa made this determination without consultation with , or written concurrence from , the fws director , once an alternative consultation agreement was executed .

fws did not review the determination for consistency with esa .

on august 24 , 2006 , a federal court overturned the pesticide counterpart regulations , ruling that these regulations did not conform to the plain language or intent of esa section 7 because they excused federal action agencies from engaging in consultation .

the court let stand the "optional formal consultation" process , in which nmfs or fws can adopt epa effects determinations as their own .

national fire plan ( nfp ) counterpart regulations were promulgated by the forest service , bureau of land management , bureau of indian affairs , national park service , fws , and nmfs .

the alternative consultation process contained in these counterpart regulations eliminates the need to conduct informal consultation with fws or nmfs , and eliminates the requirement to obtain written concurrence from fws or nmfs for those nfp actions that the action agency determines are "not likely to adversely affect" any listed species or designated ch .

the district court for the district of columbia held that the alternative consultation agreement did not improperly bypass esa section 7 .

in contrast to the pesticide counterpart regulations , the services must determine that the action agencies' actions are consistent with esa section 7 .

however , a report by the services of the nfp counterpart regulations found that all 10 projects reviewed by nmfs were deficient in 5 or 6 criteria , and 44 out of 50 projects reviewed by fws missed at least 1 of 6 criteria , with 19 missing all of them .

in the 111 th congress , h.r .

585 would have directed the president to enter into an arrangement whereby the national academy of sciences would determine the impact of p.l .

108-148 ( healthy forests restoration act of 2003 ) on esa protection relative to forest fire protection .

the prohibitions in section 9 ( private actions ) and section 7 ( federal nexus ) at times frustrate the economic desires of owners of land or other property .

this has long been a rallying cry for esa's detractors , who assert that restrictions under esa routinely "take" property in the constitutional sense of the term .

conflicts between esa and property owners come about despite the existence of esa mechanisms intended to soften its impact on property owners .

under the fifth amendment , property cannot be "taken" by the united states without just compensation .

the supreme court has long tried , with limited success , to define which government actions affect private property so severely as to effect such a "taking. .

in briefest outline , government actions usually are deemed a taking when they cause either a permanent physical occupation of private property or , through regulation , a total elimination of its economic use .

when the government regulation removes only part , but not all , of the property's use or value , a three - factor balancing test is used to determine whether a taking has occurred .

although these factors have been little explicated by the courts , it is clear that for a taking to occur , the property impact must be severe .

moreover , except for physical takings , the property impact is assessed with regard to the property as a whole , not just the regulated portion .

approximately 20 court decisions have addressed takings challenges to esa restrictions on land or other property , with all but two finding no taking .

these cases have involved restrictions on timber cutting , reductions in water delivery to preserve instream flows needed by listed species ( a particularly active area now ) , restrictions on shooting marauding animals that were responsible for loss of livestock , and prohibitions on the transport or sale of endangered species .

in several of these cases , the taking claim failed because it was filed in the wrong court or was not "ripe. .

where taking claims were reached by the court , they were rejected principally because the economic impact was insufficient as to the property as a whole , or because of the long - standing principle that the government is not responsible for the actions of wild animals .

of the two decisions favoring the property owner , one , involving reduced water delivery to a water district owing to the need to maintain in - stream flows for listed fish , has been repudiated by the judge who wrote it .

the other , however , instructs that when government requires water subject to appropriative water rights to be physically diverted to a fish ladder ( here , for the use of a listed species ) , the diversion must be analyzed under a physical rather than regulatory taking theory .

under such a theory , as noted , the holder of water rights is likely to win its taking claim — unless the government can show that "background principles" of state water law never gave the plaintiff the right to be free of the complained - of diversion .

this case is now headed back to the trial court where the united states likely will attempt such a showing .

critics want esa amended to afford compensation for a broader range of property impacts than the constitution provides — perhaps by specifying a fixed percentage of esa - related property value loss , above which compensation must always be paid .

provisions to that effect have been included in bills of previous congresses , although not in recent ones .

opponents of an explicit compensation standard counter that esa should not be singled out for a more property owner - friendly standard than other statutes or the constitution .

more fundamentally , they note that property rights have never been absolute , and that regulation has long been noncompensable as long as the impact on the property owner is not severe .

in the 111 th congress , section 9107 of p.l .

111-11 amended p.l .

106-392 to extend the authorizations for the upper colorado and san juan river basin endangered fish recovery programs through fy2023 .

on may 12 , 2009 , the senate agreed to s.res .

121 , designating may 15 , 2009 , as "endangered species day. .

on may 7 , 2010 , the senate agreed to s.res .

503 , designating may 21 , 2010 , as "endangered species day. .

on may 27 , 2010 , the senate agreed to s.res .

542 , expressing support for designating june 20 , 2010 , as "american eagle day. .

on june 14 , 2010 , the house agreed to h.res .

1409 , also expressing support for designating june 20 , 2010 , as "american eagle day. .

other introduced measures relating to esa that were not enacted include: section 30 of h.r .

1108 would have directed the secretary of the interior to establish regional outer continental shelf ( ocs ) joint permitting offices , with expertise in esa section 7 consultations and preparation of biops .

section 3 of s. 995 / h.r .

2362 would have directed the secretary of the interior to establish a pilot project to improve federal renewable energy permit coordination , with expertise in esa section 7 consultations and preparation of biops .

section 1713 of h.r .

2300 / h.r .

2828 would have directed the secretary of the interior to establish regional offices to coordinate review of federal permits for oil and gas projects on federal lands onshore and on the ocs , with expertise in esa section 7 consultations and preparation of biops .

h.r .

2288 / s. 1453 would have amended p.l .

106-392 to maintain annual base funding for the upper colorado and san juan fish recovery programs through fy2023 .

the senate energy and natural resources subcommittee on water and power held a hearing on s. 1453 on july 23 , 2009 .

the house natural resources subcommittee on water and power held a hearing on h.r .

2288 on september 22 , 2009 .

on march 2 , 2010 , the senate committee on energy and natural resources reported s. 1453 ( s.rept .

111-142 ) .

on may 18 , 2010 , the house committee on natural resources reported ( amended ) h.r .

2288 ( h.rept .

111-481 ) , and the house passed this measure ( amended ) on the same date .

h.r .

762 would have validated the final patent for nevada lands beneficial for desert tortoise recovery ; on may 14 , 2009 , the house natural resources subcommittee on national parks , forests , and public lands held a hearing on this measure and , on june 23 , 2009 , the house committee on natural resources reported the measure ( h.rept .

111-178 ) .

the house passed this measure on july 15 , 2009 .

on december 17 , 2009 , the senate energy and natural resources subcommittee on public lands and forests held a hearing on this measure ; the senate committee on energy and natural resources reported this bill on august 5 , 2010 ( s.rept .

111-272 ) .

section 106 of s. 684 , section 627 ( a ) ( 5 ) of s. 3663 , and section 208 ( a ) ( 5 ) of h.r .

6292 would have authorized the coast guard and noaa to identify u.s. waters where special navigational measures are warranted to reduce the risk of oil spills and potential damage to natural resources , including esa critical habitat .

section 4 of h.r .

5863 would have prohibited the secretary of the interior from approving an oil or gas exploration and / or development / production plan without certified compliance with the esa , while section 5 of this same measure would have required esa consultation for certain oil and gas leasing and development activities .

h.r .

556 and s. 1748 would have established a research program for recovery of the southern sea otter ; the house natural resources subcommittee on insular affairs , oceans , and wildlife held a hearing on h.r .

556 on may 5 , 2009 .

on june 23 , 2009 , the house committee on natural resources reported h.r .

556 , amended ( h.rept .

111-175 ) ; the house passed this measure ( amended ) on july 28 , 2009 .

on december 10 , 2010 , the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation reported ( amended ) s. 1748 ( s.rept .

111-362 ) .

h.r .

2455 and s. 3116 would have amended the whale conservation and protection study act to promote international whale conservation , protection , and research .

on may 6 , 2010 , the house foreign affairs subcommittee on international organizations , human rights , and oversight and subcommittee on asia , the pacific , and the global environment held a joint hearing on h.r .

2455 .

h.r .

6028 and s. 3919 would have prohibited treatment of the gray wolf as an endangered or threatened species .

s. 3825 and s. 3864 would have amended esa to remove certain portions of the distinct population segment of the rocky mountain gray wolf from the list of threatened and endangered species .

two bills would have provided that the inclusion of the gray wolf on lists of endangered species and threatened species under the esa have no force or effect nationally ( h.r .

6485 ) or in the state of utah ( h.r .

6486 ) .

section 123 of h.r .

3086 would have established a center for international wildlife recovery partnerships to facilitate long - term investment in captive breeding , reintroduction , rehabilitation , release , habitat protection , and research activities concerning species listed as threatened or endangered .

s. 1601 , h.r .

5362 , and s. 3387 would have provided for the release of water from the ruedi reservoir for the benefit of endangered fish habitat in the colorado river .

on june 9 , 2010 , the senate energy and natural resources subcommittee on water and power held a hearing on s. 3387 .

h.r .

6276 would have authorized the secretary of the interior to identify and declare wildlife disease emergencies and to coordinate rapid response to these emergencies , with species listed under esa identified as top priority .

h.r .

1901 and s. 805 would have provided for a comprehensive study by the national academy of sciences to assess the water management , needs , and conservation of the apalachicola - chattahoochee - flint river system .

h.r .

5531 would have amended esa to enable federal agencies to rescue and relocate species that would be taken in the course of reconstruction , maintenance , or repair of flood control levees .

h.r .

5964 sought to inform consumers regarding power administration costs associated with compliance for protecting endangered and threatened species under the esa .

s. 3146 would have amended the internal revenue code to provide a tax credit to individuals who enter into agreements to protect the habitats of endangered and threatened species .

section 205 of s. 2921 would have established habitat mitigation zones beneficial to threatened and endangered species within the california desert conservation area .

h.r .

5155 would have directed the secretary of commerce to conduct an aerial assessment of sea turtle populations in u.s. waters .

h.r .

672 would have restricted the use of military and national security exemptions to permit the taking of esa - listed species .

h.r .

3480 would have increased protection afforded eight species of bears by prohibiting trade in bear viscera .

h.res .

1308 would have expressed support for the goals and ideals of the international year of biodiversity .

appropriations play an important role in the esa debate , providing funds for listing and recovery activities as well as financing consultations that are necessary for federal projects .

in addition , appropriations bills have served as vehicles for some changes in esa provisions .

on february 1 , 2010 , the obama administration released its detailed budget request for fy2011 , including about $280 million for fws endangered species and related programs , which is $0.483 million ( 0.2% ) less than was enacted for fy2010 .

table 2 summarizes recent esa and related funding for fws .

the administration's fy2011 request for endangered species and related funding within fws's ecological services account is $2.017 million ( 1.1% ) more than funding enacted for fy2010 .

on march 4 , 2010 , the house natural resources subcommittee on insular affairs , oceans , and wildlife held an oversight hearing on the fy2011 fws budget .

under the authority of a continuing resolution ( p.l .

111-322 ) since interior department appropriations for fy2011 have not been enacted , fws was allowed to operate with continued funding at fy2010 levels through march 4 , 2011 .

on june 23 , 2009 , the house committee on appropriations reported h.r .

2996 , recommending more than $283 million in fy2010 appropriations for fws endangered species and related programs ( h.rept .

111-180 ) .

the house recommendation is about 14.1% greater than the fy2009 enacted level and about 1.6% larger than the fy2010 administration request .

the house passed this measure ( amended ) on june 26 , 2009 .

on july 7 , 2009 , the senate committee on appropriations reported h.r .

2996 ( amended ) , recommending more than $276 million in fy2010 appropriations for fws endangered species and related programs ( s.rept .

111-38 ) .

the senate recommendation is about 11.3% greater than the fy2009 enacted level , about 1.0% less than the fy2010 administration request , and about 2.5% less than the house fy2010 recommendation .

the senate passed h.r .

2996 ( amended ) on september 24 , 2009 .

on october 28 , 2009 , a conference report was filed on h.r .

2996 ( h.rept .

111-316 ) , recommending about $281 million for fws endangered species and related programs for fy2010 .

the conference recommendation is about 13.2% greater than the fy2009 enacted level and about 0.7% larger than the fy2010 administration request .

on october 30 , 2009 , president obama signed h.r .

2996 into law as p.l .

111-88 .

earlier in the 111 th congress , p.l .

111-8 ( h.r .

1105 , omnibus appropriations for fy2009 ) provided more than $248 million for fws's esa and related programs .

for nmfs , funding for esa programs is included in a budget line item for "protected species research and management" that also includes funding authorized under the marine mammal protection act .

on february 1 , 2010 , the obama administration released its fy2011 budget request , including about $210 million for nmfs protected species programs .

 ( see table 3 . ) .

the fy2011 request for nmfs protected species funding within noaa's operations , research , and facilities ( or&f ) account was $6.3 million ( 3.1% ) more than funding enacted for fy2010 .

on february 24 , 2010 , the house natural resources subcommittee on insular affairs , oceans , and wildlife held an oversight hearing on noaa's fy2011 budget request .

on march 3 , 2010 , the senate commerce , science , and transportation subcommittee on oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard held an oversight hearing on noaa's fy2011 budget request .

on july 22 , 2010 , the senate committee on appropriations reported s. 3636 , recommending more than $213 million for nmfs protected species programs ( s.rept .

111-229 ) ; the senate committee recommendation is $9.68 million ( +4.7% ) more than the fy2010 appropriation and $3.38 million ( +1.6% ) more than the fy2011 administration request .

under the authority of a continuing resolution ( p.l .

111-322 ) since no commerce department appropriations for fy2011 have yet been enacted , nmfs was allowed to operate with continued funding at fy2010 levels through march 4 , 2011 .

