the state of the union address is a communication between the president and congress in which the chief executive reports on the current conditions of the united states and provides policy proposals for the upcoming legislative year .

the state of the union address originates in the constitution .

as part of the system of checks and balances , article ii , section 3 , clause 1 requires that the president "shall from time to time give to the congress information of the state of the union , and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient. .

in recent decades , the president has expanded his state of the union audience , addressing the speech to both the nation and members of congress .

from congress's perspective , the state of the union address may be considered the most important presidential speech of the year .

although presidents may ask to address congress in joint session on extraordinary occasions , the state of the union is the one time presidents are regularly scheduled to venture to the house chamber to present their programmatic priorities and set the tone for the ensuing year .

although modern presidents communicate with congress and the public regularly , the state of the union provides the president with a unique opportunity to present his entire policy platform in one speech .

from the president's perspective , the state of the union address has evolved from a constitutional duty to a welcome source of executive power and authority .

standing before the american public to deliver the annual address , the president combines several constitutional roles: chief of state , chief executive , chief diplomat , commander - in - chief , and chief legislator .

besides delivering the state of the union , there is no other annual opportunity for the president to showcase his entire arsenal of constitutional powers .

over time , the state of the union address has evolved considerably .

the format and delivery of the speech has changed , and its length has fluctuated widely .

some scholars have suggested the speech has evolved to mimic american culture and ethos , with a growing emphasis on self - interest .

technology has also influenced the delivery of the address , with the advent of radio , television , and the internet playing significant roles in the transformation .

as a rhetorical tool , the state of the union address has changed in several substantial ways since the origins of the american republic .

it is difficult to point to one moment in time when the address developed into the contemporary speech now commonly recognized as the starting point of the legislative session .

instead , several presidents throughout american history presided over shifts and variations to the address .

george washington gave the first "state of the union" address on january 8 , 1790 .

at that time , the speech was known as the "annual message. .

washington's address , which was quite short at 1,089 words , was delivered before both houses of congress .

as the nomenclature implies , when washington gave his second annual message the following year , he established the precedent that the president would provide information annually to congress .

john adams followed washington's precedent during his tenure .

likening it to a "speech from the throne" reminiscent of monarchy's vestiges , thomas jefferson changed course and instead submitted his annual message in writing .

historians also speculate that jefferson was a poor public speaker and did not want to deliver it orally since his inaugural address had been barely audible and was unfavorably received .

between 1801 and 1913 , presidents fulfilled their constitutional duty by sending their yearly report as a formal written letter to congress .

these written messages contained information about the state of the nation , including policy recommendations .

during this time period , the annual message swelled in length , with several exceeding 25,000 words .

president woodrow wilson altered historical precedent when he delivered the 1913 annual message in the house chamber before a joint session of congress .

although wilson's action "stunned official washington," he had written extensively in constitutional government about his disagreement with jefferson's decision to submit the address in writing .

instead , wilson read the constitution as providing the president with the broad authority to serve as a national spokesman .

wilson altered presidential rhetoric , using it as an intermediary tool to draw widespread public attention to the policies he supported .

the public's endorsement served as political leverage that could compel members of congress to support his legislative agenda .

from 1913 until 1934 , the annual message entered a transitional phase in which presidents occasionally issued the address orally .

wilson delivered six of his eight annual messages in person , and warren harding presented his two addresses orally .

calvin coolidge gave one address in the house chamber , and became the first president to broadcast the annual speech on radio .

during his presidential terms , franklin roosevelt solidified the oral tradition of the annual message .

roosevelt also applied the constitutional language "state of the union," both to the message and the event , which became the popular nomenclature from his presidency forward .

given its oral rather than written delivery , the length of the address decreased to between 5,000 and 7,000 words .

roosevelt also ushered in the modern tradition of using the collective words "we" and "our" with greater frequency than his predecessors .

figure 1 displays the length of state of the union addresses across american presidential history .

it shows the sudden drop in 1913 , when woodrow wilson resuscitated the oral mode of delivery .

the spikes after wilson are instances in which presidents issued the final state of the union of their term in writing , such as franklin roosevelt in 1945 and carter in 1981 .

after winning reelection in 1972 , richard nixon issued a series of written messages in 1973 instead of giving an overview speech .

barack obama's 2015 speech contained 6,718 words , which was slightly shorter than his 2014 speech of 6,989 words .

the 2015 address lasted 59 minutes , 57 seconds .

harry truman's 1947 state of the union address was the first televised .

until 1965 , presidents issued the state of the union during the day .

to attract a larger viewing audience , lyndon johnson changed the time of the speech to the evening .

this practice has been followed since johnson , and presidents now explicitly direct the address to the citizens of the united states as well as congress .

the state of the union address is a speech steeped in tradition and ceremony .

it is known for its display of pomp and circumstance , perhaps corroborating thomas jefferson's objection that the custom retains monarchical elements .

in presenting the address , the president fulfills political and ceremonial functions .

the combination of such roles makes the annual speech a uniquely powerful ritual .

the state of the union address is a unique genre of presidential speech .

historian charles beard commented , "whatever may be its purport , the message is the one great public document of the united states which is widely read and discussed. .

karlyn kohrs campbell and kathleen hall jamieson have identified three common rhetorical sequences in state of the union addresses: 1. public meditations on values ; 2. assessments of information and issues ; and 3. policy recommendations .

the state of the union address is uniquely situated to strengthen the president's role as chief legislator .

the president routinely uses the address to convey his policy priorities and advertise his past legislative successes .

in the course of the speech , the president can advocate for policies already being considered by congress , introduce innovative ideas , or threaten vetoes .

prior to woodrow wilson's precedent - changing personal appearances before joint sessions , presidents from thomas jefferson forward directed their annual address mainly to congress , although major newspapers and magazines analyzed the contents of the speech .

now that the state of the union is broadcast on television , radio , and the internet , presidents can speak directly to congress and the american public .

by speaking directly to citizens , presidents attempt to convince the public to pressure their elected representatives and senators to support particular policy proposals mentioned in the speech .

from 1965 through 2015 , the average number of policy requests in a state of the union address was 34 .

an opposition response is a speech given by select members of the political party not currently occupying the white house .

the opposition response is usually broadcast immediately after the completion of the president's state of the union address .

it is a much shorter speech than the state of the union ; recent opposition responses have been approximately 1,500 words in length and lasted about 10 minutes .

the practice of an opposition response to the state of the union address began in 1966 when senator everett dirksen and representative gerald ford provided the republican reply to president lyndon johnson .

the state of the union address is an important weapon in the president's arsenal as a legislative leader .

although recent state of the union addresses used a common structure and often included similar themes , the speech provides the president with the opportunity to outline his own policy agenda for the upcoming congressional session .

presidents have two audiences in mind: congress and the american public .

presidents must receive the support of a majority in the house , and oftentimes a supermajority in the senate , to enact their legislative proposals .

presidents have realized that the american people can help accomplish this frequently difficult task .

by appealing directly to the public , a president can use popular leverage to convince congress to adopt his policy agenda .

a campaign of such sustained public pressure typically goes beyond the state of the union address , but presidents often use the state of the union as an initial vehicle to introduce policy priorities to a large viewing audience .

while the state of the union address highlights the president's legislative role , it also serves as an annual reminder that the chief executive exists within a separated powers system .

legislative powers are shared between congress and the presidency , evidenced by the constitutional requirement that the president "shall from time to time give to the congress information of the state of the union , and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient. .

