in november 2007 , senator barack obama announced his intention , if elected president , to appoint a federal chief technology officer ( cto ) .

on april 18 , 2009 , president obama appointed virginia secretary of technology aneesh p. chopra to serve as "america's chief technology officer. .

mr. chopra serves as assistant to the president and cto , and holds the position of associate director for technology in the white house office of science and technology policy .

in his capacity as assistant to the president and cto , mr. chopra also serves as a member of the white house domestic policy council under a provision of executive order 13500 ( amending executive order 12859 ) issued by president obama on february 5 , 2009 .

in announcing the appointment of mr. chopra , president obama broadly defined the role of the cto as promoting "technological innovation to help achieve our most important priorities — from creating jobs and reducing health care costs to keeping our nation secure. .

this report presents president obama's vision for the cto position put forth during his campaign for the presidency and during the presidential transition .

it also discusses the potential scope of duties and authorities of the cto , articulates organizational precedents and challenges for the cto , reviews some of the activities undertaken by aneesh chopra during his tenure as cto , and identifies issues congress may choose to consider if it opts to exert oversight or to develop legislation to create the position and / or office of the cto .

in 2008 , barack obama's presidential campaign issued a position paper on the issue of technology and innovation which included the following description of the role envisioned for a cto: bring government into the 21 st century: barack obama will use technology to reform government and improve the exchange of information between the federal government and citizens while ensuring the security of our networks .

obama believes in the american people and in their intelligence , expertise , and ability and willingness to give and to give back to make government work better .

obama will appoint the nation's first chief technology officer ( cto ) to ensure that our government and all its agencies have the right infrastructure , policies and services for the 21 st century .

the cto will ensure the safety of our networks and will lead an interagency effort , working with chief technology and chief information officers of each of the federal agencies , to ensure that they use best - in - class technologies and share best practices .

the cto will have a specific focus on transparency , by ensuring that each arm of the federal government makes its records open and accessible as the e - government act requires .

the cto will also focus on using new technologies to solicit and receive information back from citizens to improve the functioning of democratic government .

the cto will also ensure technological interoperability of key government functions .

for example , the chief technology officer will oversee the development of a national , interoperable wireless network for local , state and federal first responders as the 9 / 11 commission recommended .

this will ensure that fire officials , police officers and [emergency medical technicians] from different jurisdictions have the ability to communicate with each other during a crisis and we do not have a repeat of the failure to deliver critical public services that occurred in the aftermath of hurricane katrina .

in november 2008 , president - elect obama reiterated his intentions for the cto on change.gov , the website of the office of the president - elect: bring government into the 21 st century: use technology to reform government and improve the exchange of information between the federal government and citizens while ensuring the security of our networks .

appoint the nation's first chief technology officer ( cto ) to ensure the safety of our networks and lead an interagency effort , working with chief technology and chief information officers of each of the federal agencies , to ensure that they use best - in - class technologies and share best practices .

prior to mr. chopra's appointment , details related to the cto position remained uncertain .

there was little or no information on the specific duties and authorities of the cto and how its functions will be coordinated and integrated within ostp , with other white house offices , and with federal departments and agencies .

during this period , some commentators speculated about the range of duties and authorities the cto may be given ( see discussion on pages 3-5 of this report ) .

while many details remain uncertain about the ctos role , some aspects have become more clear as mr. chopra has undertaken initiatives , testified before congress , and given interviews ( see " cto structure and activities in the obama administration " ) .

a fundamental question for policymakers related to the cto position is: what should be the scope of duties and authorities of this position ? .

two broad roles for the cto appear to have emerged .

the first role , explicitly articulated on president obama's campaign and transition websites , might be described as a supra - chief information officer with the mission of using information technology to improve the delivery of government services , increasing transparency of government policymaking , and opening channels for increased citizen participation in government , as well as ensuring that the nation's information and communications infrastructure is robust and secure .

in this capacity , the cto would also ensure that "best practices" are identified , shared , and implemented across agencies .

the second role for the cto might be described as an advocate for technological innovation in support of national interests such as economic growth , job creation , improvements to quality of life , national defense , and homeland security .

president obama's dual appointment of mr. chopra to serve as both cto and ostp associate director for technology , and his statement accompanying the selection , positioned mr. chopra to undertake such a role .

prior to mr. chopra's appointment , several analysts proposed a variety of roles for an obama administration cto .

stanford university professor lawrence lessig asserted that the cto could play an important role in bringing an understanding of how technology might be used to address national challenges: the cto could be a critically important position , from deciding how to make government more efficient and transparent through technology , to helping advance public policy questions like those surrounding global warming .

the cto could play an important role in national economic policy according to andrew d. lipman , a telecommunications attorney with bingham mccutchen , llp .

mr. lipman asserted that [president] obama sees greater broadband penetration as an enormous economic engine , much like the railroads were a century ago .

that is why the cto will play such a critical role in any recovery plan .

ed felten , a princeton university professor of computer science and public affairs and director of princeton's center for information technology policy , likewise suggested a broad role for the cto in innovation policy: the cto could act as the cybersecurity czar , ensuring that reliability of the government infrastructure is protected .

and much like the role of the presidential science advisor , the cto could offer advice to the president on all areas of technology .

the role could be a catalyst to push us closer to being a more entrepreneurial , high - tech country .

the center for american progress ( cap ) and new democracy project ( ndp ) , public policy institutes , proposed that the cto serve as a champion for information and communications technologies broadly .

cap / ndp proposed that the cto be given three roles: advising the president on the use of ict to create a more open and efficient government ; working with ostp to advise the president on all issues that have a critical ict component , including economic , national security , health care , and education policies ; and helping to ensure ict platforms deployed across the united states are robust , broadly available , and affordable to all sectors .

cap / ndp anticipate this latter role would "straddle the public and private sectors" to maximize private innovation for the public good .

in contrast , the association of american universities ( aau ) , an association of research universities , recommended to president obama that a cto be given a more narrow role: if a new chief technology officer position is created , this individual's responsibilities primarily should be to oversee the use of technology within the white house and to coordinate the use of technology within the executive branch .

in addition , the aau urged that ostp remain the sole presidential advisor for science and technology: [the president should] retain a single presidential advisor for science and technology with a strong associate director for technology and innovation... .

the responsibility for coordinating and helping to shape science and technology policy across government agencies should remain that of the ostp director , as has historically been the case .

three factors are likely to play key roles in defining the full scope of duties and authorities of the cto: first , the role that president obama wants the cto to play ( including authorities derived from formal means , such as an executive order , and non - formal means , such as presidential expressions of support for , and confidence in , the cto ) ; second , congressional oversight of any actions by the obama administration ; and , third , statutory duties and authorities , if any , that congress may elect to confer upon the position and / or office .

further , the personal attributes of the cto may , in part , define the role of cto .

in this regard , mr. chopra served as virginia's secretary of technology where he led "the commonwealth's strategy to effectively leverage technology in government reform , to promote virginia's innovation agenda , and to foster technology - related economic development. .

previously , chopra served as managing director of the advisory board company , a public company that provides best practices research and analysis to the health care industry .

he led the firm's financial leadership council and the working council for health plan executives .

in defining or refining the duties and authorities of the cto , congress and the obama administration may opt to draw from the duties and authorities of existing and previous organizational structures and positions .

these could include agency - level chief information officers ( cios ) and ctos ; the bush administration's use of the office of management and budget ( omb ) to handle cio , cto , and e - government responsibilities ; the clinton administration's "reinventing government" initiative ; the commerce department's recently eliminated technology administration and its agency predecessors ; and the white house office of science and technology policy ( ostp ) .

an overview of each is provided below .

among the early challenges the cto may face are defining and communicating the roles of the position ; identifying and recruiting talent , from both inside and outside of government ; and negotiating domains of responsibilities , formal and informal , within the white house and with executive branch agencies that have overlapping missions .

beyond these initial challenges , the cto will need to establish goals and milestones , set priorities , secure resources , and develop and execute a strategy .

if the position or office of the cto is not established by congress and provided with statutory authorities and a dedicated budget , it may be difficult for the cto to affect change in individual federal agencies or systemically throughout the federal government .

in such a case , the efficacy of the cto may depend largely on the mandate provided by president obama to the cto ( and agencies' perception of the mandate ) , the imprimatur of the white house , and the personal attributes of the cto ( eg , relationship with the president , past accomplishments , knowledge , professional reputation , persuasiveness ) .

perhaps one of the most difficult and enduring challenges the cto may face could be "turf wars" associated with overlapping responsibilities with other executive agencies and their principals .

these "turf wars" could involve issues such as technology and innovation policy , computer and network security , and intellectual property enforcement .

for example , there are several organizations within the executive office of the president ( eop ) that have potentially overlapping authorities , including the office of management and budget ( as discussed on pages 6-7 of this report ) ; the national economic council ( nec ) , on issues related to technological innovation .

for example , the nec might evaluate federal policies intended to promote technological innovation as an option for achieving the president's economic policy objectives ; the president's council on innovation and competitiveness , which is charged under the america competes act with providing advice to the president with respect to global trends in competitiveness and innovation and allocation of federal resources in education , job training , and technology research and development in the context of global trends in competitiveness and innovation , as well as making recommendations to the heads of executive agencies to improve innovation ; and the intellectual property enforcement coordinator , on technology - centered intellectual property rights ( eg , digital copyright ) .

potential conflict between the cto and these offices might be magnified with the co - location of the cto within ostp .

while assigning mr. chopra the dual roles of assistant to the president and cto and associate director of ostp may contribute to better coordination and integration of cto and ostp functions , it may also create reporting and issue jurisdiction issues , both within ostp and with other eop offices .

for example , in his capacity as ostp associate director for technology , mr. chopra reports to the director of ostp , just as the position has in previous administrations .

however , in his capacity as assistant to the president and as cto , both he and the director of ostp carry the equivalent title of "assistant to the president. .

in addition , placing the cto in ostp may also create jurisdiction issues with the omb's cpo and cio functions .

the cto's responsibilities might also overlap with other executive branch agencies , such as the federal communications commission ( fcc ) and / or the department of commerce's national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) on issues such as information and communication technology , and with agency cios and ctos .

finally , the manner in which the cto has been established may affect the position / office's ability to transcend presidential administrations .

if the authorities of the cto continue to rely solely upon the president's executive authority ( through an executive order , for example ) , then its continued existence would be at the sole discretion of the current or future presidents .

in contrast , if the cto were to be established by statute ( as ostp was , for example ) , then the position / office would continue to exist through changes of presidential administrations unless eliminated by statute .

there is no official position description for the cto , nor has president obama sought legislation to create a statutory foundation for the cto position .

accordingly , to date , the structure and official duties of the cto remain largely undefined .

structurally , mr. chopra has a small staff to assist him in his role as cto , including three deputy ctos and an assistant deputy cto .

appointment to the cto position is at the sole discretion of the president and does not require senate confirmation .

however , mr. chopra's appointment as associate director of ostp position required senate confirmation ; he was confirmed on may 21 , 2009 .

according to ostp , the cto is organizationally a part of ostp .

further , ostp states that the cto and associate director of ostp for technology are separate and distinct positions though they are currently held by the same individual .

in the absence of a formal position description , some insights into the duties of the cto in the obama administration may be gleaned from what mr. chopra has said and done since assuming his dual responsibilities .

however , in the course of his public communications , mr. chopra does not generally associate his various activities with the unique responsibilities of the two positions he holds .

this makes it difficult to identify which of his efforts and comments are specifically linked to his duties as cto as distinct from those that are linked to his duties as associate director of ostp .

in a december 2009 interview with a trade publication , mr. chopra described his role as cto as an umbrella over his two - part service as assistant to the president and ostp associate director for technology: the chief technology officer role has two components: the first is my service as assistant to the president ; the second is in my capacity as associate director for technology in the white house office of science and technology policy .

in my role as assistant to the president , i serve as one of 25 key advisors who meet every morning in the west wing to coordinate and collaborate on all the major issues in front of the president .

my responsibility is largely to ensure that the voice of technology and innovation is heard across a wide range of policy priorities – healthcare , energy , or education .

at ostp , a role for which the united states senate confirmed me back in may , i coordinate agency technology r&d and policy and interface with the private sector in advancing our policy priorities .

mr. chopra's role as assistant to the president , as articulated above , seems consistent with then - candidate obama's assertion at a campaign event in silicon valley that one of the reasons behind his plan to appoint a cto is to "make certain we incorporate technology into every decision we make. .

it is unclear , however , how his self - described role as assistant to the president to "ensure that the voice of technology and innovation is heard across a wide range of policy priorities" aligns with the role of ostp director john holdren who also serves as assistant to the president for science and technology .

in previous presidential administrations , the role mr. chopra asserts for himself has been one generally reserved to the president's science advisor .

according to ostp , one of mr. chopra's responsibilities is to assist in implementation of the president's strategy for american innovation , articulated in an executive office of the president report published in september 2009 .

the strategy includes four thrusts: "invest in the building blocks of american innovation," including fundamental research , 21 st century workforce skill development , physical infrastructure , and widespread access to information technology tools .

"promote competitive markets that spur productive entrepreneurship," including promoting american exports , supporting open capital markets , encouraging high - growth and innovation - based entrepreneurship , and improving innovation .

"drive innovations in health care technology," including expanding use of health care information technology , increasing investment in medical research , and slowing the rising costs of health care costs .

"catalyze breakthroughs for national priorities," including investments in new energy technologies , advanced vehicle technologies , and health care technology , as well as addressing "grand challenges" through science , technology and innovation .

in testimony before the senate budget committee task force on government performance , mr. chopra stated that his focus was on "harnessing the power and potential of technology and innovation to execute on the president's vision for a 21 st century economy" to create jobs , improve u.s. competitiveness , improve the affordability of communications , expand adoption of broadband technologies , help keep families more connected , and increase the safety and security of americans .

further , in his testimony , mr. chopra discussed three areas of his work: technology for open government .

mr. chopra cited his efforts in support of the open government directive , issued by the white house office of management and budget , that instructs agencies to provide information to the public in open , accessible , machine - readable formats ; requires agencies to formulate an open government plan and website ; and calls for a review of government - wide information policies .

mr. chopra described his office's role in the development of this directive as undertaking a month - long pilot initiative using emerging technologies like wikis , blogs , and posts to solicit ideas from the public on the topic , then culling more than 1,000 responses to incorporate their ideas into the crafting of the directive .

technology for government performance .

mr. chopra discussed several examples of efforts to improve government performance in moving research into development and deployment , supporting open standards , and using prizes and competitions to align innovation with national priorities .

it was not clear from his remarks the role the cto played in these activities .

the president's strategy for american innovation ( see earlier discussion ) .

mr. chopra has also advocated for the application of technology and innovation to improve education .

in testimony before the house committee on education and labor , mr. chopra asserted the need for a greater proportion of americans to earn college degrees ; an increase in the number of students excelling in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ; breakthrough strategies to identify hidden talent in the united states ; and the potential role for technology and innovation to help meet theses needs .

it would appear from the initiatives mr. chopra has undertaken and the testimony and interviews he has given that his scope of duties is wide and generally aligned with the vision articulated by president obama during the campaign and transition .

among the tools mr. chopra has used to fulfill his cto responsibilities are the development and promotion of ideas , policy development , public communication , and fostering agency collaboration and coordination .

with the appointment of mr. chopra as cto , congress has the opportunity to consider and oversee the administration's plans for and use of this position .

although the president has provided a broad overview of the role of the cto , the white house has not provided detailed information on the roles and responsibilities of the cto , its organizational structure , staffing plans , or relationship to white house offices and federal agencies .

nor has the president sought to create a statutory foundation for the cto that might be used to define the office's duties and authorities .

on april 2 , 2009 , representative gerald e. connolly introduced the chief technology officer act of 2009 ( h.r .

1910 ) .

representative connolly stated that the purpose of the bill , in part , is to make the position of cto permanent to "ensure that a presidentially - appointed chief technology officer would be part of future administrations. .

in an interview with the national journal's nextgov , representative connolly further explained , what i'm trying to do here is essentially provide a statutory framework for what president obama has done by executive order... .

it is a logical extension of what he has done .

it guarantees that the cto is the spokesman for technology in the federal government and the white house itself — and the advocate for it .

the act would provide a statutory foundation for the office of the chief technology officer , establishing it as an executive office of the president headed by a federal chief technology officer .

the act assigns thirteen duties to the office , focused primarily on the federal government's use of information technology and its role in securing the national information infrastructure .

under the act , the cto would also "serve as a source of analysis and advice for the president and heads of federal departments and agencies with respect to major policies , plans , and programs of the federal government associated with information technology. .

bruce mcconnell , a former head of information technology policy at omb , asserts that the bill does not give the cto a broad enough portfolio , placing too great a focus on information technology which instead should be the domain of the federal chief information officer ( cio ) .

alan paller of the sans institute , a computer security research and education organization , has expressed concerns that the wide range of duties and responsibilities assigned the cto in the bill might pull the cto in too many directions and make the cto ineffectual .

trey hodgkins , vice president for national security and procurement policy at techamerica , an association that represents high - tech companies , stated that it was important for the cto and cio to have the authorities to facilitate participatory democracy and , if a statute was necessary to provide these authorities , the legislation may be beneficial .

the act was referred to the house committee on oversight and government reform on may 4 , 2009 .

no action has been taken .

on may 27 , 2010 , representative ike skelton offered an amendment ( h.amdt .

658 ) to the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2011 ( h.r .

5136 ) , which included , among other things , subtitle b , "federal chief technology officer. .

the amendment was agreed to in the house by a voice vote .

the provisions of subtitle b are very similar to those in h.r .

1910 .

the subtitle would establish the office of the chief technology officer in the executive office of the president , and assign to the position a variety of duties related to the federal government's use of information technology ( it ) .

the duties of the cto would include supporting efforts to foster the further development of it through research and development funding , development of public - private partnerships to foster federal knowledge and integration of commercially available it , and collection and analysis of information about it trends that may affect the federal government's use of it to meet its goals .

the cto would also conduct analysis and provide advice to the president and heads of federal departments and agencies with respect to major it policies , plans , and programs of the federal government .

further , the subtitle designates the cto as a member of the domestic policy council and the federal cyber security practice board .

it also requires the cto to produce an annual report for the president and selected committees of congress that provides information on programs to promote the development of technological innovations ; recommendations for the adoption of policies to encourage the generation of technological innovations ; and information on the activities and accomplishments of the office of the chief technology officer .

if congress chooses to establish the cto position through statute , there are several issues it may wish to consider .

for example: what mission , duties , and authorities should be given the cto ? .

should one person serve as both the cto and ostp associate director for technology ? .

what level of funding should be authorized and / or appropriated for the cto ? .

should the cto be placed in the executive office of the president or elsewhere in the executive branch ? .

if in the eop , should the cto directly report to the president , or instead be a part of another eop agency ? .

who should the cto report to ? .

should the appointment of the cto be subject to senate confirmation ? .

should the cto be a stand - alone position or an office or agency with its own staff ? .

if the cto is established together with a supporting office or agency , how many full - time equivalent positions should be authorized ? .

what should be the composition of the staff with respect to occupation ( eg , scientists , engineers , it professionals , lawyers , managers , administrators ) ; political appointees and career civil servants ; and permanent employees and employees on detail from other agencies ? .

how should the work of the cto differ , overlap , and / or complement the duties and authorities of offices in the executive office of the president , and other executive branch agencies ? .

what should be the relationship between the president's cto and the existing ctos and cios of individual departments and agencies ? .

