the foreign intelligence surveillance act ( fisa ) provides a statutory framework by which government agencies may , when gathering foreign intelligence for an investigation , obtain authorization to conduct electronic surveillance or physical searches , utilize pen registers and trap and trace devices , or access specified business records and other tangible things .

authorization for such activities is typically obtained via a court order from the foreign intelligence surveillance court ( fisc ) , a specialized court created to act as a neutral judicial decisionmaker in the context of fisa .

shortly after the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , congress enacted the usa patriot act , in part , to "provid[e] enhanced investigative tools" to "assist in the prevention of future terrorist activities and the preliminary acts and crimes which further such activities. .

that act and subsequent measures amended fisa to enable the government to obtain information in a greater number of circumstances .

at the time of enactment , these expanded authorities prompted concerns regarding the appropriate balance between national security interests and civil liberties .

perhaps in response to such concerns , congress established sunset provisions which apply to three of the most controversial amendments to fisa: section 6001 ( a ) of the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( irtpa ) , also known as the "lone wolf" provision , which simplifies the evidentiary showing needed to obtain a fisa court order to target non - u.s. persons who engage in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefor , specifically by authorizing such orders in the absence of a proven link between a targeted individual and a foreign power ; section 206 of the usa patriot act , which permits multipoint , or "roving," wiretaps ( i.e. , wiretaps which may follow a target even when he or she changes phones ) by adding flexibility to the manner in which the subject of a fisa court order is specified ; and section 215 of the usa patriot act , which authorizes orders compelling a person to produce "any tangible thing" that is "relevant" to an authorized foreign intelligence , international terrorism , or counter - espionage investigation .

these provisions were originally set to expire on december 31 , 2005 , but were extended multiple times , with slight modifications , through june 1 , 2015 .

in summer 2013 , media began reporting on several foreign intelligence activities conducted by the national security agency ( nsa ) , including the bulk collection of telephone metadata under section 215 .

the controversy surrounding section 215 complicated efforts to reauthorize all three of the expiring provisions , and they eventually expired on june 1 , 2015 .

one day later , congress enacted the usa freedom act , which placed new limitations on the scope of the government's foreign intelligence activities , while simultaneously extending the expired provisions through december 15 , 2019 .

fisa , enacted in 1978 , provides a statutory framework which governs governmental authority to conduct , as part of an investigation to gather foreign intelligence information , electronic surveillance and other activities to which the fourth amendment warrant requirement would apply if they were conducted as part of a domestic criminal investigation .

its statutory requirements arguably provide a minimum standard that must be met before foreign intelligence searches or surveillance may be conducted by the government .

the three amendments to fisa covered by this report are the "lone wolf," "roving wiretap," and section 215 provisions .

although the amendments are often discussed as a group and may implicate similar questions regarding what legal standards govern the fisc's determinations , unique historical and legal issues apply to each amendment .

as noted above , these three fisa amendments have been extended until december 15 , 2019 .

if that date were to arrive without any extension , the amended fisa authorities would revert to their text as it appeared before the enactment of the usa patriot act .

for example , in the context of roving wiretaps , section 105 ( c ) ( 2 ) of fisa would read as it did on october 25 , 2001 , eliminating the authority for fisa court orders to direct other unspecified persons to assist with electronic surveillance .

likewise , regarding fisa orders for the production of documents , sections 501 and 502 of fisa would read as they did on october 25 , 2001 , restricting the types of business records that are subject to fisa and reinstating the requirement for "specific and articulable facts giving reason to believe that the person to whom the records pertain is a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power. .

however , a grandfather clause applies to each of the three provisions .

the grandfather clauses authorize the continued effect of the amendments with respect to investigations that began , or potential offenses that took place , before the provisions' sunset date .

thus , for example , if a non - u.s. person were engaged in international terrorism before the sunset date , he would still be considered a "lone wolf" for fisa court orders sought after the provision has expired .

similarly , if an individual is engaged in international terrorism before that date , he may be the target of a roving wiretap under fisa even if authority for new roving wiretaps expired .

