the world financial crisis that erupted in 2008 demonstrated that the forces of globalization have affected two major parts of the world economy: the international financial system and the global production system .

these financial and real ( goods - and - services producing ) sectors are closely interconnected and synergistically intertwined .

the financial crisis demonstrated that the combination of globalization , new technology , new financial instruments , and unrecognized risks , can cause major upheavals in markets that can spread from firm to firm and then from country to country .

in this globalized world , production is becoming more fragmented into discrete activities and can be spread geographically within and across national borders while remaining integrated organizationally within a multinational company or network of companies .

this report begins with an overview of global supply chains , why they have developed , and how the variables in the chain ( including government policy ) relate to each other .

it then examines the types of policies that affect different parts of the global supply network and concludes with a discussion of policy review mechanisms .

in any global supply structure , there are trade - offs between border transaction costs ( including tariffs ) , factor costs ( including labor and capital ) , logistical costs ( including shipping ) , costs of quality control , external business costs ( ease of doing business , regulations , etc .

 ) , and various risks ( including financial and political risk ) .

government economic policy often affects each of these tradeoffs in different ways .

globalized manufacturing chains relate directly to the two essential national interests of the united states , security and economic well - being , and relate indirectly to the third — the projection of american values .

on the security side , the constant flow of imports streaming into u.s. ports and through border crossings raises the potential for illicit or dangerous cargo , including possible terrorist devices , to enter the united states .

on the economic well - being side , the globalized supply chains represent changes in crucial segments of the u.s. economy that ultimately affect the well being of americans .

they bring into play fundamental economic issues such as jobs , wage levels , income distribution , entrepreneurship , and the profitability of businesses .

at a more basic level , u.s. manufacturers and providers of services form the foundation of the economy and generate the resources available to support the well - being of americans , governmental activities , and the ability of the nation to pursue its security and other national interests .

as for the projection of american values , globalization and the economic opportunities it generates can raise standards of living in countries , such as china or vietnam , and thereby can potentially create alternative centers of power and channels of communication that may challenge repressive governments or help in resolving problems with democracy , the rule of law , and human rights .

however , globalized supply chains also may provide resources for certain repressive governments or , in the case of china , help in providing a rationale for the ruling party to continue its dominance .

the presence of u.s. or other international corporations in countries may provide a mechanism for u.s. business and labor practices , as well as language , culture , and values to be spread to parts of the local populations .

foreign investors , however , may be attracted to authoritarian governments because they tend to create stability even though that stability may be at the sacrifice of certain freedoms or human rights .

the globalization of manufacturing also is creating dependency and interaction among trading partners , such as china and japan or china and taiwan .

these seem to be ameliorating historical friction points and promoting stability in regions .

for china , the nation's increased economic influence , generated partly from its crucial role in global supply chains , has provided beijing with greater voice in international fora and arguably some leverage in negotiations with the united states .

the globalization of production networks and supply chains also has raised policy issues and has called into question certain long - held perceptions about the efficacy and effects of policy initiatives .

for example , a large proportion of international trade is conducted within production networks and chains that cross international borders .

how does this affect traditional trade and investment policy that is based on national governments , national economies , and country - to - country relations ? .

how have global supply chains affected american jobs ? .

how does the united states ensure the security and integrity of products assembled offshore from components that are procured from a variety of markets around the world ? .

other policy issues include how to target fiscal policy to generate the largest possible beneficial effects , the degree to which the government should act to retain industries and related job opportunities in the united states , the extent to which american jobs are being "outsourced" overseas , the role of u.s. policy in promoting overseas investment , competition by governments ( including state governments ) to attract foreign investment , and the arguably declining manufacturing base in the united states .

congressional interest in this issue stems from the aforementioned national interests as well as its constitutional mandate to regulate commerce with foreign nations .

congress also deals with the variety of policies that arise with respect to international trade , import competition , investments and capital flows , market access , currency misalignment , intellectual property rights , product safety , shipping security , labor , and the environment .

in a broader sweep , the globalization of business strikes directly at issues related to maintaining the u.s. industrial base , the education and training of the american labor force , health care , and the myriad other factors that determine the level of competitiveness of u.s. - based business in international commerce .

u.s. public policies combine with business costs and other factors to affect the shape , geographical location , and operation of supply chains .

conversely , the existence of supply chains may affect u.s. policymaking .

trade policy aimed at curbing imports from china , for example , would likely affect chinese exporters and ancillary sectors , but it also may hit subsidiaries of u.s. companies and manufacturers whose supply chains stretch there .

it is not surprising , therefore , that some of the strongest voices both for and against trade protectionism come from american - based manufacturers and service providers .

a crucial issue for u.s. policymakers is how to create conditions that make the u.s. economy more attractive as a location for both u.s. parented supply chains and for segments of supply chains of foreign companies .

this directly affects job creation for americans .

a possible test for policy is to ask if the predominant effect is trade diversion or trade creation .

does the policy divert production from the u.s. economy to a foreign location , draw production toward a u.s. - based location , or shift production between two foreign locations ? .

does the proposed policy create more production ? .

does it induce foreign businesses to locate segments of their supply chains here ? .

does it create jobs in the united states or merely shift them from one foreign country to another ? .

what effect does the policy have on supply chain operations , efficiency , profitability and the distribution of benefits between labor and management ? .

as the 111 th congress and the obama administration consider changes to economic policy , the basic issues raised by global supply chains may come into play , particularly considerations of the incidence of policies .

for example , is the goal of a policy to support business to promote the overall efficiency and profitability of u.s. parented supply chains even if significant segments of those chains are located abroad , or is the goal to induce companies to move production or other business activity to the united states even if such action reduces supply chain efficiency and the ability of the u.s. - parented supply chain to compete in the global marketplace ? .

in international trade and investment policies , does the incidence of the policy fall on overseas segments of american parented supply chains ? .

if the policy is to reduce imports into the united states , what effect will that have on global supply chain operations ? .

is there a balance between trade policies designed to increase u.s. exports ( eg , by reducing tariffs abroad ) and those that may induce u.s. companies to move production overseas ( eg , easing foreign country limits on direct investments ) ? .

as global supply chains attempt to maximize their efficiency and profitability , they face trade - offs between border transaction costs ( including tariffs ) , factor costs ( including labor and capital ) , logistical costs ( including shipping ) , external business costs ( ease of doing business , regulations , etc .

 ) , and various risks ( including security , financial , and political risk ) .

how does government economic policy influence these factors and trade - offs in ways that are in accord with , rather than counter to u.s. national goals ? .

what about the perception that u.s. businesses are sending jobs overseas ? .

one approach that addressed this issue in part is to focus on manufacturing .

in september 2009 , the white house named ron bloom to be the administration's senior counselor for manufacturing policy to coordinate policy with the departments of commerce , treasury , energy , and labor .

in december 2009 , the executive office of the president released a report entitled "a framework for revitalizing american manufacturing. .

this report examined the manufacturing process , the supply chain , and laid out a simplified model of the manufacturing process , identified each cost driver in this process , and attempted to determine the influence of government on each cost .

the relevant costs identified were labor , technology and business practices , equipment , location , transportation , regulation , and taxation .

some of the legislation related to global supply chains in the 111 th congress include a bill condemning the people's republic of china for its socially unacceptable business practices , including the manufacturing and exportation of unsafe products , casual disregard for the environment , and exploitative employment practices ( h.res .

44 [poe] ) ; retooling america's workers for a green economy act ( s. 269 [murray] ) ; achievement through technology and innovation act of 2009 ( h.r .

558 [roybal - allard] ) ; trade enforcement act of 2009 ( h.r .

496 [rangel] ) ; 10,000 trained by 2010 act ( h.r .

461 [wu] ) ; food safety enhancement act of 2009 ( h.r .

2749 [dingell] ) ; strengthening our economy through small business innovation act of 2009 ( s. 177 [feingold] ) ; sectors act of 2009 ( s. 777 [brown , s.] ) ; business incubator promotion act ( s. 1662 [brown,s .

] ) ; reciprocal market access act of 2009 ( s. 1766 .

[brown , s.] ) .

the 110 th congressed passed the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 that reformed the consumer product safety commission and strengthened enforcement of consumer product safety standards ( h.r .

4040 [rush , p.l .

110-314 ] ) and the america competes act that promotes investment in science and engineering research and in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education ( h.res .

602 / h.r .

2272 [sutton , p.l .

110-69 ] ) .

the globalized american economy poses challenges for u.s. trade and regulatory policy .

the traditional paradigm for policy was that the american economy consisted of u.s. businesses that operated primarily in the domestic market , hired u.s. workers , and sold to u.s. consumers , but some production was either imported or exported .

international trade took place between countries according to each nation's competitive and comparative advantage .

a trade policy aimed at a particular country had impact on businesses in that country .

only indirectly would adverse effects rebound to harm u.s. business interests such as when foreign governments retaliated in kind .

u.s. import restrictions assisted competing industries in the u.s. market even though those restrictions also generally raised prices for american consumers .

the world now has changed .

like a child's neural network , the global economy is constantly organizing and reorganizing itself with new linkages , supply networks , manufacturing chains , and marketing channels that rise in response to market forces and government policies .

this integrated world economy raises both challenges and opportunities for u.s. policymakers .

how u.s. policy responds to this new reality directly affects the well - being of americans .

the existing paradigm based on geographical boundaries , country - to - country trade , vertical integration of manufacturing , and retailers acting as market takers rather than as market makers seems to be in need of updating .

a new policy paradigm should account for the evolving world of business in which large u.s. manufacturers and providers of services have become part of increasingly complex international chains in which parts and components are made in multiple locations and assembled in others .

in the delivery of services , some still require face - to - face contact ( eg , airline passenger travel or food services ) but other business services can be delivered through high speed internet connections ( eg , computer programming , data analysis , customer relations , or ticket sales ) .

international trade now is less between countries than it is within a global supply network that may include headquarters , design , branding , and engineering in the united states but manufacturing in china with parts from singapore , japan , and the european union and call center services in india .

for example , a u.s. company may make a computer in shanghai , but it could have been assembled from chips designed in texas with a motherboard from taiwan and manufactured according to specifications by the u.s. brand - name holder in california with software from washington state and shipped through hong kong directly to a retailer either in the american market or abroad .

the product service department might be located partly in india or the philippines .

such supply chain relations tend to be long - term with "upstream" processes directly connected to "downstream" activities and both pitfalls and opportunities for policy at various junctures in the supply chain .

some supply chain relationships are cemented through ownership ties , but others are contractual .

in either case , the relationships tend to be long - term in which product development , design , and manufacturing tends to be a collaborative process .

one indicator of the extent to which international trade increasingly is being conducted within companies can be seen in data on exports and imports by u.s. non - bank multinational companies ( mncs ) with affiliated and non - affiliated companies .

note that many non - affiliated companies may belong to a company's supply chain .

as shown in figure 1 , in 2007 , u.s. mncs exported $214 billion to their foreign affiliated companies and $344 billion to non - affiliated companies .

these exports accounted for 44% of all u.s. exports of goods in that year .

u.s. mncs also imported $272 billion from their foreign affiliated companies and $456 from non - affiliates .

this accounted for 34% of all u.s. imports .

in 2007 , u.s. parent non - bank mncs employed 22.0 million people in the united states and 11.7 million abroad in affiliated companies .

not shown in figure 1 are exports by multinational companies of foreign parentage located in the u.s. market .

these include companies such as toyota , nokia , seagram , or bayer .

these american subsidiaries comprise key components of foreign supply chains .

in 2007 , they employed 5.5 million people in the u.s. economy ( 4.6% of total employment ) , exported $216 billion and imported $533 billion in goods .

their u.s. operations often are part of a far flung global network .

for example , in 2007 , the operations of hitachi of japan included 16,242 employees in 75 companies in north america , 56,305 employees in china , 49,340 in other asian nations , 9,468 in europe , and 251,702 employees in japan .

in a survey on the future of manufacturing undertaken by industry week magazine in 2008 , the u.s. manufacturers that responded indicated that 18% of their products in 2008 were manufactured or directly sourced from outside the united states and that by 2011 , they expected 25% would be foreign - sourced .

the manufacturers also indicated that 16% of their products in 2008 were being sold outside the united states and that by 2011 , they expected 22% would be sold abroad .

of the major regions of the world where companies were sourcing product in 2008 , 54% said china , 30% said the european union , 27% mexico / latin america , 22% southeast asia , 21% canada , and 17% said india .

foreign sourcing was expected to increase by 2011 from china , mexico / latin america , southeast asia , and india but decrease from the european union and canada .

one example of a typical supply chain may be that for apple computer's ipod music playing device .

this is made by a manufacturing chain that stretches across several countries in the pacific basin .

as shown in figure 2 , the value of $144 for an ipod imported from china in 2005 had its major parts and services originate from china , the united states , japan , south korea , taiwan , and singapore .

each of these major components , moreover , may have involved parts from various countries of the world .

the ipod supply chain included design , supply chain management , parts production , assembly , shipping , distribution , and retail .

note that less than half of the $299 retail cost is accounted for by the $144 import price .

the largest share of the retail price arises from apple computer's profit and other activities and in u.s. distribution and retail .

some of the parts also originate from u.s. companies .

the supply chain also includes transportation and logistics management , financing , risk management , and quality control .

many of these services may be provided by an american company .

apple computer also sells ipods in the global marketplace .

although , these may be shipped directly from china , they contain u.s. parts and generate profits for apple .

in this globalized business world , products may be pushed through the international supply network by an american holder of the brand name , or they may be pulled through the network by a major u.s. retailer .

in either case , relevant u.s. policies include those affecting international trade , exchange rates , product safety , shipping security , as well as costs of fuel and raw materials , labor quality and price , and the existence of production infrastructure .

these combine to affect the shape , geographical location , and operation of the supply chain .

conversely , the existence of the supply chain may affect u.s. policymaking .

trade policy aimed at curbing imports from china , for example , would likely affect chinese exporters and ancillary sectors , but it also may hit subsidiaries of u.s. companies and manufacturers whose supply chains stretch there .

it is not surprising , therefore , that some of the strongest voices both for and against trade protectionism come from american - based manufacturers and service providers .

the manufacturing sector , moreover , can operate only if it is supported by a robust and capable financial sector .

manufacturing managers tend to focus their energies on producing goods and use financial services companies to handle most financial activities .

many companies rely heavily on banks , brokerage houses , investment funds , and insurance companies to raise capital , finance transactions , insure against risks , and issue stock .

when the financial sector is in crisis , the manufacturing sector is usually not far behind .

for manufactures , such as general motors , with in - house financial services , the current financial crisis may have hit them with a dual punch .

it may have clobbered both their financial subsidiaries and their sales of product .

trade transactions , moreover , rely heavily on trust and credit .

in 2008 , thinly capitalized suppliers in other countries were finding it increasingly difficult to obtain new letters of credit .

available loans , moreover , were at higher rates of interest .

this was threatening to disrupt the intricate supply chains that reached into china and emerging markets in eastern europe .

the commerce clause of the u.s. constitution ensured that the various state economies would unite into a vast american market allowing for the free movement of goods , capital , and labor anywhere within the nation .

as the economy developed , the government intervened to subsidize the building of a transportation infrastructure ( roads , railways , ports , and airports ) and communication facilities , to regulate business , and to protect intellectual property .

this huge , unified market gave u.s. businesses a distinct advantage in global markets because they could spread their operations across multiple state markets and take advantage of concentrations of consumers , natural resource endowments , and different labor skills and wages but still operate under a common federal regulatory system .

over the past half century , three revolutionary changes have redefined business production methods and spawned the development of globalized supply chains .

the first has been the development of low - cost shipping along with fast and cheap communications .

the second has been the rise of business management strategies that call for a focus on core competencies , just - in - time production , steady improvement in product quality , risk minimization , flexibility in meeting consumer demand , and profit maximization over a supply chain rather than for each entity within that chain .

the third has been the reduction in international trade and investment barriers worldwide through both multilateral and bilateral trade agreements .

underlying these three revolutionary changes has been a period of relative stability in the world and the absence of global warfare that would have threatened international shipping .

these changes have encouraged the globalization of business , but this globalization also may either coincide with or conflict with national goals of full employment , economic growth , balance in international trade accounts , and national security .

a crucial issue for u.s. policymakers is how to create conditions that make the u.s. economy more attractive as a location for both headquarters of supply chains and for each segment of both u.s. and foreign parented supply chains .

in general , the more value that is added domestically , the more domestic job opportunities that may be created and greater the well - being of americans .

a possible test for policy is to ask if the predominant effect is one of diversion or creation .

does a proposed policy divert production ( including services , research , and marketing ) and employment that goes with production from the u.s. economy to a foreign location , draw production toward a u.s. - based location , or shift production between two foreign locations ? .

does the proposed policy create more production , or does it discourage productive activity ? .

does it induce foreign - owned businesses to locate segments of their supply chains here ? .

does the policy disrupt or enhance supply chain operations and decrease or increase overall supply chain efficiency and profitability ? .

how does a policy affect the distribution of benefits among corporate executives , workers , shareholders , and consumers ? .

does a proposed policy encourage the delivery of products for consumers that are high in quality yet low in price ? .

also , does a proposed policy affect where intellectual property is created or resides , and what are the spinoff benefits for the rest of society ? .

public policy affects businesses in two distinct ways .

the first is in the environment for business or the economic , political , and social crucible in which it operates .

this includes a wide range of factors including basic institutions of private property , commercial law and rights , market access , rights of establishment , national treatment , border barriers , exchange rate policy , protection of intellectual property , infrastructure , education and training of workers , energy policy , the climate for innovation , political governance , and the panoply of policies aimed at the general climate for business that all companies face .

the second way that public policy affects business is in actions that affect the internal operations of companies .

these are actions that directly affect costs of production and profitability , and may include tax policy , specific customs duties , wage and employment policies , accounting and reporting rules , health and safety requirements , specific environmental requirements , and product safety .

some policies affecting the general business environment , such as energy costs and subsidies for research and development , also affect internal costs .

the development of global supply chains adds another dimension to the impact of public policy .

this appears in the incidence ( who is affected ) by policy .

since manufacturing processes now have become fractured , the incidence of policy likewise has become fractured .

a supply chain consists of a domestic parent , domestic suppliers , foreign suppliers , and a community of supporting functions that include logistics , supply chain management , and quality assurance .

public policy may provide incentives or disincentives for supply chain parent companies to establish and retain their headquarters in the u.s. market .

this applies both to historically american companies and to foreign companies that may locate regional headquarters in the united states .

public policies favorable to business in the united states also may induce both american and foreign - owned supply chains to locate more segments of their supply chains in the united states ( and vice versa ) .

u.s. policies , however , also may lower the costs of manufacturing abroad .

reciprocal tariff reductions ; free trade areas ; reducing market access barriers in other countries ; improving u.s. seaports , airports , and other freight handling infrastructure ; promoting faster and more efficient communications networks ; and certain tax provisions may increase the incentive to source from abroad or to invest in business operations there .

while such policies may work counter to efforts to induce businesses to locate activities in the united states , they also may increase the overall profitability of a u.s. parented global supply chain and may better enable u.s. businesses to leverage their supply chain operations in order to sell product in the foreign market .

therefore , while u.s. efforts at decreasing border barriers abroad tend to have an unequivocally positive impact on u.s. economic well - being by increasing u.s. exports , efforts at improving the business environment in foreign countries ( such as protecting intellectual property or easing restrictions on foreign investment ) tend to have a dual impact .

while such efforts may encourage the location of segments of a supply chain in foreign countries , they also may increase the profitability of the supply chain operations for the u.s. parent company .

an analogous argument holds for a policy such as imposing additional import tariffs in the united states .

while such a policy may increase the incentive to locate production in the u.s. market , it also may reduce the profitability and competitiveness of supply chain operations for u.s. companies .

as a result , the chain as a whole may be less able to compete with other global supply chains , may lose business , and may end up with fewer american employees overall .

the proliferation of global supply chains , therefore , has exacerbated certain trade - offs with respect to the effect or incidence of policies .

for a given policy proposal , is the larger effect on the supply chain parent , on overseas operations that also affect the parent company , or on company operations , both domestic and foreign , in the united states ? .

the varying effects of the policy may cause seemingly contradictory reactions to policy initiatives .

it should not be a surprise to find various interest groups , even those within certain business sectors , at odds with each other .

in view of these disparate responses , business associations , such as the national association of manufacturers , tend to take positions only on issues of general interest to their members .

they usually do not speak out on industry sectoral issues , unless such issues are non - controversial or have wide member support .

public policy , therefore , affects different segments of the supply chain in different ways .

a policy aimed at increasing the number of scientists and engineers in the u.s. economy may help to retain the research and development segment in the united states , but the focus on such high - level skills may lessen the number of new graduates who are willing to take jobs that require only lower - level labor skills and face work processes that tend to be repetitive .

a policy aimed at keeping out certain types of imported materials , such as carbon steel , to assist the domestic steel industry may lessen the competitiveness of the automobile and other industries that use steel in their assembly process .

the fracturing of the manufacturing process and the outsourcing of components of that process to foreign suppliers , therefore , implies that public policy also may need to be fractured ( multidimensional and discriminating ) , designed to have different effects on different segments of the production chains and the workforce associated with those production activities .

one example of how public policy may enter into business decision making to determine where to manufacture product is an analytical tool reportedly used by dow chemical .

dow has manufacturing capacity in several countries and can move production from location to location on short notice .

the company has used a linear programming model that takes account of international differences in exchange rates , tax rates , and transportation and labor costs to determine the best mix of production by location for each planning period .

the company is able to respond quickly to government policies that may affect exchange rates , taxes , or other cost factors .

in policies aimed at creating a favorable climate for business in the american market , the united states seems to do quite well , measures of general business climate usually place the united states first in the world in terms of "competitiveness. .

relative competitiveness , however , is difficult to measure and metrics tend to be quite general .

the measures do , however , indicate how a country compares with other nations as a potential generator of economic growth and as a host for international business .

for example , the world economic forum publishes the global competitiveness index for 134 countries .

under this index in 2008 , the united states ranked first , switzerland second , denmark third , sweden fourth , germany fifth , finland sixth , singapore seventh , japan , eighth , united kingdom ninth , and the netherlands tenth .

china was 34 th .

likewise , the institute for management development in lasuanne , switzerland publishes a world competitiveness scoreboard each year that "analyzes the factors and policies that shape the ability of a nation to create and maintain an environment that sustains more value creation for its enterprises and more prosperity for its people. .

the analysis divides the national environments of 55 countries into four main factors ( with 331 criteria ) : economic performance , government efficiency , business efficiency , and infrastructure .

the 2008 scorecard placed the united states first , singapore second , hong kong third , switzerland fourth , and luxembourg fifth .

china was number 17 .

according to these analyses , the united states leads the world in providing an economic environment favorable for business .

these comparative indices however , tend to examine underlying performance factors that lead to high incomes and business development .

while the united states ranks first in both of these international comparisons , they do not explain why companies headquartered in the united states choose to manufacture in countries that rank lower in "competitiveness. .

this is where supply chains enter the analysis .

international business supply chains provide the structure for the new world of globalized business .

much of u.s. international trade is conducted by globalized supply chains .

for public policy , supply chains affect the magnitude of impact for fiscal stimulus packages and also the incidence of trade policy .

supply chains also are affected by the range of policies that have an impact on the competitiveness of u.s. business .

whether taxes , environmental regulations , labor policy , or shipping security , business supply chains are directly affected by changes in the business environment , whether in the domestic or foreign markets .

in the world of globalized supply chains , a policy aimed at imports , may actually hit u.s. parented supply chains as well as foreign companies and countries .

the fracturing of business into core and non - core competencies and into domestic and foreign segments of supply chains implies that what had been purely domestic economic and regulatory policy now may affect the operations of u.s. parented supply chains abroad , and what had been primarily international economic , trade , and investment policy now also has a clear domestic effect .

the globalization of supply has added complexity to both the managers of the supply chains and to policymaking .

as the 111 th congress and the obama administration consider changes to economic policy , the basic issues raised by global supply chains may come into play , particularly considerations of the incidence of policies .

for example , is the goal of a policy to support business to promote the overall efficiency and profitability of u.s. parented supply chains even if significant segments of those chains are located abroad , or is the goal to induce companies to move production or other business activity to the united states even if such action reduces supply chain efficiency and the ability of the u.s. - parented supply chain to compete in the global marketplace ? .

in international trade and investment policies , does the incidence of the policy fall on overseas segments of american parented supply chains ? .

if the policy is to reduce imports into the united states , what effect will that have on global supply chain operations ? .

is there a balance between trade policies designed to increase u.s. exports ( eg , by reducing tariffs abroad ) and those that may induce u.s. companies to move production overseas ( eg , easing foreign country limits on direct investments ) .

as global supply chains attempt to maximize their efficiency and profitability , they face trade - offs between border transaction costs ( including tariffs ) , factor costs ( including labor and capital ) , logistical costs ( including shipping ) , external business costs ( ease of doing business , regulations , etc .

 ) , and various risks ( including security , financial , and political risk ) .

how does government economic policy influence these factors and trade - offs in ways that are in accord with , rather than counter to , u.s. national goals ? .

