worldwide there are millions of people that flee their homes and cross international borders due to threatening circumstances , including refugees and asylum - seekers .

a refugee is a person fleeing his or her country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

asylum - seekers are individuals that claim to be refugees and apply for sanctuary from within a potential host country , but whose claim for refugee status have not yet been evaluated and determined .

the united nations high commissioner for refugees ( unhcr ) — an agency mandated to lead and coordinate international action to protect refugees and resolve refugee problems worldwide — attempts to register and assist as much of this population as possible .

unhcr contributes to a statistical database that allows for the tracking and analysis of what it describes as "populations of concern," that includes asylum - seekers and refugees .

specifically , this database allows for the comparison of refugee and asylum - seeker inflows and populations in the united states and other countries , such as member states of the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) .

unhcr data generally show that the united states ranks among the highest recipients of refugees and asylum - seekers in the oecd .

while the refugee and asylum - seeker situation has been of concern to policymakers for many years , the recent economic downturn may hold implications for the worldwide population of concern .

international slowdowns in the availability of capital , as well as the accompanying unemployment , means that resources shortages are developing due to tightening government revenues .

some countries may develop shortages of vital food and agricultural imports , which could lead to food - based migration and displacement .

resource shortages have historically also served as the basis for conflict , which could mean an escalation in the worldwide supply of refugees and asylum - seekers .

yet , the united states is also being severely impacted by the economic downturn , and the demand for government assistance is growing .

thus , a potential issue for congress is whether the united states should increase its admissions of asylum - seekers and refugees during a worldwide economic downturn , maintain current admission levels , or whether the economic circumstances warrant diverting refugee resources to other concerns .

providing a comparative and historical analysis of refugee and asylum - seeker inflows to the united states is of particular informational value , especially relative to other oecd countries .

such information informs members of congress as to how policies in the united states and the rest of the oecd are impacting refugee and asylum - seeker inflows and populations .

other crs products provide extensive discussion of united states refugee and asylum policy .

the aim of this report , however , is to provide members of congress with a comparative data context .

various patterns will be extracted from the data and the inflows to the united states will be analyzed in comparison to other oecd member states .

the policy analysis will provide some discussions regarding policy developments in oecd countries that may impact their respective inflows of refugees and asylum - seekers .

the vast majority of these policies relate to the flows of asylum - seekers , since this group tends to foster less political support in the oecd .

the data in this report shows that there is no uniform inflow trend across oecd countries relating to refugees or asylum - seekers .

one of the main findings is that several oecd countries with historically greater numbers of asylum - seekers ( such as the united states ) have had the levels of their asylum - seeker inflows converge .

moreover , the level at which these asylum - seeker levels have converged is in most cases markedly lower than asylum - seeker inflows during the 1990s .

other oecd countries — mainly those on the periphery of the eu — have recently experienced an upward trend in the asylum - seeker inflows .

this pattern is likely due to their geographic proximity to non - eu countries and the existence of safe third country provisions ( a concept discussed later in this report ) .

additionally , refugee data demonstrates that the united states continues to be the main host country of resettled refugees , both in the oecd and worldwide .

despite lower numbers of refugee resettlements in the united states from a decade ago , the number of refugee resettlements in other oecd countries has also declined .

therefore , the resettlement burden of the united states as compared to other oecd countries has remained consistent .

refugee policy in the united states and other oecd countries is rooted in a post - world war ii context .

as state parties to the un convention relating to the status of refugees of 1951 and the subsequent 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees , all member states of the oecd have committed themselves to admitting an unspecified number of individuals fleeing persecution .

the intent of the convention was to end an ad hoc approach to refugee admissions and resettlement that had previously characterized refugee policy .

the united states has adopted the principles of the convention in statute .

after a state officially grants sanctuary to an individual under the 1951 convention and 1967 protocol , the state is obligated to provide law - abiding admitted refugees with many of the same rights and privileges that citizens enjoy , such as access to courts , the right to pursue gainful employment , public education , medical access , artistic expression , and the like .

these rights and privileges do not necessarily extend to individuals that have not been officially granted protective status .

yet , under the principal of nonrefoulment — which prohibits the expulsion or involuntary return of a refugee or a person seeking asylum to a territory where his / her life or freedom would be threatened — all parties to the 1951 convention or 1967 protocol must provide some evaluation of claims for sanctuary from persons within its jurisdiction .

in oecd countries , sanctuary is normally offered on a permanent basis .

as mentioned above , the unhcr tracks official data worldwide on groups and individuals labeled as "unhcr populations of concern" — a classification that includes several categories such as refugees , asylum - seekers , idps , and other populations of concern .

in 2007 , the worldwide population of concern was approximately 31.7 million .

of this population , approximately 36% were refugees , 2% were asylum - seekers ( with pending cases ) , 43% were internally displaced persons , and the remaining 19% were other populations of concern ( eg , stateless persons ) .

note that these figures represent those registered with unhcr , but do not represent the full total worldwide ( as many are not registered ) .

as shown in figure 1 , the period between 1998 and 2007 witnessed a shift within the unhcr's population of concern .

for most of the time period there was a downward trend in the refugee population .

yet in 2007 , the year - over - year growth number of refugees rose by 15% to approximately 11.4 million , due mainly to the conflicts in iraq and afghanistan .

asylum - seekers experienced declining numbers during the latter half of the 10-year period .

asylum - seekers dropped from a peak in 2001 of 1.1 million asylum - seekers to roughly 740,000 at the end of 2007 , a decline of 32% .

persons categorized as "other populations of concern" increased notably in recent years before declining in 2007 to 5.7 million .

yet , the population that has undergone the largest absolute change in the previous few years has been the worldwide population of idps .

at the end of 2007 , unhcr - registered population of idps had grown to nearly 13.7 million persons — an approximately twofold increase since 2005 .

the regions of origin for the populations of concern are predominantly africa and asia , as shown in figure 2 .

the people from asia and africa constituted 38% and 35% of this population in 2007 , respectively .

the third - largest contributing region during the same year was latin america and the caribbean , which was responsible for producing 12% of the population of concern .

the persons of concern originating from europe represented 4% of the estimated total population .

north america's population ( excluding mexico and the caribbean ) represented less than 1% of the total population — similar to persons of concern from oceania .

the category of other populations such as stateless persons ( labeled "various" in figure 2 ) accounted for 11% of the worldwide population .

as mentioned above , those refugees determined by the unhcr to be most at risk are eligible to be screened and processed for permanent resettlement in a country with an existing resettlement agreement .

mandated by the unhcr's charter , resettlements are used as a protection tool and durable solution for resettled individuals .

among oecd countries , the united states is somewhat unique in its continued participation in large - scale resettlement of refugees .

the majority of oecd countries do not participate at all in refugee resettlement and fulfill 1951 convention terms by processing asylum - seekers that arrive within their borders .

in the past decade , only 12 other oecd member states have participated in refugee resettlement , and one of those countries — japan — has not resettled any refugees since 2001 .

by contrast , countries such as australia , canada , and the united states have consistently resettled thousands of refugees on an annual basis , thereby constituting the states most involved in refugee resettlement over the past 10 years .

the policy approaches that countries have taken towards refugees and asylum - seekers has been largely intertwined with the political value countries have placed on immigration in general .

while countries such as the united states , canada , and australia have traditionally had relatively proactive immigration policies , many european countries have not historically accepted many immigrants and have practiced highly restrictive legal immigration policies .

these divergent immigrant experiences are partly reflected in the united states' willingness to accept hundreds of thousands of permanent immigrants annually .

consequently , refugees have constituted a smaller share of permanent inflows into the united states .

by comparison , most european countries tend to prefer admitting foreign nationals on a temporary basis , and in many european countries asylum has become a main avenue for entry and a perceived "loophole" for immigration .

the sizable inflows of asylum - seekers to many european countries has led to a perception in a number of states that their asylum systems are overburdened .

in many countries , the expenditure of resources towards special accommodations , financial assistance , and providing temporary employment , has led to dissatisfaction with the asylum system .

additionally , the wave of migrants that arrived in western europe with the collapse of the soviet union and communist control over eastern europe placed a burden on public resources that many european policymakers are not eager to see repeated .

thus , many of the restrictive policy trends that are noted in subsequent sections have emerged out of these political developments in europe over the last two decades .

moreover , the lack of geographic barriers make travel to europe less strenuous , and , as a result , make some countries on the european periphery especially susceptible to asylum - seeker inflows .

an additional development affecting asylum - seeker and refugee policies in european oecd member states has been the expanded number of member states in the european union ( eu ) .

for eu member states , their nationals may freely travel , settle , and seek employment in other member states .

while such an arrangement should benefit the economic development of the entire eu area in the long term , political and cultural concerns have been raised about the impact this openness may have on various countries .

moreover , since countries cannot restrict flows from within the eu area , they have shown a greater eagerness to restrict unwanted flows from outside .

thus , asylum - seekers have become a prominent target for certain proponents of immigration restriction .

eu countries are increasingly attempting to coordinate immigration and asylum - seeker policies , such as the recently passed european pact on immigration and asylum .

the inflow of large numbers of unauthorized immigrants has prompted security concerns amongst policymakers in europe ( as it has in the united states ) .

the new european security - based provisions are likely to impact asylum - seekers since the proposed changes to eu policy will be based upon the concept of "country reception capacity" — thereby suggesting that inflows to each country beyond the level of "reception capacity" constitutes a security risk .

for many oecd countries , however , the most confounding factor is illegal migration .

the difficulty for many countries is separating illegal economic migrants from actual asylum - seekers that have migrated inside their borders .

moreover , asylum - seekers may have economic considerations when migrating to a destination country .

although less than 1% of unhcr populations of concern are admitted into oecd countries , these countries are frequently desirable destinations for asylum - seekers because of the stronger performing economies and potential for social and economic upward mobility .

thus , the question for many oecd policymakers has been how to develop adequate inflow control measures without excluding genuine asylum - seekers .

empirically , oecd countries with strongly performing economies are likely to be recipients of relatively higher rates of asylum applications .

strong economies serve as an incentive for economic migrants to travel to these states ( in either an authorized or unauthorized manner ) , but not necessarily for asylum - seekers .

more recent asylum - seeker policies throughout the oecd , however , have seemingly been based upon the assumption that asylum - seekers are economically rational actors , similar to many illegal immigrants .

the response in the united states and throughout other oecd states has been to develop proactive measures to control the flows of asylum - seekers , by way of unilateral measures or via multilateral agreements .

efforts such as safe third - country agreements and various cost control programs have been the likely cause of the convergence of asylum - seeker inflow levels in certain oecd countries with historically higher inflow rates ( a convergence that is depicted in figure 4 ) .

the "beggar thy neighbor" policy approach within the european union has elevated concerns among numerous observers , causing some advocates and academics to label the eu as "fortress europe. .

while empirical data do not support the implication that the eu member states ( nor other oecd countries for that matter ) are closing off asylum - seeker inflows entirely , statistics do indicate that there have been marked inflow level shifts downward in several traditionally larger receiving countries for asylum - seekers .

asylum - seekers represent the largest inflow population into oecd countries .

table a - 1 in appendix shows that the inflows of asylum - seekers into oecd countries has declined in recent years ( the table also includes information for eu countries ) .

in total , the oecd took in 638,539 asylum - seekers in 2001 , while in 2005 this number had been reduced to 319,050 , a drop of 50% .

the corresponding drop in the worldwide asylum - seeker population was 29% .

although these trends are likely the results of inflow control policies implemented by the various countries , other factors such as regional stability cannot be ruled out as causal variables .

the preceding data analysis has largely been based on inflow levels .

while such analysis is both informative and valid in an overview of capacity for and contributions towards these populations , it does not fully address the relative costs that countries experience from such inflows .

employing additional economic and demographic indicators would provide a fuller view of refugee inflows in oecd member states .

therefore , this section attempts to place these inflows into a comparative context that emphasizes the relative burden of refugee populations in terms of economic costs and population size .

one approach to contextualizing inflows in oecd countries is to analyze a country's existing refugee population relative to the size of the national income and productivity .

the map shown in figure 7 shows these data and uses gross domestic product ( gdp ) adjusted for purchasing power parity ( ppp ) to account for a given country's potential , relative financial burden .

specifically , figure 7 maps out the average number of refugees per $1 gdp ( ppp ) per capita from 2002 to 2006 , thereby adjusting national income to both exchange rates and the size of the population .

this measure makes no assumption about the long - term net cost / benefit of refugee because such factors are entirely dependent on how economically integrated into the host country this population becomes .

the map in figure 7 demonstrates that when placed in the context of national income , the united states has taken on a larger refugee hosting burden than almost every other oecd country .

only germany , with 26.3 refugees per $1 gdp ( ppp ) per capita , had a higher relative burden than the united states ( 10.9 ) .

on a worldwide basis , both the united states and germany ranked in the top 35 for this same measure .

moreover , the map shows that the majority of oecd countries had an average population of one refugee per $1 gdp ( ppp ) per capita or less .

consequently , the united states had an average burden at least 11 times greater than most oecd countries for the 2002-2006 time period relative to national income .

the lowest - ranked country in the oecd for this measure was iceland , which had over 100 times fewer refugees than the united states relative to national income .

another way to contextualize burden sharing worldwide is to consider a given country's existing population .

such an approach removes economic conditions and considers refugees in terms of the number of residents in a country .

this measure serves as one type of indicator for the demographic impact of refugee inflows .

depicted in figure 8 is a world map showing the 2002-2006 average cumulative number of refugees to every 1,000 inhabitants in each country .

unlike the measure for national income , the united states — with 1.7 refugees per 1,000 inhabitants — figured more toward the median of oecd countries for this demographic measure .

overall , the ratio for the united states was lower than that of 14 other oecd countries and ranked 56 th worldwide .

the highest ratios among oecd countries were for sweden , denmark , germany , and norway .

sweden's ratio ranked 11 th worldwide .

thus , the top 10 hosting countries for refugees per 1,000 inhabitants worldwide were all outside the oecd .

a plurality of oecd countries averaged 1.0 or fewer refugees per 1,000 inhabitants from 2002 to 2006 .

overall , refugees constitute the costliest recipients of public benefits on a per person basis in the united states .

yet , as advocates will note , the costs either presented or implied in the figures above do not convey the benefits of hosting refugee ( or asylum - seeker ) populations .

many benefits cannot be quantified in monetary terms , but nonetheless have affected host countries enormously .

in the united states , for example , refugee populations frequently contribute to multicultural diversity and global awareness in the population .

moreover , some refugees that chose to remain have become successful entrepreneurs and strong contributors to economic development .

historically , recipient countries have benefitted from the human capital that refugee populations have represented by using that human capital for intellectual and technological advancement .

in this regard , notable refugees to the united states include nobel prize winner and scientist albert einstein and former secretary of state madeleine albright .

while costs of refugee resettlement and asylum - seeker programs are necessary considerations for any government , these costs must also be weighed against the many contributions to the political , economic , cultural , and religious life that these populations make in oecd countries .

the findings of this report indicate that currently the united states resettles more refugees and has a higher inflow rate of asylum - seekers than any other oecd country , despite having numerous deterrence mechanisms in place .

additionally , the rate of positive asylum decisions ( when a decision is taken ) is above the oecd average .

but the data also indicate that there are millions of refugees and other populations of concern worldwide , and in recent years these populations have grown .

and with the worldwide economic downturn occurring , these populations are likely to increase .

yet , the united states is also being severely impacted by the economic downturn , and the demand for government assistance is growing .

thus , balancing the availability of resources against the demand for refugee assistance will likely continue .

