the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) offers legal protection to individuals with disabilities facing discrimination in employment , public accommodations , and services provided by the telecommunications , transportation , and public sectors .

its stated purpose is "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. .

title ii of the ada states in part that "no qualified individual with a disability shall , by reason of such disability , be excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of the services , programs , or activities of a public entity , or be subjected to discrimination by any such entity. .

a public entity is defined as a state or local government .

the department of justice ( doj ) has promulgated detailed regulations for title ii .

one of these regulations , the so - called integration regulation , interprets title ii to mean that "a public entity shall administer services , programs , and activities in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified individuals with disabilities. .

however , the integrated setting is not required if "the public entity can demonstrate that making the modifications would fundamentally alter the nature of the service , program , or activity. .

in olmstead v. l.c .

 , 527 u.s. 581 ( 1999 ) , the supreme court held that , under title ii of the ada and the integration regulation promulgated by the doj , state action to unjustly isolate people with disabilities is a form of prohibited discrimination .

since then , appellate courts have more clearly articulated states' olmstead obligations .

in addition to these judicial developments , the recent health care reform package , the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca , p.l .

111-148 ) as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act ( hcera , p.l .

111-152 ) ( collectively the affordable care act , or aca ) , has the potential to influence states' olmstead initiatives .

specifically , the affordable care act revised the federal medicaid statute to give states greater incentives to provide home and community - based care services to people with disabilities , offer states greater flexibility in the kinds of packages of home and community - based services they can offer , and , perhaps , enable states to provide more medicaid beneficiaries with long - term care services in their communities .

because judicial developments under olmstead often take federal medicaid law into account , ppaca amendments to that law may affect the outcome of future cases on deinstitutionalization .

in olmstead v. l.c .

 , the supreme court held that "unjustified isolation ... is properly regarded as discrimination based on disability" under title ii of the ada and its implementing regulations .

the plaintiffs in olmstead were mentally disabled individuals who were voluntarily confined to a state hospital's psychiatric unit .

their physicians had determined that they were capable of living in a community - based environment .

georgia refused to transfer the individuals to a less restrictive setting , although the programs were available .

the plaintiffs then brought suit under the ada arguing that their segregation in the state institution violated title ii of the act .

georgia argued that its actions did not fall within the ada's concept of discrimination because it had decided to keep the plaintiffs in institutions not because of their disabilities but because of other factors .

in addition , georgia claimed that the federal medicaid statute ( 42 u.s.c .

§1396 et seq. ) .

"reflected a congressional policy preference for treatment in the institution over treatment in the community. .

the court rejected georgia's arguments , holding that the ada reflects a "more comprehensive view of the concept of discrimination. .

specifically , the court held that the ada defines discrimination to include the unjustified segregation of individuals with disabilities and thereby requires states to provide community - based treatment for persons with mental disabilities when three conditions are satisfied: ( 1 ) the state's treatment professionals determine that such placement is appropriate , ( 2 ) the affected persons do not oppose it , and ( 3 ) the placement can be reasonably accommodated given the state's resources and the needs of others with mental disabilities .

regarding the third condition , the court held that requiring community - based care is not a reasonable accommodation if , because of budgetary constraints , it would fundamentally alter the state's services and programs by forcing the state to mete out its mental health services inequitably .

in part iii - b of the olmstead opinion , a plurality set a benchmark by which the reasonableness of the state provision of community care to the plaintiffs could be assessed .

the plurality stated that to determine whether the provision of community care is a reasonable accommodation to , or a fundamental alteration of , the state's services and programs , a plaintiff's request must be reviewed in the context of the state's responsibility for the care and treatment of its disabled population as a whole .

from this viewpoint , neither a state's marginal cost of placing the plaintiff nor the immediate placement of all qualified persons is the touchstone .

instead , a state could satisfy its obligation if , because of budget constraints , it maintains a waitlist of qualified persons needing community placement so long as the waitlist moves at a "reasonable pace not controlled by the [s]tate's endeavors to keep its institutions fully populated" and is part of a "comprehensive , effectively working plan for placing qualified persons … in less restrictive settings. .

early case law interpreting olmstead focused primarily on the complaint: what does a plaintiff need to allege to establish a prima facie case that a state failed to fulfill the ada's integration requirement ? .

more recent case law , however , has focused on the defense: what does a defendant need to prove to show that providing the services requested would necessitate a fundamental alteration of its programs and services ? .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( p.l .

111-148 ) , as amended by the health care and education reconciliation act ( p.l .

111-152 ) ( hereinafter referred to collectively as the affordable care act or aca ) , provided incentives for states to expand their offerings of home and community - based services to better enable individuals with disabilities to live in the community .

among the provisions of aca with the potential to affect developments under olmstead are: section 2401 ( "community first choice option" ) , which allows states to offer personal care attendant services as an optional benefit to certain medicaid beneficiaries and receive a six - percentage - point increase in the federal matching rate for doing so .

section 2402 , which both gives states more flexibility to offer different packages of long - term care services to different target groups and creates a new eligibility pathway into medicaid for people who need long - term care services , particularly those who need only very limited long - term care assistance .

section 2403 , which both extends funding for state money follows the person ( mfp ) demonstration projects and lowers the eligibility requirements for individuals who would like to participate in a state's mfp demonstration project so that more individuals are eligible to receive community - based support for their transition out of a long - term care facility .

section 10202 , which allows qualifying states to receive temporary bonus payments for increasing their share of their medicaid long - term care spending for home and community - based services and supports and reducing their share of spending for institutional long - term care .

aca also established the community living assistance services and supports ( class ) program to , inter alia , provide a financing mechanism for long - term care services and supports to empower individuals with functional limitations to live in the community .

however , aca also contained provisions relating to the class program's solvency and financial independence , reflecting concerns about the program's long - term financial viability .

pursuant to these provisions , the department of health and humans services ( hhs ) assessed the actuarial soundness of its options for implementing the class program and , in october 2011 , informed congress that it did "not see a viable path forward for class implementation" at that time .

although some of aca's provisions have taken effect — for example , the community first choice option became effective in october 2011 — its implementation is not yet complete .

nevertheless , many expect that the affordable care act will influence the future of states' olmstead initiatives by shifting medicaid spending away from institutional care to some degree .

the ada's integration mandate may be enforced through a private action — a lawsuit brought by a private individual — or an action brought by the department of justice .

congress has also vested the independent protection and advocacy system ( p&as ) with the duty and authority to , inter alia , investigate alleged violations of the rights of individuals with disabilities and pursue policy changes and legal remedies on their behalf .

federal courts have held that these p&a organizations have standing to enforce the integration mandate by filing suit on behalf of facility residents , a view supported by the department of justice .

recently , some have expressed concern that the interests of the residents of intermediate care facilities for people with mental disabilities and their legal guardians are not adequately protected in representational litigation brought by the department of justice and the state p&a agencies .

proponents of this view have advocated for legislation requiring the department of justice and p&a agencies to satisfy additional procedures before initiating lawsuits on behalf of the residents of these facilities .

critics , however , contend that such laws would undermine the capacity of facility residents to challenge their institutionalization and / or their living conditions and hinder the enforcement of federal law .

this legislation may also be perceived as duplicative because ( 1 ) the federal rules of civil procedure already contain safeguards designed to ensure that class actions fairly and adequately represent class members' interests ; and ( 2 ) the department of justice generally interviews residents , staff , and other individuals familiar with a given facility before commencing litigation .

