the william d. ford federal direct loan ( dl ) program — authorized under title iv , part d of the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ) , as amended , and administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) — is the primary source of federal student loans .

several types of loans are offered through the dl program: subsidized stafford loans for undergraduate students ; unsubsidized stafford loans for undergraduate and graduate students ; plus loans for graduate students and parents of dependent undergraduate students ; and consolidation loans through which borrowers may combine their loans into a single loan payable over a longer term , which varies according to the combined loan balance .

for many years , essentially the same set of loans was also available through the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program , authorized under title iv , part b of the hea ; and the majority of loans made were ffel program loans .

the safra act terminated the authority to make new ffel program loans , effective july 1 , 2010 .

both the ffel and dl programs are descendants of the guaranteed student loan ( gsl ) program , which was originally enacted under title iv of the hea to enhance access to postsecondary education for students from low - and middle - income families by providing them access to low - interest student loans .

under the ffel program , loans were originated by private sector and state - based lenders and were funded with nonfederal capital .

the federal government guaranteed lenders against loss through borrower default , death , permanent disability , or , in limited instances , bankruptcy .

the federal government also entered into agreements to provide participating lenders a variety of incentives designed to ensure that nonfederal capital would consistently be available to support ffel program student loans .

ffel program loans are serviced by private sector and state - based lenders ; and state and nonprofit guaranty agencies receive federal funds to play the lead role in administering the federal loan guarantee .

while no new loans are being made through the ffel program , outstanding ffel program loans are due to be repaid over the coming years .

authorization for the dl program was enacted under the student loan reform act of 1993 , part of the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) .

the program was established with the goals of streamlining the student loan delivery system and achieving cost savings .

when enacted , the program was originally intended to gradually expand and replace the ffel program ; however , provisions calling for a "phase - in" of the dl program were repealed under the higher education amendments of 1998 ( p.l .

105-244 ) .

for the nearly two decades that both the ffel and dl programs were in operation , ihes were able to participate in the program of their choice .

the dl program uses a different administrative structure and draws on a different source of capital than was used in the ffel program .

under the dl program , the federal government essentially serves as the banker — it provides the loans to students and their families using federal capital ( i.e. , funds from the u.s. treasury ) , and it owns the loans .

schools that participate in the dl program may serve as direct loan originators or the loans may be originated by a contractor working for ed .

federal contractors hired by ed service dl program loans .

the dl program is the largest federal program that provides direct aid to support students' postsecondary educational pursuits .

in fy2016 , ed estimates that 20.4 million new dl program stafford loans and plus loans , averaging $5,342 each and totaling $109.2 billion , will be made to undergraduate and graduate students , and the parents of undergraduate dependent students ; and it estimates that 503,000 consolidation loans , averaging $55,244 and totaling $27.8 billion , will also be made .

in the recent years , numerous changes have been made to the terms and conditions of dl program loans .

the college cost reduction and access act of 2007 ( ccraa ; p.l .

110-84 ) incrementally lowered , from 6.8% to 3.4% , the fixed interest rates charged to undergraduate borrowers of subsidized stafford loans made during the four award years spanning july 1 , 2008 , to june 30 , 2012 , and established the income - based repayment ( ibr ) plan .

the ensuring continued access to student loans act of 2008 ( ecasla ; p.l .

110-227 ) increased the amounts students may borrow in unsubsidized stafford loans .

the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) reauthorized the hea and made a variety of changes to loan terms and conditions .

the safra act , part of the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( hcera ; p.l .

111-152 ) , terminated the authority to make new loans under the ffel program after june 30 , 2010 .

the budget control act of 2011 ( bca ; p.l .

112-25 ) eliminated the availability of subsidized stafford loans to graduate and professional students for periods of instruction beginning on or after july 1 , 2012 ; and terminated the availability of certain repayment incentives for loans made on or after july 1 , 2012 .

the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) extended the 3.4% interest rate to apply to subsidized stafford loans made from july 1 , 2012 , to june 30 , 2013 .

most recently , the bipartisan student loan certainty act of 2013 ( p.l .

113-28 ) established a new market - indexed , fixed interest rate structure for dl program loans made on or after july 1 , 2013 .

this report discusses major provisions of federal student loans made available through the dl program and previously made through the ffel program .

the primary emphasis is placed on discussing provisions related to borrower eligibility , loan terms and conditions , borrower repayment relief , and loan default and its consequences for borrowers .

these topics are principally discussed with regard to loans currently being made through the dl program , or made in the recent past through either program .

historical information on certain prior terms and conditions is also presented in instances where there remains substantial interest in those aspects of loans .

following a brief review of loan types in the introduction , the next section of this report reviews eligibility requirements , loan limits , interest rates , and allowable fees for these loans .

this is followed by a comparable section on consolidation loans .

the remainder of the report examines various terms and conditions of ffel and dl program loans that are applicable to all loan types .

these include student loan discounts and incentives , loan repayment , repayment relief , loan default , loan rehabilitation , loan discharge , and loan forgiveness .

a glossary of selected financial terms is included in appendix a .

this section discusses borrower eligibility requirements , loan limits , interest rates , and allowable fees for subsidized stafford loans , unsubsidized stafford loans , and plus loans .

consolidation loans enable borrowers to simplify the repayment of their federal student loans by combining multiple loans into a single loan .

depending on the amount owed , loan consolidation may also provide borrowers the opportunity to repay their loans over an extended period of time , which reduces the monthly payment amount ( although it increases the total amount that must be paid due to the longer period over which interest accrues ) .

in addition , with consolidation loans currently being made through the dl program , borrowers are afforded the opportunity to lock in a fixed interest rate on their student loans , based on the weighted average of the interest rates in effect on the loans being consolidated , rounded up to the nearest higher one - eighth of 1% .

ed does not assess origination fees on consolidation loans .

as described above , the maximum interest rates and fees that may be paid by borrowers of ffel and dl program loans are established by statutory and regulatory provisions .

in the ffel program , the lender was required to pay the origination fee to the federal government ; and the lender could choose whether or not to pass the entire fee on to the borrower , within certain limitations .

the default fee ( which defrays federal default costs ) was paid to the guaranty agency for the guarantor's locally held federal reserve fund .

if the default fee was paid by the borrower , it was required to have been deducted proportionally from the proceeds of the loan prior to payment to the borrower .

the default fee also could have been paid by other nonfederal sources ( eg , by the lender or the guarantor ) .

lenders in the ffel program often used to compete for borrowers by offering different packages of interest rate and fee discounts .

to attract borrowers , lenders might have paid origination fees or default fees without passing on the cost to students .

similarly , to attract loan business , guaranty agencies might have opted to pay the default fee .

the practice of waiving fees may have started as the ffel loan industry began experiencing competition from the dl program , although lenders also competed with each other for business .

under the dl program , until june 30 , 2012 , the secretary was authorized to offer a variety of interest rate reductions to borrowers as a means of encouraging on - time repayment .

any such reductions made under the dl program were required to be cost neutral to the government .

amendments made by the bca , curtailed the authority of the secretary to offer all but one type of repayment incentive on loans made under the dl program after june 30 , 2012 — a 0.25 percentage point interest rate reduction for repaying by electronic debit account ( eda ) repayment .

this section briefly describes examples of the types of loan discounts and interest rebates that were once commonly offered to borrowers of ffel and dl program loans .

several forms of repayment relief are available to borrowers of loans made under the ffel and dl programs who may be experiencing difficulty in making payments on their student loans .

these benefits are broadly categorized as deferments , forbearance , and interest rate benefits for active duty servicemembers .

deferment and forbearance are the primary means through which borrowers may be temporarily relieved of their obligation to make scheduled loan payments .

periods during which borrowers are in deferment or forbearance are generally excluded from the repayment period .

 ( exceptions apply with respect to the ibr and paye plans , for which periods in economic hardship deferment are included in the total repayment period , after which borrowers become eligible for loan forgiveness. ) .

in addition , interest rate benefits may be available to certain categories of active duty servicemembers .

deferments , forbearance , and interest rate benefits may help borrowers avoid defaulting on their loans , as well as help prevent student loan debt and the accrual of interest and fees from inhibiting their pursuit of further studies .

these forms of borrower repayment relief are described below .

as defined for purposes of the ffel and dl programs , a defaulted loan is one on which the borrower has failed to make a required payment when due , or on which the borrower has otherwise violated the terms of the promissory note for 270 days ( or 330 days if the loan is repayable in installments less frequent than monthly ) if it is reasonable to conclude that the borrower no longer intends to repay the obligation .

defaulted student loans are a significant problem both for the federal government and for borrowers .

losses due to defaults constitute a major cost component in the federal student loan programs .

from the borrower's perspective , defaulting on a student loan can ruin credit and otherwise present a major obstacle to future economic well - being .

the consequences of default for borrowers are discussed below .

loan rehabilitation offers student loan defaulters an opportunity to have their loan reinstated as an active loan and to have their borrower benefits and privileges restored .

if , during a period of 10 consecutive months , a borrower who has defaulted on a loan makes nine monthly payments within 20 days of the due date according to a payment plan agreed to by the borrower and guaranty agency ( or the secretary ) , the loan may be sold to another lender , or ( in the case of dl loans ) reinstated .

at this point , the loan is considered rehabilitated and the borrower again becomes eligible for full borrower privileges , such as deferments and loan forgiveness .

in implementing these provisions , the guarantor or ed must require a monthly payment that is "reasonable and affordable" based on the borrower's financial circumstances .

borrowers whose defaulted loans are assigned to ed are offered the opportunity to obtain dl program consolidation loans .

in accordance with the terms and conditions of loans made under the ffel and dl programs , in certain circumstances borrowers may have all or a portion of their debt discharged or repaid by the federal government .

these are described below .

liability for ffel and dl program loans is discharged in the case of borrowers who die , who become permanently and totally disabled , or who are unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity due to a physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or that has lasted continuously or can be expected to last continuously for 60 months .

borrowers who have been determined by the secretary of veterans affairs to be unemployable due to a service - connected condition shall be considered permanently and totally disabled for purposes of student loan discharge .

in most instances , federal student loans may not be discharged through personal bankruptcy actions brought under either chapter 7 or chapter 13 of the bankruptcy code .

however , if after filing for bankruptcy , a borrower successfully petitions a bankruptcy court and the court finds that repayment constitutes an undue hardship on the borrower and his dependents , federal student loans may be discharged in bankruptcy .

a borrower's liability for a loan ( including any interest and collection fees owed by the borrower ) may be discharged under any of the following circumstances if the borrower received the loan on or after january 1 , 1986 .

loans may be discharged if the student borrower ( or the student on whose behalf a parent borrowed ) was unable to complete an educational program because the school closed .

any period of the student's attendance at the institution at which the student was unable to complete the course of study because of closure is not counted against the total period of the student's eligibility for additional student aid .

borrowers are eligible for loan discharge if the school falsely certified the student's eligibility to borrow , including loans falsely certified as a result of identity theft .

all or a portion of a borrower's loan liability may be discharged if an institution fails to refund the appropriate amount of loan proceeds to a lender or to the secretary on behalf of a borrower .

in addition , title iv eligibility is restored for borrowers who may have defaulted on a loan discharged under any of the above circumstances .

finally , the third higher education extension act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-292 ) authorized the discharge of the outstanding balance of loans made to individuals who were the spouses or parents of individuals who died or became permanently and totally disabled as a result of the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks .

the hea authorizes several programs through which borrowers may have some portion of their ffel or dl program loans forgiven , cancelled , or repaid as an incentive for entering certain occupations or professions , or for performing certain types of public service .

some loan forgiveness provisions are entitlements to qualified borrowers , meaning that mandatory funding is provided for loan forgiveness .

other loan forgiveness and repayment programs are discretionary and subject to the availability of funds made available in annual appropriations acts .

in addition , borrowers may also be eligible to have their loans repaid through other non - hea programs .

loan forgiveness and repayment programs authorized under title iv , parts b and d of the hea are described below .

loan forgiveness for teachers is authorized for borrowers of ffel and dl program stafford loans .

under the program , new borrowers , who had no outstanding balance on title iv loans on or after october 1 , 1998 , may be granted loan forgiveness after having served as a full - time teacher for five consecutive complete school years in certain low - income schools or locations .

at least one of these school years must be after the 1997-1998 school year .

forbearance is available to borrowers during their five years of qualifying teaching service .

teacher loan forgiveness is an entitlement available to qualified borrowers .

two levels of loan forgiveness are available .

up to $5,000 in loan forgiveness is available to stafford loan borrowers who have been employed for five consecutive complete school years as a full - time teacher in certain low - income schools or locations .

borrowers whose five - year period of service began on or after october 30 , 2004 , must be highly qualified teachers , as defined in the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , section 9101 .

up to $17,500 in loan forgiveness is available to stafford loan borrowers who meet the general requirements described above and whose teaching service is as a full - time teacher of mathematics or science in a secondary school ; or as a special education teacher .

loan forgiveness for public service employees is available to borrowers of dl program loans who are employed full - time in certain public service jobs for 10 years during the repayment of their loans .

to qualify for loan forgiveness , borrowers must make 120 monthly payments on or after october 2 , 2007 , according to the icr plan , the ibr plan , or either of the standard , graduated , or extended repayment plans in amounts equal to or greater than the monthly amount due as calculated according to a standard 10-year repayment period , while concurrently being employed full - time in public service jobs .

after having made 120 qualifying payments , a borrower's remaining loan balance will be forgiven .

loan forgiveness for public service employees is available to new and existing borrowers of dl program loans and is an entitlement to qualified borrowers .

for purposes of the program , a public service job is defined as a full - time job in emergency management , government ( excluding service as a member of congress ) , military service , public safety , law enforcement , public health ( including nurses , nurse practitioners , and health care practitioners ) , public education , social work in a public child or family service agency , public interest law services ( including prosecution or public defense or legal advocacy in low - income communities at a nonprofit organization ) , early childhood education , public service for individuals with disabilities , public service for the elderly , public library sciences , school - based library sciences and other school - based services , or at an organization that is described in section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the irc and exempt from taxation under section 501 ( a ) ; or teaching as a full - time faculty member at a tribal college or university as defined in section 316 ( b ) of the hea and other faculty teaching in high - needs areas , as determined by the secretary .

under this program , borrowers of ffel or dl program loans who are employed full - time in an occupation specified as an area of national need may qualify to have a portion of their outstanding loan balance forgiven by the secretary .

up to $2,000 in ffel or dl program student loan debt may be forgiven for each school , academic , or calendar year of full - time employment in an area of national need completed on or after august 14 , 2008 .

a maximum of $10,000 may be forgiven for five years of service .

specified areas of national need are early childhood educators ; nurses ; foreign language specialists ; librarians ; certain highly qualified teachers ; child welfare workers ; speech - language pathologists and audiologists ; school counselors ; certain public sector employees ; nutrition professionals ; medical specialists ; mental health professionals ; dentists ; employees in science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) fields ; physical therapists ; superintendents , principals , and other ( school ) administrators ; occupational therapists ; and allied health professionals .

plus loans obtained by parent borrowers on behalf of a dependent student and consolidation loans used to repay such loans are not eligible to be forgiven under the program .

the program is authorized to be funded annually at such sums as may be necessary and , subject to the appropriation of funds , will be available to borrowers on a first come , first served basis .

under this program , borrowers of federal student loans may qualify to have a portion of the outstanding balance of their loans repaid if they enter into agreements with the secretary to serve as a full - time civil legal defense attorney for a period of not less than three years .

in return for their service , the secretary will assume the obligation to make payments of up to $6,000 per year , and up to $40,000 in the aggregate , on federal student loans made under ffel , dl , and perkins loan programs .

loan repayment made available under the program may not be used to repay a plus loan obtained by a parent borrower on behalf of a dependent student , nor the portion of a consolidation loan used to repay such a loan .

the program is authorized to be funded annually at such sums as may be necessary through fy2014 .

subject to the appropriation of funds , loan repayment will be available to borrowers on a first come , first served basis .

appendix a. glossary of financial terms amortization : to provide for the gradual reduction and ultimate elimination of a debt through periodic payments sufficient in size to cover interest due and reduce the amount of principal owed over a specified repayment period .

bond equivalent rate : the interest rate on treasury bills is commonly reported on a "bank discount basis," a measure that is calculated based upon the face value of a treasury bill at maturity ( as opposed to the purchase price ) .

the bond equivalent rate is the interest payment determined as a percentage of purchase price .

capitalizing interest : to add accumulating interest to the loan principal thereby increasing the total amount of the loan on which interest is charged .

capitalization of accrued interest would typically occur at one or more intervals when a borrower is not required to make regular interest payments .

interest : a charge for borrowed money , generally a percent of the amount borrowed .

negative amortization : when required payments on a loan are not sufficient in size to cover accrued interest and unpaid interest is added to loan principal — increasing the borrower's debt ( a scenario that can occur under income - contingent repayment ) .

principal : the amount of money borrowed .

91-day treasury bill : a short - term promissory note issued by the u.s. treasury , secured by the full faith and credit of the united states .

treasury bills are issued by the federal government as a means of financing deficits and managing cash flows and are generally viewed as risk - free investments .

a 91-day treasury bill has a maturity of 13 weeks , and the rate for 91-day treasury bills is determined when the treasury auctions the 91-day treasury bill , typically on the first business day of the week .

variable interest : rate of interest on a loan that is tied to an index ( such as the 91-day treasury bill ) , and adjusted periodically in accordance with changes in the index .

appendix b .

detailed tables on selected characteristics of ffel and dl program loan .

