the establishment clause of the first amendment provides that "congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion...." the u.s. supreme court has construed the establishment clause , in general , to mean that government is prohibited from sponsoring or financing religious instruction or indoctrination .

but the court has drawn a constitutional distinction between aid that flows directly to sectarian schools and aid that benefits such schools indirectly as the result of voucher or tax benefit programs .

with respect to direct aid , the court has typically applied the tripartite test it first articulated in lemon v. kurtzman .

the lemon test requires that an aid program ( 1 ) serve a secular legislative purpose ; ( 2 ) have a primary effect that neither advances nor inhibits religion ; and ( 3 ) not foster an excessive entanglement with religion .

because education is an important state goal , the secular purpose aspect of this test has rarely been a problem for direct aid programs .

but prior to the court's latest decisions , both the primary effect and entanglement prongs were substantial barriers .

to avoid a primary effect of advancing religion , the court required direct aid programs to be limited to secular use and struck them down if they were not so limited .

but even if the aid was so limited , the court often found the primary effect prong violated anyway because it presumed that in pervasively sectarian institutions it was impossible for public aid to be limited to secular use .

alternatively , it often held that direct aid programs benefiting pervasively sectarian institutions were unconstitutional because government had to so closely monitor the institutions' use of the aid to be sure the limitation to secular use was honored that it became excessively entangled with the institutions .

these tests were a particular problem for direct aid to sectarian elementary and secondary schools , because the court presumed that such schools were pervasively sectarian .

it presumed to the contrary with respect to religious colleges .

the court's decisions in agostini v. felton and mitchell v. helms , however , have recast these tests in a manner that has lowered the constitutional barriers to direct aid to sectarian schools .

the court has abandoned the presumption that sectarian elementary and secondary schools are so pervasively sectarian that direct aid either results in the advancement of religion or fosters excessive entanglement .

it has also abandoned the assumption that government must engage in an intrusive monitoring of such institutions' use of direct aid .

the court still requires that direct aid serve a secular purpose and not lead to excessive entanglement .

but it has recast the primary effect test to require that the aid be secular in nature , that its distribution be based on religiously neutral criteria , and that it not be used for religious indoctrination .

the court's past jurisprudence imposed fewer restraints on indirect aid to sectarian schools such as tax benefits or vouchers .

the court still required such aid programs to serve a secular purpose ; but it did not apply the secular use and entanglement tests applicable to direct aid .

the key constitutional question was whether the initial beneficiaries of the aid ( i.e. , parents or schoolchildren ) had a genuinely independent choice about whether to use the aid for educational services from secular or religious schools .

if the universe of choices available was almost entirely religious , the court held the program unconstitutional because the government , in effect , dictated by the design of the program that a religious option be chosen .

but if religious options did not predominate , the court held the program constitutional even if parents chose to receive services from pervasively sectarian schools .

moreover , in its decision in zelman v. simmons - harris , the court legitimated an even broader range of indirect aid programs by holding that the evaluation of the universe of choice available to parents is not confined to the private schools at which the voucher aid can be used but includes as well all of the public school options open to parents .

in roemer v. maryland board of public works , the court upheld a state program of noncategorical grants to all private colleges in the state , including ones that were church - affiliated , because the program included a statutory restriction barring the use of the funds for sectarian purposes .

the court stressed that the church - related colleges that benefited were not "pervasively sectarian" and that the aid was statutorily restricted to secular use .

in tilton v. richardson , the court upheld as constitutional a federal program that provided grants to colleges , including church - affiliated colleges , for the construction of needed facilities , so long as the facilities were not used for religious worship or sectarian instruction .

the statute provided that the federal interest in any facility constructed with federal funds would expire after 20 years , but the court held that the nonsectarian use requirement would have to apply so long as the buildings had any viable use .

subsequently , in hunt v. mcnair , the court upheld a program in which a state issued revenue bonds to finance the construction of facilities at institutions of higher education , including those with a religious affiliation .

the program barred the use of the funds for any facility used for sectarian instruction or religious worship .

in rosenberger v. the rector and board of visitors of the university of virginia , the court held that it would be constitutional for a state university to subsidize the printing costs of an avowedly religious student publication .

the university made the subsidy available to non - religious student publications as a way of fostering student expression and discussion , and the court held that it would constitute viewpoint discrimination in violation of the free speech clause of the first amendment to deny the subsidy to a student publication offering a religious perspective .

in two summary affirmances , the court has upheld the constitutionality of programs providing grants to students attending institutions of higher education , including religiously affiliated colleges .

both smith v. board of governors of the university of north carolina and americans united for the separation of church and state v. blanton involved grants given on the basis of need for students to use in attending either public or private colleges , including religiously affiliated ones .

in affirming the decisions , the supreme court issued no opinion in either case , but the lower courts reasoned that the religious colleges benefited from the programs only if the students independently decided to attend .

in locke v. davey , the court considered the constitutionality of a state scholarship program that included a restriction on recipients that prohibited the use of scholarship funds to pursue devotional theological degrees .

the court noted that , because the recipient would make an independent choice regarding how to spend the funds , the federal establishment clause would not be violated by such a program .

