the environmental quality incentives program ( eqip ) is a voluntary program that provides technical and financial assistance to eligible agricultural producers who wish to implement soil and water conservation practices .

the purpose of eqip is to promote agriculture production , forestry management , and environmental quality as compatible goals , and to optimize environmental benefits .

eqip was originally authorized in the 1996 farm bill as an amendment to the 1985 farm bill .

eqip replaced four conservation programs repealed in the same law .

these were the great plains conservation program , the agricultural conservation program , the water quality incentives program , and the colorado river basin salinity control program .

eqip is the largest agriculture conservation program for working lands .

the program encourages farmers and ranchers to participate in conservation efforts by paying a portion of the cost of installing or constructing approved conservation practices .

eligible producers enter into eqip contracts to receive payment for implementing conservation practices .

approved activities are carried out according to an eqip plan developed in conjunction with the producer that identifies the appropriate conservation practice or practices to address resource concerns on the land .

eqip was amended and reauthorized in both the 2002 and 2008 farm bills .

the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) administers eqip under an interim final rule .

nrcs implemented eqip by establishing national priorities to reflect the most pressing natural resource needs and emphasize offsite benefits to the environment .

the current national priorities set by nrcs are as follows: reductions of nonpoint source pollution , such as nutrients , sediment , pesticides , or excess salinity in impaired watersheds consistent with total maximum daily loads ( tmdls ) , where available ; the reduction of surface and groundwater contamination ; reduction of contamination from agricultural point sources , such as concentrated animal feeding operations ( cafos ) ; conservation of ground and surface water resources ; reduction of emissions , such as particulate matter , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , volatile organic compounds , and ozone precursors and depleters that contribute to air quality impairment violations of national ambient air quality standards ; reduction of soil erosion and sedimentation from unacceptable levels on agricultural land ; and promotion of at - risk species habitat conservation .

eqip continues to receive widespread support in the farm community and in congress , as it remains the major source of financial and technical assistance to help producers implement conservation practices that address specific resource and environmental problems .

during the 112 th congress , several issues may attract congressional interest , including budgetary pressures , a continuing backlog of unfunded applications , program reauthorization , and measuring program accomplishments .

the 2008 farm bill reauthorized eqip through september 30 , 2012 , with annual authorized funding levels of $1.2 billion in fy2008 , $1.34 billion in fy2009 , $1.45 billion in fy2010 , $1.59 billion in fy2011 , and $1.75 billion in fy2012 .

as shown in figure 1 , the authorized funding level has continued to increase since the 2002 farm bill ; however , annual appropriations acts have reduced the actual funding levels by a total of nearly $1.8 billion from fy2005 through fy2011 .

with the 112 th congress's emphasis on reducing federal spending , similar reductions to eqip could be considered either in the appropriations process or through possible reconciliation .

another possible reduction to eqip funding could come during farm bill reauthorization , as the authorizing committee seeks to offset funding for other farm bill programs .

most policy observers expect the next farm bill will be budget - neutral and written using only the current budget "baseline. .

no additional money is expected for new programs without corresponding offsets .

congress faces difficult choices about how much total support to provide agricultural conservation , and how to allocate it among competing programs .

a main justification for the large funding increase in the 2002 farm bill was to respond to a large backlog of producer demand that had been documented during the farm bill debate .

despite this increase in funding , the number of pending applications continues to exceed the amount of available funding ( see table 3 ) .

although this gap now constitutes a smaller portion of applications , it is still an issue for many producers who seek environmental assistance and are continuously denied funding due to budgetary constraints .

many conservation groups worry that this could deter producers from applying and enrolling in the program .

this issue will likely intensify if annual appropriations continue to reduce actual funding or if funding is reduced to offset additional funding for other programs .

one reason why higher funding has not resulted in the elimination of the backlog is that the average contract size has grown since the 2002 farm bill .

the average cost of an eqip contract has more than doubled from almost $7,800 per contract prior to 2002 to over $16,000 per contract since 2002 .

one reason for this increase could be the higher funding cap established in the 2002 farm bill that allowed large - scale livestock operations to fund waste management facilities and allowed the installation of more expensive conservation practices .

according to nrcs , between 1997 and 2007 , the top practice by cumulative cost - share dollars was waste storage facilities , which totaled $486 million over the ten - year period .

though the 2008 farm bill lowered the payment limitation to $300,000 over any six - year period , the average contract is still considerably less ( $16,000 ) than the limit .

this will continue to be an issue as it is widely believed that the lower payment limitation will not greatly reduce the number of unfunded applications .

section 2502 of the 2008 farm bill made certain conservation activities involving the development of plans eligible for financial assistance under eqip .

traditionally , technical assistance provides the planning , design , and technical consultation functions , while financial assistance offers monetary support for implementation capacity .

nrcs refers to these plans as conservation activity plans ( caps ) .

while the 2008 farm bill amendment specifically includes comprehensive nutrient management planning ( cnmp ) , nrcs has expanded the list of eligible caps to include forestry management , energy management , and pollinator habitat , among others .

caps are performed by third - party technical assistance providers , referred to as technical service providers ( tsp ) , and must meet nrcs standards and requirements .

eqip payments are made to the eqip participant , who then reimburses the tsp for the cap .

nrcs continues to provide the majority of technical assistance for eqip , including development of plans eligible under caps ; however , eqip continues to serve as the primary program for funding third - party technical assistance activities .

the use of caps and other third - party services could be a way to free up nrcs staff time for other eqip activities .

on the other hand , the additional administrative measures required to write cap contracts could offset time savings devoted to technical assistance .

this issue could be debated in the next farm bill as caps and their implementation are reviewed .

from available records , nrcs can provide considerable information about eqip contracts , including which conservation practices are being installed , and their design and maintenance standards .

however , until recently , relatively little was known about what is actually being accomplished through eqip contracts .

to begin filling this void , nrcs has compiled information about various resource concerns that eqip addresses .

these data show that in 2007 , the primary resource concerns addressed through eqip spending included water quality ( 20% ) , plant condition ( 17% ) , soil erosion ( 16% ) , water quantity ( 13% ) , domestic animals ( 12% ) , soil condition ( 10% ) , wildlife and fish ( 7% ) , and air quality ( 5% ) .

little is known , however , about how enduring those conservation practices might be after the contract ends .

among the questions that nrcs is trying to address for all of its conservation activities , including eqip , are how to ( 1 )  evaluate performance , ( 2 ) measure environmental changes , ( 3 ) evaluate cost - effectiveness , ( 4 ) determine which methods to use to identify environmental effects , and ( 5 ) determine which types of data should be collected to measure output .

nrcs initiated a national review in 2003 , called the conservation effects assessment project ( ceap ) , in an attempt to develop better answers to all these questions .

ceap was originally intended to account for the benefits from the 2002 farm bill's substantial increase in conservation program funding through the scientific understanding of the effects of conservation practices at the watershed scale .

only a few initial results are currently available based on cropland in the upper mississippi river basin and the chesapeake bay watershed .

initial findings show beneficial effects from conservation practices as well as additional application needs .

eqip offers financial assistance to producers to implement many of the conservation practices analyzed in the ceap assessment ; however , the assessment does not correlate the effects and benefits of conservation practice to any one federal program .

