technological advancements and tax incentives have driven a global expansion in the development of renewable energy resources .

wind energy , in particular , has been cited as the fastest - growing source of new electric power generation , and u.s. wind energy production capacity has been increasing consistently over the past several years .

currently , unlike much of europe , all wind power facilities in the united states are based on land .

however , multiple offshore wind and related infrastructure projects have been proposed in recent years to the bureau of ocean energy management ( boem ) .

the focus of this report is the current law applicable to siting offshore wind facilities , including the relationship between state and federal jurisdictional authorities .

this report also discusses the court challenges to early federal offshore wind energy permitting authorities and regulatory activity following the clarification of jurisdiction over permitting of offshore wind facilities found in the energy policy act of 2005 .

as a primary matter , it is important to briefly review the source of federal and state claims of jurisdiction over the outer continental shelf .

united states authority in the oceans begins at the coast — called the baseline — and extends 200 nautical miles out to sea .

the first 12 nautical miles comprise the u.s. territorial sea .

under the 1982 united nations convention on the law of the sea ( unclos ) , a coastal nation may claim sovereignty over the air space , water , seabed , and subsoil within its territorial sea .

u.s. supreme court precedent and international practice indicate that this sovereignty authorizes coastal nations to permit offshore development within their territorial seas .

although the united states has not ratified unclos , it generally acts in alignment with its terms .

the u.s. contiguous zone extends beyond the territorial sea to 24 nautical miles from the baseline .

in this area , a coastal nation may regulate to protect its territorial sea and to enforce its customs , fiscal , immigration , and sanitary laws .

the jurisdiction of the federal government with respect to individual states is also of importance .

the submerged lands act of 1953 assured coastal states title to the lands beneath coastal waters in an area stretching , in general , 3 geographical miles from the shore .

thus , states may regulate the coastal waters within this area , subject to federal regulation for "commerce , navigation , national defense , and international affairs" and the power of the federal government to preempt state law .

the remaining outer portions of waters over which the united states exercises jurisdiction are federal waters .

thus the federal government has jurisdiction over the potential locations for offshore wind farms to the boundaries of its exclusive economic zone ( eez ) .

however , federal authority would be limited by the internationally recognized right of free passage and by the jurisdiction granted to the states under the submerged lands act .

the scope of this federal authority is discussed in greater detail later in this report .

states play an important regulatory role when a wind energy project is proposed for construction in federal or state waters .

under the coastal zone management act ( czma ) , states are encouraged to enact coastal zone management plans to coordinate protection of habitats and resources in coastal waters .

the czma establishes a policy of preservation alongside sustainable use and development compatible with resource protection .

state coastal zone management programs that are approved by the secretary of commerce receive federal monetary and technical assistance .

state programs must designate conservation measures and permissible uses for land and water resources and must address various sources of water pollution .

the czma also requires that the federal government and federally permitted activities comply with state programs .

responding to a supreme court decision that excluded oil and gas leasing in the federal waters of the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) from state review under the czma , congress amended the "consistency review" provision to include the impacts on a state coastal zone from actions in federal waters .

thus , states have some authority to seek consistency between federal efforts to permit projects in federal waters and state coastal zone management regulation .

in addition to consistency review , projects to be constructed in state waters , including any cables that would be necessary to transmit power back to shore , are subject to all state regulation or permitting requirements .

coastal zone regulation varies significantly among the states .

the czma itself establishes three generally acceptable regulatory frameworks: ( 1 ) "state establishment of criteria and standards for local implementation , subject to administrative review and enforcement" ; ( 2 ) "[d]irect state land and water use planning and regulation" ; and ( 3 ) regulation development and implementation by local agencies , with state - level review of program decisions .

within these frameworks several states , including new jersey , california , and rhode island , consolidate authority for their programs in one agency .

in new jersey , for instance , the state department of environmental protection ( through the coastal management office within the commissioner's office of policy , planning , and science ) is the lead agency for coastal zone management under several state laws .

the majority of states , however , operate coastal zone management programs under "networks" of parallel agencies , with various roles defined by policy guidance and memoranda of understanding ( mous ) .

based on a series of mous , each agency is obligated to issue and apply state regulations and permits consistently with the state's coastal zone management program .

thus , offshore wind energy projects could be subject to comprehensive regulation with permitting authority spread among multiple state and local agencies .

use of federal and federally controlled lands , including the ocs , requires some form of permission , such as a right - of - way , easement , or license .

for onshore wind projects on federal public lands , the department of the interior ( doi ) , through the bureau of land management , has created a regulatory program under the federal land policy and management act , but a federal statute expressly governing offshore wind energy development was not enacted until august 2005 as part of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact ) .

before enactment of epact , some permitting in support of offshore wind energy development had taken place under laws existing at that time .

use of these authorities proved controversial and was the subject of a lawsuit challenging preliminary permitting actions .

the previous regulatory regime , the conflicts it engendered , and epact legal authority are discussed below .

interest in developing offshore wind energy resources continues to grow , and projects are already in the initial stages of development .

the united states has been developing the legal and regulatory framework to manage the issuance of permits for offshore development in its territorial sea and on the outer continental shelf .

the ocsla , as amended by epact 2005 , provides doi with authority to grant offshore property interests for the purpose of wind energy development ( exercised through boem ) .

additional laws that predate the enactment of epact 2005 continue in force and also appear likely to remain a source of regulation , despite the apparent primary authority granted to doi .

further , states also may claim a role in the permitting of offshore wind energy development pursuant to authorities granted under existing federal law .

