charities , houses of worship , and private schools are among the organizations that qualify for tax - exempt status as organizations described in section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) .

benefits that arise from this status include exemption from federal income taxes and eligibility to receive tax - deductible contributions .

one restriction that arises is that these organizations are prohibited under the tax code from engaging in campaign activity .

separate from the tax code's prohibition , the federal election campaign act ( feca ) may also restrict the ability of section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations to engage in such activity .

the tax laws prohibit section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations from "participat[ing] in , or interven[ing] in ( including the publishing or distributing of statements ) , any political campaign on behalf of ( or in opposition to ) any candidate for public office. .

an organization that engages in any amount of campaign activity may lose its section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status and eligibility to receive tax - deductible contributions .

it may also be taxed on its political expenditures , either in addition to or in lieu of revocation of section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status .

the tax equals 10% of the expenditures , with an additional tax equal to 100% of the expenditures imposed if the expenditures are not corrected ( i.e. , recovered and safeguards established to prevent future ones ) in a timely manner .

the organization's managers may also be subject to tax .

other consequences for the flagrant violation of the prohibition include the irs immediately determining and assessing all taxes due and / or seeking injunctive and other relief to enjoin the organization from making additional political expenditures and to preserve its assets .

the federal election campaign act ( feca ) , which regulates the raising and spending of campaign funds , is separate and distinct from the tax code .

feca prohibits corporations from using general treasury funds to make contributions in connection with federal elections .

while feca does not prohibit unincorporated section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations from making such contributions , the irc prohibits all section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations , regardless of corporate status , from making such contributions , as discussed above .

in its recent ruling in citizens united v. fec , the supreme court invalidated the prohibitions in feca on corporations and labor unions using their general treasury funds to make "independent expenditures," which are communications "expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate" that are not coordinated with any candidate or party , and "electioneering communications," which are broadcast , cable or satellite transmissions that refer to a clearly identified federal candidate and aired within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary .

the court determined that these prohibitions constitute a "ban on speech" in violation of the first amendment .

due to the tax code prohibition discussed above , section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organizations are generally not permitted to engage in the activities regulated by feca , and thus the citizens united decision does not appear to impact them in a significant manner .

at the same time , the activities that constitute electioneering under the irc and feca are not necessarily identical .

for example , it appears possible that an issue advocacy communication , depending on its timing and content , might be an electioneering communication under feca , but might not be treated as campaign intervention under the irc .

such a communication would need to comply with feca , such as its disclosure requirement for electioneering communications meeting certain monetary thresholds , if applicable .

legislation has been introduced in the 113 th congress , h.r .

127 , that would repeal the campaign activity prohibition in section 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) of the irc .

the legislation expressly provides that it "shall not invalidate or limit any provision" in feca .

