the length of the appointment process during presidential transitions has been of concern to observers for more than 30 years .

the appointment process is likely to develop a bottleneck during this time due to the large number of candidates who must be selected , vetted , and , in the case of positions filled through appointment by the president with the advice and consent of the senate ( pas positions ) , considered by that body .

by the end of the first 100 days of the reagan presidency , nominees had been confirmed for 19% of vacant pas positions .

at the same juncture at the outset of the clinton administration , nominees had been confirmed for 11% of these openings .

the figure for the presidency of george w. bush was 7% , and for the obama administration was 14% .

delays in installing new leadership would not be welcome by an administration at any time , but they may be particularly problematic during the transition period between presidents .

in 2004 , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( known as the 9 / 11 commission ) identified what it perceived were shortcomings in the appointment process during presidential transitions that could compromise national security policymaking in the early months of a new administration .

the commission noted that a new president is likely to need his or her top advisers in place to maintain continuity in this area .

furthermore , the president has limited time following his or her election to initiate an administrative and legislative agenda .

presidential transitions involve large - scale changes in the political leadership of the executive branch .

table 1 summarizes office of personnel management ( opm ) data indicating that more than 2,600 political appointees occupied positions in the 15 departments as of june 30 , 2016 .

these officials included top - level policymaking presidential appointees , political managers , and confidential support staff .

unlike career public service executives and employees , top political officials in the federal departments and agencies nearly always serve at the pleasure of the president or agency head .

these officials typically resign when the administration changes , especially if the incoming president is from a different party .

this report describes and analyzes the processes , during a presidential transition , by which top - level executive branch pas positions have been filled in the recent past .

outside of top white house staff appointments , these are a new president's earliest and arguably most important appointments .

in the next section , the usual process is described in three stages: " selection and vetting ," " senate consideration ," and " appointment . .

that section also provides examples of ways the senate has adapted its procedures during recent presidential transitions .

the report then discusses processes — recess appointments and designations under the federal vacancies reform act of 1998 — that could be used by the president to unilaterally fill positions on a temporary basis .

the final portion of the report provides additional information on the length of time required in the past to fill cabinet positions and certain national - security - related subcabinet positions .

this section provides related data for the five transitions since 1980: carter - reagan ( 1980-1981 ) , reagan - bush ( 1988-1989 ) , bush - clinton ( 1992-1993 ) , clinton - bush ( 2000-2001 ) , and bush - obama ( 2008-2009 ) .

this report does not cover and will not track the 2016-2017 transition process .

under the constitution , the power to appoint the top officers of the united states is shared by the president and the senate .

the appointment process consists of three stages — selection and vetting , senate consideration , and appointment .

the constitution and federal statutes provide several authorities for temporarily filling vacancies in pas positions: the federal vacancies reform act of 1998 , the president's constitutional recess appointment power , and position - specific temporary appointment provisions .

each of these authorities , discussed below , might be used during a presidential transition as well as later in the president's term .

as noted at the outset of this report , the length of the appointment process during presidential transitions has been of concern to observers for more than 30 years .

the 9 / 11 commission drew fresh attention to this issue in 2004 , recommending changes that might accelerate the selection , clearance , and senate consideration processes , particularly for "national security positions. .

congress responded by enacting new statutory provisions related to the selection and vetting process , as well as a provision expressing a "sense of the senate" regarding a timetable for submission and consideration of high - level national security nominations during transitions .

it also amended the presidential transition act in 2010 and 2016 .

this statute now directs the president and incumbent administration to establish a specified transition - related organizational infrastructure as well as to provide certain pre - and post - election support to eligible candidates and then to the president - elect as he selects his appointees .

 ( see "selection and vetting during presidential transitions" and "the senate confirmation process and presidential transitions," above. ) .

to assist congress in determining whether the 2004 statutory changes discussed above have had an impact on the length of the transition period appointment process , this section compares the length of the appointment process during the 2008-2009 bush - obama transition with the length of this process during the four previous transitions: carter - reagan ( 1980-1981 ) , reagan - bush ( 1988-1989 ) , bush - clinton ( 1992-1993 ) , and clinton - bush ( 2000-2001 ) .

the section also compares the length of the transition - period appointment process among cabinet positions and , for subcabinet positions , among agencies .

two groups of appointed positions were selected for comparison based on the criteria discussed above .

these groups and collected data are shown in appendices to this report .

appendix a provides nominee - level data on the length of the process for making appointments to cabinet - level positions during the five transitions identified above .

appendix c provides nominee - level data on the length of the process for making appointments to selected higher - level national security - related and economic and financial subcabinet positions during these transitions .

appendix b provides information on the method crs used for selecting the positions included in appendix c .

appendix a and appendix c each provide information about the intervals , in elapsed days , between different points in the appointment process .

these points include election day , which is the point after which the successful candidate and his or her supporters fully turn their attention from campaigning to selecting a governing team , announcement of a proposed nominee , submission of a nomination , senate committee hearing on the nomination , senate committee report or discharge , and final disposition by the senate .

the comparisons found that , in general , transition - period cabinet - level nominees were selected , vetted , considered , and confirmed expeditiously ; they generally took office shortly after the new president's inauguration .

in some cases , however , cabinet - level offices were not filled until more than six weeks after inauguration .

for example , president george h.w .

bush's secretary of defense was not confirmed until march 17 , president clinton's attorney general was not confirmed until march 11 , and president obama's nominations to be secretary of commerce and secretary of health and human services were not confirmed until march 24 and april 28 , respectively .

filling the position of director of ondcp , which was accorded cabinet rank by president clinton and president george w. bush , took far longer — more than six months in each case — than other cabinet - level positions .

comparisons among the five transitions suggest that some presidents announced their cabinet - position selections sooner than did others , but that this did not appear to accelerate the pace of the overall appointment process .

the comparisons also found that , in general , initial nominees to the subcabinet positions studied took about twice as long ( more than six months from election day ) as cabinet - level nominees ( less than three months ) to be selected , vetted , considered , and confirmed .

comparisons among the median intervals for the five transitions suggest that ( 1 ) the time required for selection and vetting of nominees for these positions has grown longer ; ( 2 ) the period of senate consideration has also grown longer ; ( 3 ) senate consideration of a nomination was generally faster than the selection and vetting process that preceded it ; and ( 4 ) the median durations of the appointment process for the george h.w .

bush , clinton , george w. bush , and obama transitions were notably longer than for the reagan transition .

a comparison among nominations to subcabinet positions in the federal organizations discussed in this report ( six departments and the intelligence community ) revealed notable differences in the average duration of the process .

in general , intelligence community positions were filled most quickly ( median = 92 days ) .

among the nominations to departmental positions , state department nominations , on average , were submitted and confirmed most quickly ( median = 148 days ) .

a more detailed discussion of the comparisons conducted for this report follows .

this subsection first provides a comparison , among the five transitions , of the pace of cabinet appointments .

it then provides a comparison , among the 21 positions , of the pace of these appointments .

these comparisons are drawn from the data presented in appendix a .

cabinet - level pas positions considered in this analysis include all heads of departments , as well as the following positions that have often been accorded cabinet rank: the administrator of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) , the director of the office of management and budget ( omb ) , the u.s. trade representative , the director of the office of national drug control policy ( ondcp ) , the chair of the council of economic advisers , and the u.s .

permanent representative to the united nations .

on the whole , the analysis of cabinet appointments indicates that the transition - period appointment process has been effective , in recent decades , at installing the cabinet of a new administration soon after the new president takes office .

the graph on the left side of figure 1 indicates that , on average , president - elect obama announced his selections sooner than did three of the four preceding presidents .

his pace was similar to that of president george h.w .

bush .

the graph compares the median number of days from election day to the announcement of the president - elect's nominees or , in a limited number of instances , his decision to retain the incumbent appointee .

this suggests that , for this group of appointments , a president - elect could move as rapidly in 2008 as during any other transition in the preceding 30 years .

president - elect george w. bush announced his selections later , on average , than did the other four presidents - elect .

this finding is not surprising , perhaps , given the unique circumstances of the 2000 presidential election and the truncated transition period that followed .

the graph on the right side of figure 1 shows that the median cabinet appointment was finalized — in most cases confirmed — within days of inauguration day during four of the five transitions .

it shows that , for each of these four transitions — reagan , clinton , george w. bush , and obama — the median cabinet appointment was finalized within 77-79 days of election day .

this finding , when paired with the graph on the left , indicates that , on average , the senate confirmed these four presidents' cabinet members within days of inauguration regardless of the average pace of a president - elect's announcements .

the median cabinet appointment was finalized less quickly — about a week later — during the transition from president reagan to president george h.w .

bush .

notably , this transition was the sole instance among the five in which an incoming president was of the same party as the outgoing president .

in addition , it is the only instance among the five in which the incoming president had been part of the previous administration .

these dynamics might have influenced the pace of this transition .

other factors , including opposition among some senators to specific nominations — including the first nominee to be secretary of defense , who was rejected — might also have contributed to this higher median .

in addition , three department heads serving at the end of the reagan administration — the attorney general , the secretary of education , and the secretary of the treasury — continued to serve through the beginning of the incoming bush administration , a fact not reflected in the median shown in figure 1 .

the statistics presented in table 2 can be used to draw comparisons of the pace of appointment of the various cabinet positions without regard to administration .

these statistics bear out the key finding seen in figure 1 : looking at the entire pool of cabinet appointments across the five transitions , the median cabinet nomination was confirmed within 79 days of the election — that is , within a few days of inauguration .

the statistics in table 2 also show , however , that all cabinet - level nominees do not move through the process at the same pace .

on average , department head nominees go through the process more quickly ( median election to final disposition = 79 days ) than do cabinet - rank nominees ( median = 84 days ) .

in general , department head nominees and cabinet - rank nominees were announced equally quickly .

however , on average , department head nominees were brought before the committee of jurisdiction more quickly and confirmed at an earlier date than cabinet - rank nominees .

perhaps more striking was a difference between the two groups in the variation in the median interval between election day and final disposition .

among department nominees , the median duration of the appointment process ranged from 77 days , for the secretaries of state , education , and homeland security , to 103 days , for the secretary of health and human services .

among cabinet - rank nominees , the median interval for filling the position of omb director was the shortest , at 79 days .

most notably , nominations to the position of director of the office of national drug control policy took far longer to go through every stage of the process than any other cabinet nomination .

the median interval for filling this position when it was designated as cabinet rank was 309 days , or approximately ten months .

all four transition period nominations to the position of ondcp director were anomalous when compared with all other cabinet - level nominations .

as the data in appendix a show , each of these nominations — including the two instances in which the president had designated the position to be of cabinet - rank — took much longer than other cabinet nominations .

the elapsed time between election day and final disposition for president clinton's nomination of lee brown was 225 days , and that for president george w. bush's nomination of john p. walters was 393 days .

because of these extreme values for this position , the mean length of the process for all cabinet - rank nominees is 23 days longer than the median length .

this subsection first provides a comparison , among the five transitions , of the pace of the selected subcabinet appointments .

it then provides a comparison , among the seven organizational units ( six departments and the intelligence community ) , of the pace of these appointments .

these comparisons are drawn from the data presented in appendix c .

this appendix includes data on 126 nominations to 38 positions across the five transitions identified above .

positions considered in this analysis include selected higher - level subcabinet posts in the federal government organizations that are most involved with policymaking related to national security and to the federal response to the economic and financial downturn at the time of the bush - obama transition .

a complete list of these selected positions and a detailed explanation of the method by which they were chosen are provided in appendix b .

figure 2 includes three bar graphs that provide a comparison , among the five transitions , of three key intervals for these subcabinet appointments: election to nomination submission , submission to final disposition , and election to final disposition .

the graphs suggest , with regard to nominees to these subcabinet positions , the following: ( 1 ) the selection and vetting of these nominees grew longer over the course of the five transitions ; ( 2 ) the selection and vetting process does not seem to have been shortened by the changes enacted in response to the recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission ; ( 3 ) the senate consideration process grew longer over the course of the five transitions ; ( 4 ) on average , the senate consideration process makes up a shorter portion of the appointment process for these positions than does the selection and vetting process ; and ( 5 ) the median length of the process from election to final disposition during the four later transitions was notably longer than it was during the reagan transition .

the graph on the left side of figure 2 indicates that , on average , the selection and vetting period grew longer , from 91 days under president reagan to 167 days under president obama , over these 5 transitions .

the length of the period under president george w. bush could be attributed , in part , to potential delays in the selection process that might have resulted from the truncated transition period following the 2000 election .

the graph in the center of figure 2 shows that the median number of days between the submission of a nomination and its final disposition ( usually confirmation ) more than doubled , from 21 days under president reagan to 48 days under president obama .

the graph on the right side of figure 2 compares , among the five transitions , the length of the appointment process from election day to final disposition .

the graph indicates that the median length of the process under president reagan , at 114 days ( about 4 months ) , was notably shorter than under any of the other four presidents , at 187-198 days ( 6-6½ months ) .

table 3 provides statistics regarding intervals in the transition - period appointment process for selected subcabinet positions , without regard to administration .

the median length of the total process , from election day to final disposition , for all specified subcabinet nominees was 189 days .

this means that half of the nominees to positions in this group were confirmed within approximately six months of election day , or , in other words , within approximately 3½ months of inauguration day .

the remaining half were confirmed after that point .

the statistics in table 3 can be used to draw comparisons of the pace of appointment to positions in the various departments , and the intelligence community , without regard to administration .

positions in the intelligence community were filled , on average , much more swiftly than were positions in the other agencies .

this finding may be an artifact of the small number of nominations in the dataset ( five ) , as well as the fact that the majority of these were nominations to be director of the central intelligence agency , a high - profile subcabinet post .

the median nomination to a position in the intelligence community reached the point of final disposition within 92 days , or about 3 months , of election day .

for all but one of the intervals measured ( submission to hearing ) , the median for a nomination to an intelligence community position was as short as , or shorter than , those of any of the departments .

among the departments , state department nominees , on average , completed the appointment process most quickly .

half the nominations reached the end of the process within 148 days ( about five months ) of election day .

the median interval between election day and nomination submission , at 121 days , or roughly four months , was shorter for state department nominees than it is for any of the other departments .

however , the median period of senate consideration for department of defense ( 20 days ) nominees was shorter than that of state department nominees ( 23 days ) as well as that of nominations to positions in other departments .

nominees to department of justice positions took the longest to be confirmed , on average .

the median interval between election and confirmation for these nominees was 206 days , or nearly seven months .

during the five transitions studied , the incoming administration has typically taken much longer to submit a nomination to one of the subcabinet positions in this group than the senate has taken to dispose of it , once it was submitted .

as table 3 shows , for all selected subcabinet nominations , the median interval between election and submission is roughly five times longer than the median interval between submission and final disposition .

appendix a .

transition period nominations to cabinet positions , 1981-2009 appendix b. subcabinet position selection method this report includes analysis of nominations to a group of higher - level subcabinet positions in the departments most involved with policymaking related to national security and to economic and financial matters .

a two - stage process was used to select this group .

first , relevant criteria were used to identify an appropriate pool of positions .

second , those positions to which a nomination had been made during at least one of the five presidential transitions included in this study were selected from this pool .

the inclusion of the national security related positions was based on a 9 / 11 commission recommendation that the "president - elect ... submit the nominations of the entire new national security team , through the level of under secretary of cabinet departments , not later than january 20," and that the "senate ... adopt special rules requiring hearings and votes to confirm or reject national security nominees within 30 days of their submission. .

the commission did not further specify which departments or under secretaries should be treated in this manner .

in an effort to select positions for analysis that might match those intended by the commission , criteria similar to those in the passages above were adopted .

positions were to be part of the department of state , the department of defense , the department of justice , the department of energy , the department of homeland security , or the intelligence community and either ( 1 ) at level i of the executive schedule and not included in the cabinet position data provided elsewhere in the report ; ( 2 ) at level ii of the executive schedule ; ( 3 ) titled as under secretaries ; or ( 4 ) for those organizations without under secretaries , equivalent in title and at level iii of the executive schedule .

with regard to the agencies listed above , one exception to these criteria was made .

the director of the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) was excluded , although as a level ii position , it met the criteria .

the position was excluded because it has a 10-year term and therefore has not been routinely filled at the beginning of a new administration .

during the 2008-2009 presidential transition , it was argued that the pace at which top leadership positions at the department of the treasury were filled would also be of concern due to federal government efforts to address the nation's economic and financial downturn .

for this reason , treasury positions similar to those in the other organizations were included .

although they did not meet the criteria above , two other positions , the assistant secretary for financial stability and the special inspector general for the troubled asset relief program , were also included because they were specifically associated with the federal government's efforts .

table b - 1 identifies the positions that were selected based on the process specified above .

the positions are listed by organization , and the organizations are listed in the order established .

the subcabinet positions that were actually subject to analysis in this report were drawn from this pool .

given the nature and purpose of the study , the group selected for analysis excluded those positions to which no nomination was made during the first year of at least one of the five administrations included in this study .

the positions excluded on this basis are shown in italics .

appendix c. transition period nominations to selected subcabinet positions , 1981-200 .

