the configuration and operation of the fcrps dams can be a polarizing issue for proponents of hydropower development , irrigation , and river navigation and those who support commercial , sport , and tribal fishing as well as environmental conservation .

commentators note that columbia basin salmon populations have declined due to a number of human actions besides fcrps operations , including fishing , predation by native and invasive species , water pollution , reduced habitat , and water withdrawals for irrigation .

many also assert that these populations will be subject to increasing stress from factors related to climate change such as higher water temperatures , changes in ocean conditions , and lower river flows .

actions intended to aid the recovery of these stocks generally fall into one of four categories , known as "the 4-h's": habitat , harvest , hatchery , and hydrosystem .

more than 20 years of esa litigation has tracked each biop covering the fcrps , and legal challenges have frequently altered those operations .

as referenced above , when agencies' planned operations may jeopardize listed species , nmfs may offer reasonable and prudent alternatives ( rpas ) to the action agencies' proposal .

in the fcrps context , these alternatives can include habitat protection , flow alterations , and fish passage systems , such as ladders or trucks .

since the early 1990s , states , conservation organizations , fishing and sporting groups , users of fcrps - generated energy , and others have challenged nmfs's jeopardy conclusions and rpas in each biop for the fcrps under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

the apa authorizes reviewing courts to "hold unlawful and set aside agency actions , findings , and conclusions found to be arbitrary , capricious , [or] an abuse of discretion.... " to satisfy the arbitrary and capricious standard and survive an apa challenge , a federal agency must show that it "examine[d] the relevant data and articulate[d] a satisfactory explanation for its action , including a 'rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.' .

a central question raised in the esa litigation related to the fcrps was whether nmfs and the action agencies could meet the apa's arbitrary and capricious standard .

a summary of major esa actions and litigation is presented in the appendix and discussed below .

other litigation has affected the way in which the esa has been applied to columbia river anadromous fish .

when the u.s court of appeals for the tenth circuit ruled that the fws's method of determining critical habitat under the esa was flawed , nmfs agreed to settle a suit that challenged its critical habitat determination for the columbia river .

nmfs had used a methodology similar to fws in determining how economic factors were used in its determination of critical habitat .

litigants have also challenged whether hatchery - raised salmon and steelhead should be listed as threatened under the esa under nmfs's hatchery listing policy ( hlp ) .

issued as interim policy in 1993 , the hlp provides guidance on how nmfs treats stocks of hatchery salmon and steelhead when deciding which species should be listed as protected under the esa .

in the interim policy , nmfs concluded that certain hatchery fish could be included in the same evolutionary significant unit ( esu ) as wild fish , which were listed , but it nevertheless excluded stocks of hatchery fish in its listing .

a federal court found this approach violated the esa by listing distinctions below the species level .

if hatchery and wild salmon were in the same esu , the court reasoned , they should have the same listing status .

nmfs revised the interim policy and issued a final hlp in 2005 .

when determining whether to list a species as threatened or endangered , the final hlp requires nmfs to consider the status of the esu as a whole rather than the status of only the wild fish .

it also states that an entire esu would be listed , rather than just the wild fish .

this revised approach resulted in a downlisting of certain fish , such as steelhead trout , from endangered to threatened .

two suits were filed in two federal district courts challenging the final hlp .

a suit in the western district of washington addressed the hlp's application to steelhead ( the "steelhead case" ) , and a suit in the district of oregon challenged its effect on salmon ( the "salmon case" ) .

in the steelhead case , a diverse set of plaintiffs challenged both sides of the hatchery argument: one group argued that hatchery steelhead should be considered distinct from wild steelhead , while another argued that nmfs should make no distinction between places of origin .

the district court concluded nmfs erred in downlisting steelhead based on the condition of the entire esu — both hatchery and wild — rather than focusing on the "benchmark of naturally self - sustaining populations that is required under the esa[.] .

the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit reversed that portion of the district court's ruling and concluded that the final hlp complied with the esa .

the ninth circuit gave discretion to nmfs's analysis and concluded that the downlisting was based on "substantial ... scientific data , and not mere speculation[.] .

in the salmon case , nmfs distinguished between hatchery stocks of salmon and wild or "natural" salmon .

the u.s. district court for the district of oregon rejected the plaintiffs' argument that the esa required hatchery salmon and wild salmon to be treated equally for listing purposes when they are included in the same esu , and the ninth circuit affirmed .

to reduce predation on upstream migrating adult salmon , nmfs authorized washington and oregon in march 2008 to lethally take california sea lions that gather below the bonneville dam .

the authorization was revoked in november 2010 , following a ninth circuit decision that the permit for lethal removal was contrary to law .

the court found that nmfs could not justify killing california sea lions when their take of the salmon was shown to be no larger than that of commercial fishing ; nmfs had described the effect of commercial fishing as "minor" and "minimal" in past statements .

in may 2011 , nmfs authorized states to euthanize up to 85 california sea lions , but withdrew that authorization in july 2011 , in response to a lawsuit .

following a second application process , nmfs reissued letters of authorization in march 2012 to washington , oregon , and idaho allowing the states to remove up to 92 animals .

a group of plaintiffs , including the humane society , challenged the 2012 authorization in the u.s. district court for the district of columbia arguing that it did not comply with the ninth circuit's decision .

on review ( and after the case was transferred to the district of oregon ) , the ninth circuit sided with nmfs in this legal bout , finding that , although the plaintiffs raised "valid concerns," the 2011 authorization was sufficiently grounded in scientific data to explain the need to euthanize .

with the legal challenge resolved , states have since lethally removed sea lions under the 2012 authorization .

between 2008 and 2015 , the departments of fish and wildlife for the states of oregon and washington have removed 102 california sea lions .

of those removed , 15 were placed in a zoo or aquarium , 87 were euthanized by lethal injection , and seven died in captivity .

the 2012 letter of authorization expired on june 30 , 2016 , and , on january 27 , 2016 , washington , oregon , and idaho submitted an application for a five - year extension .

nmfs agreed that the states' applications showed "sufficient evidence of the [predation] problem[,]" and it issued a new letter of authorization on june 30 , 2016 .

