located along the pacific coast of south america , chile is a politically stable , upper - middle - income nation of 18 million people .

the country declared independence from spain in 1810 but did not achieve full independence until 1818 .

chile enjoyed mass electoral democracy from 1932 until 1973 , when the chilean military , under the control of general augusto pinochet , deposed the democratically elected marxist government of president salvador allende ( 1970-1973 ) .

more than 3,200 people were killed or "disappeared" and some 38,000 people were imprisoned and / or tortured during pinochet's 17-year dictatorship .

chile ultimately restored democratic governance in 1990 .

a center - left coalition of parties , known as the "coalition of parties for democracy" ( concertación ) , governed chile for two decades after the return to democratic rule .

while the concertación governments were significantly constrained by authoritarian provisions in the pinochet - era constitution , they were able to enact incremental political , economic , and social reforms .

they largely maintained the market - oriented economic framework they inherited from pinochet and built upon it by negotiating a broad network of trade agreements designed to foster export - led development .

chile has implemented trade agreements with some 60 countries and now has open and reciprocal access to major consumer markets , such as china , japan , the european union , and the united states .

the concertación also institutionalized countercyclical fiscal policies and gradually strengthened chile's social safety net .

sebastian piñera of the center - right "alliance for chile" ( alianza ) coalition broke the concertación's hold on power , serving as president from 2010-2014 , but his administration largely maintained the same policy mix .

analysts credit chile's policy framework for the significant economic and social gains that the country has made over the past 25 years .

real annual economic growth has averaged over 5% since 1990 , lifting chile's gross domestic product ( gdp ) to $258 billion and per capita gdp to $14,480 in 2014 .

the percentage of chileans living below the national poverty line fell from 39% in 1990 to 8% in 2013 , and the percentage of chileans living in extreme poverty fell from 13% to 2.5% during the same time period .

nevertheless , many chileans have expressed discontent with the socioeconomic situation in their country .

they are dissatisfied with the country's high level of inequality and believe that the country's economic gains have not translated into better living conditions and public services for most chileans .

the gini coefficient , which is used to measure income concentration , has barely changed over the past decade , remaining near 0.53 .

although it falls to 0.50 when taxes and government transfers are taken into account , it is well above the organisation for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) average of 0.31 .

moreover , intergenerational social mobility is low since the education system tends to replicate existing class disparities .

chileans have also become increasingly dissatisfied with their political leaders and institutions , which have proven unable or unwilling to address these socioeconomic concerns .

the country's unique binomial electoral system , a legacy of the pinochet dictatorship , significantly limits the responsiveness of the chilean government .

under the binomial system , deputies and senators are elected from two - member electoral districts that require a coalition to win by two - to - one margins in order to secure both seats .

since it effectively ensures a relatively equal distribution of power between the two major political coalitions regardless of voters' preferences , elections are extremely limited in their ability to produce change .

moreover , municipal and regional governments have little authority and few resources to address local concerns since political power is heavily concentrated in the central government .

given these constraints on electoral democracy , many chileans have taken to the streets in recent years to voice their demands and hold their leaders accountable .

students calling for the government to guarantee free , high - quality education have organized the largest and most persistent of the protests .

the united states and chile have traditionally enjoyed friendly relations .

over the past seven years , the obama administration has sought to maintain close ties with chile while encouraging its leadership in latin america and on the international stage .

president obama hosted president bachelet at the white house in june 2014 , calling her return to office "an opportunity to strengthen further the outstanding relationship between the united states and chile. .

congress has expressed particular interest in u.s. - chilean trade and investment relations , security ties , and energy cooperation .

the countries also collaborate on various areas of scientific research , such as astronomy and glacier monitoring , and engage in so - called trilateral cooperation to support security , governance , and socioeconomic development in other latin american and caribbean countries .

chile is in the midst of a political and economic transition .

following the return to democracy in 1990 , chilean leaders and institutions prioritized political stability and economic growth , eschewing ambitious structural reforms in favor of consensus - based politics , orthodox economic policies , and incremental social change .

those preferences allowed chile to consolidate democratic governance and produce significant improvements in the living standards of its citizens , but they inhibited the political system's ability to address chile's high level of inequality .

discontent with the limits of the post - pinochet policy consensus propelled president bachelet and her new majority coalition to sizeable electoral victories .

while their ambitious fiscal , educational , and constitutional reforms have produced uncertainty and could be damaging to the country's economy and stability if mishandled , they have the potential to foster inclusive growth and revitalize chile's democratic institutions .

u.s. - chilean relations are likely to remain friendly in the coming years as a result of shared values and common interests .

the countries currently cooperate on a range of issues , including trade , security , energy , and scientific research .

congressional approval of the trans - pacific partnership trade agreement and a bilateral income tax treaty could lead to higher levels of trade and investment , while approval of a pending extradition treaty could lead to enhanced security cooperation .

the united states and chile may also discover new areas for collaboration as chile's ongoing transition to a higher level of economic development enables it to take on additional regional and global responsibilities .

map of chile chilean political party acronym .

