on january 30 , 2009 , a monaco declaration was signed by more than 150 marine scientists from 26 countries , calling for immediate action by policymakers to reduce carbon dioxide emissions so as to avoid widespread and severe damage to marine ecosystems from ocean acidification .

the monaco declaration is based on the research priorities report developed by participants in an october 2008 international symposium on "the ocean in a high - co 2 world," organized by unesco's intergovernmental oceanographic commission , the scientific committee on oceanic research , the international atomic energy agency , and the international geosphere biosphere programme .

in december 2010 , the united nations environment programme highlighted the emerging concerns over the relationship between ocean acidification and food security .

while not yet fully understood , the ecological and economic consequences of ocean acidification could be substantial .

legislative attention by congress on ocean acidification currently is focused on authorizing , funding , and coordinating research to increase knowledge about ocean acidification and its potential effects on marine ecosystems .

the complex interplay between rising carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) levels in the atmosphere and the ocean's chemistry is a process that scientists have recognized for more than a century .

as increasing co 2 from the atmosphere dissolves in seawater , seawater chemistry is altered .

the prevailing ph ( a measure of hydrogen ion concentration ) of water near the ocean surface is around 8.1 , or slightly alkaline .

ocean acidification is the name given to the ongoing process whereby ph decreases as seawater becomes less alkaline when increasing amounts of anthropogenic co 2 from the atmosphere dissolve in seawater .

when atmospheric co 2 dissolves into the ocean , it forms carbonic acid ( h 2 co 3 ) .

some of the carbonic acid dissociates in ocean waters , producing hydrogen ions ( h + ) .

as the number of hydrogen ions increases , the ph of the ocean decreases , and the water becomes less alkaline .

scientists are concerned that this change in seawater ph could alter biogeochemical cycles , disrupt physiological processes of marine organisms , and damage marine ecosystems .

this report does not discuss the effects of increasing thermal stress to marine organisms and ecosystems ( eg , coral bleaching ) related to climate change .

however , marine ecosystems are likely to be affected by the synergistic effects of factors involved in both thermal and chemical processes .

over the past several decades , the oceans annually have absorbed about 2 billion metric tons of the approximately 7 billion metric tons of carbon that all the countries in the world release as co 2 into the atmosphere each year .

it has been estimated that a total of more than 530 billion tons of co 2 have been absorbed by the ocean between 1800 and 1994 , with the average ph of water near the ocean surface decreasing by almost 0.1 ph unit .

that decrease sounds small , but it represents a 26% increase in the concentration of hydrogen ions , because the ph scale is logarithmic ( i.e. , water with a ph of 6 is 10 times less acidic than water with a ph of 5 , and 100 times less acidic than water with a ph of 4 ) .

open ocean observational records of declining ph are available from the hawaiian ocean time - series station in the pacific and the bermuda atlantic time - series station in the atlantic .

up to a point , as atmospheric co 2 continues to increase , ocean ph will continue to decrease ; one estimate suggests that the rate of co 2 uptake by the oceans could stabilize at around 5 billion metric tons per year by 2100 .

one prediction suggests that continued burning of fossil fuels and future uptake of co 2 by the ocean could reduce ocean ph by 0.3-0.5 units .

all gases , such as co 2 , are less soluble in water as temperature increases .

thus , marine waters near the poles have a much greater capacity for dissolving co 2 than do ocean waters in the tropics .

in addition , dissolved co 2 is transported into ocean depths at these high latitudes ( i.e. , deep water formation mechanism ) since the lower - temperature waters are of higher density , causing greater convection to occur than happens in the more stratified tropical oceans .

if temperature were the only factor affecting the rate of ocean acidification and its impacts on physical and biological features , these impacts might be more likely to occur in marine waters nearer the poles .

however , in addition to temperature , other factors modulate the impact of co 2 on marine waters .

cellular respiration and organic decomposition add co 2 to seawater , and photosynthesis removes it .

deep oceanic water is enriched in co 2 due to respiration in the absence of photosynthesis and , when brought to the surface by equatorial currents ( i.e. , upwelling ) , can place co 2 - enriched seawater in contact with the atmosphere where it can absorb even more co 2 .

hence , the tropics , and most notably tropical coral reefs , are also vulnerable to near - term effects .

an additional factor is the potential increase in storm activity at higher latitudes , as some climate models suggest .

co 2 and other acidic gasses such as nitrogen dioxide are also dissolved in rainwater .

an increase in north atlantic or western north pacific storms could significantly accelerate the ph decrease of surface ocean waters in these regions .

key scientific questions concern which factors may affect the future rate at which seawater ph might decrease , especially whether the rate of decrease will remain constant in direct relationship to the amount of co 2 in the atmosphere or whether other factors , such as rising ocean temperatures diminishing co 2 absorption , will decelerate the rate that ph changes .

there is also the question of equilibrium — that is , how long might it take the process whereby the ph of warming ocean waters is decreasing to come into equilibrium with the concentration of atmospheric co 2 , should the currently increasing atmospheric emission rate of co 2 eventually stabilize or diminish ? .

an adjunct to this question is how long might it take the rate of ocean acidification to slow ( or even reverse ) in response to increasing water temperatures and any measures that might be taken to slow , halt , or even reverse the increasing concentration of co 2 in the atmosphere ? .

additional questions relate to how ocean circulation , which partially controls the co 2 uptake rate , might change in response to changes in the overlying climate as a result of greenhouse gas emissions .

since the marine environment is complex and some of the likely changes may be years in the future , the potential effects identified in this section , although many are supported by laboratory experimentation , are primarily conjecture and / or forecasts .

however , field studies are beginning to provide a more direct view of potential ocean acidification problems .

several natural feedback mechanisms can act to moderate the process of seawater ph change .

the less alkaline the ocean becomes , the less co 2 will be dissolved .

in addition , the warmer the seawater becomes , the less co 2 will dissolve .

speculative questions exist about what might occur should the oceans reach a ceiling ( i.e. , equilibrium ) in their ability to take up co 2 , and atmospheric co 2 levels continue to increase .

even with increasing concentrations of atmospheric co 2 , scientists predict that the oceans are not likely to reach ph values of less than 7 ( neutral ) .

our ability to reduce ocean acidification through artificial means is unproven .

proposals have suggested the addition of chemicals to the ocean , such as ( 1 ) using iron compounds to stimulate planktonic algae growth , whereby the increased photosynthesis might capture / remove dissolved co 2 ; ( 2 ) using limestone to neutralize ( i.e. , buffer ) the lower - ph streams and rivers near where they enter oceans and close to sources of limestone , or adding limestone powder directly to the ocean where deeper , lower - ph water upwells ; or ( 3 ) pumping the calcium bicarbonate byproduct from limestone scrubbers at natural gas power plants into the ocean .

other measures might include habitat restoration / creation , such as planting seagrass .

unless a massive global effort is mounted , these techniques will at best be effective only on a very local scale .

in addition , manipulation of ocean chemistry has the potential to damage or otherwise alter the marine environment and ecosystems in unforeseen ways .

reducing co 2 emissions to the atmosphere and / or removing co 2 from the atmosphere ( i.e. , carbon sequestration ) currently appear to be the only practical ways to minimize the risk of large - scale and long - term changes to the ph of marine waters .

because of the continuing increase in co 2 levels in the atmosphere , and its resident time there , decreasing ph of ocean waters will likely continue for decades .

even if atmospheric co 2 were to return to pre - industrial levels , it could possibly take tens of thousands of years for ocean chemistry to return to a condition similar to that occurring at pre - industrial times more than 200 years ago .

much of the current federal attention to ocean acidification focuses on research to better understand the chemical processes involved and to become better able to predict how ocean ecosystems might respond to decreasing ph .

the national science foundation ( nsf ) was the first federal agency to become involved in research related to ocean acidification .

the modern surveys of co 2 in the oceans can be traced to the nsf - sponsored joint global ocean flux study ( jgofs ) , which originated in recommendations from a national academies of science workshop in 1984 .

the more modern concerns over ocean acidification arose from a may 2004 paris workshop chaired by the now - president of the national academy of sciences , ralph cicerone .

in april 2005 , nsf , the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , and the u.s. geological survey sponsored a workshop on the impacts of ocean acidification on coral reefs and other marine calcifiers .

in section 701 of p.l .

109-479 , congress called for an 18-month comprehensive national study by the national research council of the national academies of science on how co 2 emissions absorbed into the oceans may be altering fisheries , marine mammals , coral reefs , and other natural resources .

this study was commissioned by noaa and nsf in october 2008 , and a summary of ocean acidification: a national strategy to meet the challenges of a changing ocean was released in late april 2010 ; the full report was published in september 2010 .

the federal ocean acidification research and monitoring act of 2009 ( foaram ; p.l .

111-11 ) established the interagency working group on ocean acidification ( iwgoa ) .

the iwgoa is chaired by a representative from the national oceanic and atmospheric administration and includes representatives from the national science foundation , bureau of ocean energy management , u.s. department of state , environmental protection agency , national aeronautics and space administration , u.s. geological survey , u.s .

fish and wildlife service , and u.s. navy .

the iwgoa was charged with developing a strategic research and monitoring plan to guide federal research on ocean acidification .

in 2012 , a draft of the strategic plan for federal research and monitoring of ocean acidification was released and sent to the national research council for review .

the strategic research plan attempts to provide a common vision and specific goals to coordinate activities of federal agencies .

the plan is organized into the following seven themes , 1. monitoring of ocean chemistry and biological impacts , 2. research to understand responses to ocean acidification , 3. modeling to predict changes in the ocean carbon cycle , 4. technology development and standardization of measurements , 5. assessment of socioeconomic impacts and development , 6. education , outreach , and engagement strategy , and 7. data management and integration .

foaram also directed the iwgoa to submit a report to congress every two years that summarizes federally funded ocean acidification activities .

the most recent report for fy2010 and fy2011 identifies funding levels by agency and by the strategic themes used in the strategic research plan .

in fy2011 , total funding for ocean acidification activities was approximately $29 million .

funding for activities with a primary focus on ocean acidification was approximately $21 million and funding for activities related to ocean acidification was approximately $8 million .

in comparison to previous sessions of congress , legislative interest in ocean acidification expanded significantly in the 110 th congress .

congressional attention focused primarily on addressing the cause of ocean acidification — increasing atmospheric co 2 .

to date , legislative attention to ocean acidification has focused on authorizing , funding , and coordinating research to increase knowledge about ocean acidification and its potential effects on marine ecosystems .

in the 111 th congress , foaram directed the secretary of commerce to establish an ocean acidification program within noaa , established an interagency committee to develop an ocean acidification research and monitoring plan , and authorized appropriations through fy2012 for noaa and the national science foundation .

on april 22 , 2010 , the senate commerce , science , and transportation subcommittee on oceans , atmosphere , fisheries , and coast guard held a hearing on the environmental and economic impacts of ocean acidification .

several additional measures were introduced in the 111 th congress to address this issue .

the only bill related to ocean acidification that has been introduced during the 113 th congress is the coral reef conservation act amendments of 2013 ( s. 839 ) .

s. 839 would include ocean acidification in the criteria used to evaluate project proposals for studying threats to coral reefs and developing responses to coral reef losses .

on july 30 , 2013 , the senate committee on commerce , science and transportation ordered s. 839 to be reported .

r.p .

kelly , et al. , "mitigating local causes of ocean acidification with existing laws," science , v. 332 ( may 27 , 2011 ) : 1036-1037 .

quirin schiermeier , "earth's acid test," nature , v. 471 ( march 10 , 2011 ) : 154-156 .

