according to the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) , the u.s. economy was in a recession for 18 months from december 2007 to june 2009 .

it was the longest and deepest recession of the post - world war ii era .

this report provides information on the patterns found across past recessions since world war ii to gauge whether and how this recession might be different .

there is no simple , rule - of - thumb measure to determine when recessions begin or end .

recessions are officially declared by the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) , a non - profit research organization .

the nber defines a recession as a "significant decline in economic activity spread across the economy , lasting more than a few months" based on a number of economic indicators , with an emphasis on trends in employment and income .

it is unlikely that all of those indicators will begin declining or rising simultaneously .

thus , when comparing historical episodes , some of the symptoms associated with a recession may occur before or after the recession has officially begun or ended .

in the recent episode , gross domestic product ( gdp ) began to fall ( in the fourth quarter of 2007 ) before employment ( in january 2008 ) , and both deteriorated significantly in the third quarter of 2008 .

the economy began to grow again in the third quarter of 2009 , but employment continued to fall through december 2009 .

recessions are not uncommon — 2008 marked the 11 t h since world war ii .

in recent years , recessions have been less frequent — from 1982 to 2001 , there were only two recessions — but the length between the recent one and the prior one , 73 months , was comparable to the frequency of recessions from 1945 to 1981 .

as can be seen from table 1 , the recent recession was 18 months long , making it the longest of the post - war period .

it was almost twice as long as the median length of post - war recessions ( 9.5 months ) .

recessions end because of monetary and fiscal stimulus — both were employed in the recent episode — and because markets automatically adjust .

recessions affect economic well - being by their length and depth .

when considering depth , the recent recession can be separated into two distinct phases .

during the first phase , which lasted for the first two quarters of 2008 , the recession was not deep as measured by the change in gdp or unemployment .

it deepened in the third quarter of 2008 , however , and remained deep through the first quarter of 2009 .

after a slight further decline in the second quarter , the economy returned to expansion in the third quarter of 2009 .

the fall in gdp during the recent recession , a cumulative 4.1% , was the deepest of the post - war period .

by contrast , output fell by 1.4% in the 1990-1991 recession and 0.3% in the 2001 recession .

the decline in output after the second quarter of 2008 was even larger than over the entire recession .

most of the decline occurred from the third quarter of 2008 to the first quarter of 2009 .

the 1981 recession was the last recession to feature consecutive quarters of steep declines in gdp .

the 1973 and 1981 recessions were also unusually long and deep , in terms of lost output .

during the recession beginning in 1973 , gdp fell by a cumulative 3% .

during the recession beginning in 1981 , gdp fell by a cumulative 2.9% , and this recession came on the heels of a 2.2% decline in gdp in a separate recession one year earlier .

economists often attribute the unusual length and depth of the 1973 and 1981 recessions in part to the federal reserve's decision to keep interest rates high .

the rate targeted by the fed , the federal funds rate , peaked at 12.9% in july 1974 and 19% in july 1981 .

 ( after adjusting for inflation , these rates were not nearly as high as they appear because inflation was so much higher at the time. ) .

the fed had raised rates that high in order to reduce inflation , which , as measured in the gdp accounts , peaked at an annualized rate of 12.8% in the third quarter of 1974 and 11.1% in the fourth quarter of 1980 .

for that reason , some economists have described these recessions as "made in washington" — had the fed not raised rates so high , they argue , the recessions would presumably have been shorter and milder ( although inflationary problems might have worsened ) .

this dynamic has not been important in the recent recession , as the federal funds rate's recent peak was 5.25% and was reduced before the recession had begun , eventually falling to almost zero .

rising inflation was initially a concern in the current episode , but has never come close to the rates of the 1970s and 1980s — it peaked at 4.2% in the first quarter of 2007 .

rising energy and commodity prices were temporarily pushing inflation up in the first half of 2008 .

since then , declines in those prices temporarily led to deflation ( falling prices ) at the end of 2008 , with very low inflation since .

as the economy gradually recovers , views are divided on the outlook for inflation .

some commentators point to a federal funds rate of zero and the unprecedented scale of the fed's intervention in financial markets as policies that will ultimately push inflation higher .

through direct lending and asset purchases , the fed's outstanding support to the financial sector has , at times , exceeded $1 trillion , compared with less than $1 billion before the financial crisis began .

in normal times , such interest rate and lending policies would be expected to be highly inflationary .

but as the recession drove down aggregate demand , it put downward pressure on inflation .

other commentators fear that the recession was severe enough that deflation is a greater threat than inflation .

they argue that the fed's intervention in financial markets was necessary to avoid a "liquidity trap," where lower interest rates no longer stimulate interest - sensitive spending .

although the fed has brought the federal funds rate down to near zero , because it was only 5.25% when the fed began reducing rates , the fed's scope for easing monetary policy through traditional methods was somewhat limited .

by contrast , the federal funds rate , although high , was reduced ( peak to trough ) by 6.8 percentage points in the 1973 recession and by 10.5 percentage points in the 1981 recession .

 table 2 shows the rise in unemployment in all 11 post - war recessions .

unsurprisingly , the recessions with the deepest declines in output also featured the largest increases in unemployment .

from the expansion peak to post - recession high , the 1973 recession saw an increase in the unemployment rate of 4.2 percentage points , and the 1981 recession saw an increase of 3.6 percentage points ( or 4.8 percentage points compared with the expansion that ended in 1980 ) .

unemployment peaked at 10.1% in october 2009 , a 5.1 percentage point increase compared with the previous expansion peak .

the 1981-1982 recession was the only other recession in the post - war period in which unemployment topped 10% .

most of the increase in unemployment in the recent recession occurred after the first six months of the recession , underlining the initial mildness of the recession .

the rise in the unemployment rate during this recession was comparable to the recessions since 1960 for the first 10 months following the recession's onset .

beginning in the 11 th month , however , it followed a pattern similar but even more severe than the two "deep and long" recessions of 1973 and 1980 .

 ( unemployment leveled off after about a year in the other four recessions since 1960. ) .

the recent recession eventually featured the largest increase in unemployment in the post - war period .

unemployment rose for 22 months , the longest period of rising unemployment since world war ii .

the 1973 and 1981 recessions were the only other two in the post - war period where unemployment continued to rise after about a year ; in the 1973 recession , it rose for 19 months .

the previous two recessions , in 1991 and 2001 , were mild and brief as measured by the decline in gdp , and had some of the smallest increases in unemployment in the post - war period .

this is not the whole story , however , because , in both cases , unemployment continued to rise for over a year after the recession had ended .

 ( in every other post - war recession , with the exception of the one beginning in november 1970 , unemployment began falling within six months of the recession's end. ) .

these two episodes have therefore been called "jobless recoveries. .

if the rise in unemployment in the jobless recovery were included , the episode beginning in 1991 would have featured an above average rise in unemployment ; but the episode beginning in 2001 would still remain below average .

it is unclear whether the economy has changed in some fundamental way that makes jobless recoveries more likely from now on , or if it was simply a coincidence that the previous two recessions ended in this way .

job growth following the recent recession was more typical in that employment began rising in january 2010 , seven months after the recession officially ended .

less typically , subsequent employment growth has been weak .

the recent recession has also featured the largest decrease in consumption and private fixed investment spending of any post - war recession .

there are a few commonalities found across all previous post - war recessions .

first , in all cases , consumption spending did not weaken as much as gdp , as shown in table 1 .

in fact , in five out of 11 recessions , consumption continued to grow while gdp fell .

to the extent that households can adjust their saving and borrowing levels , they are thought to generally prefer to "smooth" consumption over time , avoiding sudden increases and decreases .

in the recent recession , consumption declined relatively rapidly in the third and fourth quarters of 2008 , with small positive and negative changes in the other quarters .

consistent with the historical pattern , consumption has fallen by proportionately less than output cumulatively .

second , in all recessions , fixed investment spending fell more sharply than gdp .

this evidence casts doubt on a popular explanation that recessions are caused by declines in consumption .

it suggests to some that the primary driver of the business cycle is cyclical changes in investment demand .

investment demand is separated into two categories — business investment ( in plant and equipment ) and residential investment ( home building ) .

cyclical changes in business investment could be driven by changes in business conditions , confidence , or credit conditions .

residential investment is driven by changes in housing demand and credit conditions .

changes in credit conditions are heavily influenced by monetary policy .

both business investment and residential investment fell in each of the post - war recessions .

in eight out of 10 recessions , there was a larger percentage decline in residential investment than in business investment .

the percentage decline in residential investment was much larger in the recent recession — beginning in the second quarter of 2006 , residential investment fell by more than an annualized rate of 10% for thirteen straight quarters , while business investment fell by more than 10% in only two quarters .

further , in nine out of 10 past recessions , the decline in residential investment preceded the decline in gdp growth .

this pattern held in the recent recession as well .

many economists have argued that the housing crash was a root cause of the recent recession .

the fact that the decline in residential investment preceded the decline in gdp is not necessarily evidence that housing crashes have also caused other post - war recessions .

it may be that recessions are caused by a tightening in credit conditions , and residential investment is the sector that is first and most affected by tighter credit conditions .

for example , the deep decline in residential investment in the early 1980s is usually attributed to the fed's decision to push the federal funds rate as high as 19% .

while residential investment has fallen in all other post - war recessions , national house prices had not ( since the major data series were first collected ) , until now .

in the recent recession , national house prices fell 15% peak to trough , and residential investment fell by more than half from peak to trough .

unlike many other post - war recessions , housing may be a cause , rather than a symptom , of the recent recession .

another commonality between the recent recession and past recessions is the behavior of oil prices .

the recessions of 1973 and the early 1980s are remembered for their oil shocks , and this pattern is not uncommon .

in a well - known article , economist james hamilton identified disruptions to oil supply before all but one of the post - war recessions — a pattern that has continued in every recession since his article was published , including the latest .

crude oil prices rose from $51 per barrel in january 2007 to a peak of $129 per barrel in july 2008 .

the average price in 2009 was about half the 2008 peak price , which should eventually offset much of the contractionary effects of the previous price increase on gdp .

evidence against attributing the economic downturn to rising oil prices would be the fact that oil prices rose significantly in the previous expansion without any noticeable effect on gdp growth .

for example , prices rose from $37 per barrel in december 2004 to $69 per barrel in july 2006 .

as a result of the current global nature of the financial turmoil , the recent recession was widespread throughout the world .

in 2009 , world gdp growth was - 0.6% overall and - 3.2% in developed economies , contracting in all of the g - 7 economies .

a widespread recession is not historically unusual .

for example , between 1980 and 1982 , all of the g - 7 countries except france and japan experienced a contraction in gdp for at least one year ( and growth was close to zero in france in 1981 ) .

likewise , between 1991 and 1993 , all of the g - 7 countries except japan experienced a contraction in gdp for at least one year ( and growth was close to zero in japan in 1992 and 1993 ) .

the global nature of the recession could potentially prolong and deepen it because there would be less demand abroad for a country's exports .

in a study of historical recessions in industrial countries , the international monetary fund ( imf ) found that recessions that were highly synchronized internationally lasted an average of four months longer and gdp fell an average of 1% more than in other recessions .

a primary reason that the recent recession was longer and deeper than normal is the severity of the financial downturn that began in august 2007 and worsened dramatically in september 2008 .

as noted above , the recession was initially mild , and the decline in gdp accelerated markedly after the financial downturn worsened .

although a diminished investor appetite for risk and a stock market decline before or during a recession is common , the recent recession has featured a breakdown in activity in certain financial markets , such as the markets for asset - backed securities , commercial paper , and interbank lending , and the failure ( or government rescue to avoid failure ) of several large , established financial firms .

since then , financial conditions have improved but have not completely returned to normal .

beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008 , disruptions in financial markets resulted in significant declines in business investment .

given the lag between changes in financial conditions and economic activity , it is less surprising that the recession was so much longer than average .

in a study of historical recessions in industrial countries , the imf found that recessions associated with financial crises lasted an average of seven months longer , although the decline in gdp was not statistically significant from other recessions .

some commentators have suggested that the financial crisis of the recent recession makes the great depression a more relevant comparison than the other post - war recessions .

while the current financial downturn has been the most severe in the post - war period by many measures , there are many differences between the recent situation and the great depression .

although the stock market crash of 1929 played a role in setting the economic downturn in motion , there is a consensus among economists that policy errors caused the downturn to become the great depression .

among the most important errors were the fed's failure to counteract the contraction in the money supply , which caused overall prices to fall a cumulative 25% , and bank runs , which caused thousands of banks to fail .

 ( the money supply fell primarily in order to maintain the gold standard , and the economic growth rate was high after the united states abandoned the gold standard. ) .

by contrast , policymakers have responded aggressively and unconventionally to attempt to contain the current crisis .

the fed has reduced short - term interest rates to nearly zero .

direct fed assistance outstanding to the financial system has exceeded $1 trillion , and congress authorized treasury to provide an additional $700 billion to the financial system through the troubled assets relief program .

widespread bank runs have not occurred since the introduction of deposit insurance in the 1930s , and similar runs on money market mutual funds in 2008 were circumvented when treasury temporarily guaranteed their principal .

the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) also temporarily guaranteed certain bank debt to ensure that banks would not lose access to borrowing markets .

during the great depression , policymakers were also reluctant to stimulate the economy through fiscal expansion ( a larger structural budget deficit ) .

by contrast , the budget deficit increased as a share of gdp from 1.2% in 2007 to 10% in 2009 .

there was also a belief among some policymakers at the time that recessions were healthy processes that purged the economy of inefficiently allocated resources — a view that fell out of favor as the depression worsened , and was eventually replaced by the view that prudent policy changes could avoid the needless waste of resources laid idle by recessions .

the great depression included two recessions , with the first lasting 3½ years and the second , beginning four years later , lasting another year .

as deep as the recent recession was , it was mild compared with the first contraction of the great depression , as shown in table 3 .

the changes in gdp , prices , and unemployment in the recent recession were much closer to those experienced in other post - war recessions than the great depression .

