the legislative agenda at the start of the 112 th congress has been dominated by discussions concerning the deficit and the debt limit .

in addition , reform of the current u.s. corporate tax system has been widely debated as an option to stimulate the economy .

most of the debate has focused on lowering the corporate tax rate and moving toward a territorial system .

an exception to this is a plan to reduce the tax rate on repatriated dividends that has received some consideration .

under such a plan , the u.s. tax that u.s. firms pay when their overseas operations remit ( "repatriate" ) their foreign earnings as dividends to their u.s. parent corporations would be reduced .

variations of a basic repatriation proposal have been introduced in several bills , including h.r .

937 , h.r .

1036 , h.r .

1834 , h.r .

2862 , s. 727 , and s. 1671 in the 112 th congress .

a conceptually similar proposal was enacted as part of the american jobs creation act ( p.l .

108-357 ) .

the provision provided a temporary reduced rate for repatriated earnings , with the condition that the repatriated earnings be used for domestic investment .

while empirical evidence is clear that this provision resulted in a significant increase in repatriated earnings , empirical evidence is unable to show a corresponding increase in domestic investment or employment by firms that utilized the repatriation provisions .

a similar provision was considered , but not adopted , as a floor amendment to a senate version of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 .

up until recently , the business community has largely continued to suggest another repatriation holiday .

in a may 2011 hearing before the ways and means committee , chief financial officers from united technology corporation , kimberly clark corporation , zimmer holdings incorporated , and caterpillar incorporated unanimously opposed holding another repatriation holiday .

however , other firms have continued to support the holiday .

in the context of the current debate on stimulus , the use of the repatriations and not the magnitude of repatriations stimulated are likely to be the key to the proposal's effect on u.s. economic growth .

this follows from two points .

first , even if sizeable repatriations occur , the rate of return on u.s. investment will be unaffected by the repatriations .

assuming firms are not liquidity - constrained , it is possible that the bulk of the repatriations will be used as dividends to stockholders or used to pay down corporate debt .

this scenario is especially likely for large firms .

second , when the repatriations occur , those that are denominated in foreign currencies will be converted to dollars .

the corresponding increase in the demand for dollars would be expected to drive up the price of the dollar in world currency markets .

as a result , u.s. net exports would be expected to decline from levels that would otherwise occur , and the repatriation holiday could contract rather than stimulate the u.s. economy .

during 2012 , interest declined in a repatriation holiday for the purposes of providing a stimulus .

however , proposals to adopt a phased - in repatriation at a lower tax rate have been coupled with proposals to make a permanent more to a territorial tax , where active earnings of foreign operations would not be subject to u.s. tax .

the united states bases its jurisdiction to tax international income on residence .

as a result , u.s. - chartered corporations are taxed on their worldwide income , but foreign corporations are taxed only on their u.s. - source income .

accordingly , a u.s. firm with overseas operations can indefinitely postpone its u.s. tax on its foreign income by operating through a foreign subsidiary .

using the same principle , u.s. taxes are deferred as long as its foreign earnings remain in the control of its foreign subsidiary and are reinvested abroad .

the u.s. firm pays taxes on its overseas earnings only when they are paid to the u.s. parent corporation as intra - firm dividends or other income .

another prominent feature of the u.s. tax system is the foreign tax credit .

the foreign tax credit is designed to alleviate double taxation where u.s. and foreign governments' tax jurisdictions overlap — that is the u.s. firm pays taxes at the higher of the u.s. or foreign tax rate .

with respect to repatriated dividends , u.s. firms can claim foreign tax credits for foreign taxes paid by their subsidiaries on the earnings used to pay the repatriated dividends .

the ability to defer u.s. tax , thus , poses an incentive for u.s. firms to invest abroad in countries with low tax rates .

proposals to cut taxes on repatriations are based on the premise that even this deferred tax on intra - firm dividends discourages repatriations and encourages firms to reinvest foreign earnings abroad and that a cut in the tax would stimulate repatriations .

the repatriated earnings provision included in the american jobs creation act ( p.l .

108-357 ) reduced the taxes due on repatriated earnings .

in particular , the provision provided a deduction equal to 85% of the increase in foreign - source earnings repatriated .

for a firm paying taxes at the 35% corporate tax rate , this reduced the tax rate on repatriated earnings to the equivalent of 5.25% .

along with the rate reduction , credits for foreign taxes paid were reduced by a corresponding amount .

the act required firms to adopt domestic investment plans for qualifying repatriations and limited the maximum deduction allowed .

the maximum allowable deduction was set equal to the greater of $500 million or the amount of earnings shown to be permanently reinvested outside the united states in a firm's books of accounts certified before june 30 , 2003 .

the deduction was designed and intended to be available for one year .

at the taxpayer's option , the year would be the first tax year beginning on or after the date of enactment of p.l .

108-357 or the last tax year beginning before that date .

the conference report for the act stated the "conferees emphasize that this is a temporary economic stimulus measure , and that there is no intent to make this measure permanent , or to 'extend' or enact it again in the future. .

a number of researchers have studied the impact of the reduction in the tax on repatriated earnings that came out of the american jobs creation act .

the studies have generally focused on two particular responses: the level of repatriations and the impact on economic growth .

in short , the studies generally conclude that the reduction in the tax rate on repatriated earnings led to a sharp increase in the level of repatriated earnings , but that the repatriations did not increase domestic investment or employment .

they further conclude that much of the repatriations were returned to shareholders through stock repurchases .

as mentioned above , the main a priori criticism of the reinvestment plan provision was that it allowed an overly generous range of reinvestment options — all but executive compensation and stock repurchase programs — and that it was not explicitly linked to specific uses .

empirical evidence has shown these a priori concerns to have merit .

in addition , concerns have been raised that repeated repatriation holidays may encourage u.s. firms to move operations overseas or engage in profit shifting in anticipation of future repatriation holidays .

finally , a repatriation holiday similar to that enacted in 2004 is estimated to reduce federal receipts by $78.7 billion over 10 years — some of which would be claimed by firms for actions that would have occurred without a rate reduction .

given the prior experience , several options to improve the target efficiency of a dividends - received deduction proposal present themselves .

note that these options are fundamentally limited in their ability to improve the target efficiency of a rate reduction by the fungiblity of money .

moreover , during 2012 , interest declined in a repatriation holiday for the purposes of stimulus , although a repatriation holiday as part of a larger permanent tax revision to move to a territorial tax was discussed .

one option to improve target efficiency is to tie the ability to use or the magnitude of the rate reduction to increases in desired activity ( such as domestic employment , wages , or investment ) .

this type of incremental "trigger" would only provide a benefit if increases in desired activity ( over past behavior ) occur and attempts to address the concern that the money repatriated is insufficiently tied to u.s. outcomes .

in practice , such a trigger could be implemented to determine eligibility for the provision as well as create "tiers" of reductions based upon the amount of additional activity .

given difficulties in defining the base , it is a non - trivial exercise , especially in the case of permanent provisions .

pooled sourcing of repatriated earnings would likely reduce the revenue cost of a repatriation holiday and concerns that firms are "cherry picking" earnings to preserve foreign taxes paid for repatriations occurring without a dividends received deduction or for cross - crediting against non - dividend income .

such a modification of the 2004 law could , conceivably , mirror proposals to determine the foreign tax credit on a pooled basis .

in practice , such a provision would require that the sourcing of aggregate repatriated earnings be made on a country - by - country basis proportional to the country's share of retained earnings abroad .

a proposal has recently been made to combine a repatriation holiday with an infrastructure bank , with the tax revenue collected from the repatriation holiday used to finance the bank .

the rationale for combining these proposals is not clear because the size of the infrastructure bank would hinge on the small amount of revenue collected initially .

moreover , the revenue loss over the remainder of the 10-year horizon is about four times as large .

that is , the short - term revenue gain is about $26 billion , but will be followed by a subsequent revenue loss of $105 billion .

the net revenue loss for the budget horizon is $79 billion .

