congress has been interested in detecting nuclear weapons and the special materials needed to make them for many years , especially since 9 / 11 .

nuclear detection has many applications for countering nuclear terrorism and nuclear proliferation , such as securing nuclear weapons and materials in u.s. , russian , and other nuclear facilities , tracking materials at border crossings and choke points , screening maritime cargo containers , and examining actual or suspect nuclear sites .

the united states currently uses several types of nuclear detection equipment .

all have significant shortcomings .

some work only at very short range ; some cannot identify the material emitting radiation , which can lead to false alarms and interrupt commerce ; some depend on operator skill , and may be defeated by a clever smuggler or a sleepy operator ; and some are easily defeated by shielding .

in an effort to overcome such problems , congress has funded a pipeline of advanced - technology research , development , and acquisition .

this report seeks to help congress understand this technology .

it discusses the science of detecting nuclear weapons and materials , describes nine advanced u.s. technologies selected to illustrate the range of projects in the pipeline , and offers observations for congress .

the report does not compare technologies .

the inclusion of the nine technologies should not be taken to mean that crs judges them to be better than the hundreds of others not considered here .

the report does not discuss the controversial advanced spectroscopic portal because a detailed discussion of it could draw attention from the other technologies considered here .

the scope of this report excludes the organization of the government for dealing with nuclear detection , the role of intelligence and law enforcement in detecting terrorist nuclear weapons , detection of radiological dispersal devices ( such as "dirty bombs" ) , the role of nuclear forensics in attributing an attack to its perpetrator , response to a nuclear attack , and the architecture of a national nuclear detection system .

nor does it discuss possible means by which terrorists might acquire a bomb , or whether they could make a bomb on their own .

much has been written on these topics .

while many who are concerned with nuclear detection focus on thwarting nuclear terrorism , this report focuses on technology per se .

it avoids extensive discussion of means to counter detection to avoid classified information .

nuclear detection technology has a dual role in thwarting a terrorist nuclear attack — deterrence and defense .

deterrence means dissuasion from an action by threat of unacceptable consequences .

terrorists may be deterred from a nuclear strike by one of the few consequences unacceptable to them: failure .

detection systems would raise that risk .

these systems could also make a terrorist nuclear strike too complex to succeed .

but other factors would also have these effects: the difficulty of fabricating a bomb , the chance that law enforcement or intelligence would detect efforts to obtain a bomb , the possible inability to detonate a purloined bomb , and the risk that scientists recruited for the plot would defect .

such risks would disappear , however , if terrorists were given a bomb and operating instructions .

they would then only need to mount a smuggling operation .

in that case , the role of nuclear detection systems would change: they would become the main defense .

as background for understanding the detection technologies in chapter 2 , this chapter outlines nuclear detection science .

the appendix provides more detail .

many nuclear detection technology projects are under way in the united states and elsewhere .

this section discusses nine u.s. technologies selected to include different ( 1 ) agencies sponsoring projects ( the defense threat reduction agency ( dtra ) , an agency of the department of defense ( dod ) ; the domestic nuclear detection office ( dndo ) , an agency of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) ; and the national nuclear security administration ( nnsa ) , an agency of the department of energy ( doe ) ) , ( 2 ) organizations performing the work ( national laboratories , industry , universities , and collaborations between them ) , ( 3 ) types of technology ( materials , algorithms , simulation , systems ) , ( 4 ) physical principles ( muon tomography , radiography , stimulated emission of radiation , nuclear resonance fluorescence ) , ( 5 ) distances between the detector and the object being scanned ( near and far ) , and ( 6 ) levels of maturity ( in use for many years but constantly updated , near deployment , and anticipated to be available for deployment in several years ) .

this section does not consider technologies in the earliest stages of development because it is too soon to tell how they will pan out .

the discussion of each technology includes several categories: the problem that the technology addresses technology background description of the technology potential benefits that the technology offers status , schedule , and funding scientific , engineering , cost and schedule , and operational risks potential gains by increased funding potential synergisms the last three categories require some explanation .

risks: the discussion presents potential benefits of the technologies .

it does not present "cons. .

that would be premature because development programs address problems .

instead , each section discusses risk .

there are several categories of risk .

scientific problems may thwart a technology .

even if it is scientifically sound , it may be hard to engineer into a workable system .

even if it can be engineered , it may be unaffordable , or take too long to develop .

even if it can surmount these hurdles , problems encountered in field use may render it unattractive .

potential gains by increased funding: in preliminary discussions , project managers asserted they would , if given more funds , use the added funds to solve problems or exploit opportunities .

crs therefore asked managers of all nine technologies considered in this report how they would spend more money as a way to probe for problems and opportunities with their projects .

would they pursue several promising routes to a technology instead of pursuing only one at the outset ? .

would they buy more equipment so they could speed up the work ? .

would they hire more staff ? .

this analysis applies only to the nine technologies discussed in this report .

it is not intended to focus authorization or appropriation consideration solely on them .

other technologies not considered here might realize larger ( or smaller or no ) gains through increased funding .

potential synergisms: as the technology descriptions show , many systems have common elements , such as certain types of detectors or algorithms , and work on one technology may contribute to others or have applications beyond current plans .

this report now discusses each of the nine technologies using the above format .

equipment commercially available at the time of the 9 / 11 attacks was limited in its capability .

pvt radiation detectors could detect radiation but could not identify isotopes , and shielding snm might defeat detection .

radiographic equipment could reveal dense objects , but relied on operator skill to flag potential threats .

it might be possible to hide a nuclear artillery shell in a cargo of dense objects , and it would be difficult to pick out a small piece of snm .

resolving alarms required time - consuming methods , such as using hand - held radioisotope identification devices or unpacking a container .

capabilities of existing systems can be improved incrementally , such as by using different detector material , computers , algorithms , or conops ( eg , scan time ) .

systems now under development have the potential to reduce false positives ( speeding the flow of commerce ) and false negatives ( improving security ) .

fission that neutrons or x - rays induce in snm generates unambiguous signals .

dual - energy radiography detects high - z material automatically .

ez - 3d reveals high - z material hidden in medium - z material , and might be able to differentiate snm from other high - z material .

these approaches detect useful signatures , but have drawbacks as well , such as low signal strength , complexity , high cost , or large size .

the task is to utilize these signatures and minimize drawbacks in a system that can be fielded .

other technologies , such as improved detector material and improved algorithms , also have the potential to improve detection capability .

it is difficult to predict the schedule of new detection technologies .

in march 2008 , the royal society , drawing on a workshop of experts , issued a report on nuclear detection that found , "in the medium term ( 5-10 years ) , there are promising opportunities to develop new technologies , such as muon detection systems .

in the long term ( 10-20 years ) detection could benefit from advances in nanotechnology and organic semiconductors. .

in 2008 , the company developing the muon tomography system thought the system could be commercially available in 2011 .

as of early 2010 , that date had slipped to 2012 and the company had not passed its test readiness review , a step to indicate whether a system is ready for its proof - of - concept demonstration .

in 2008 , some thought that nanocomposite scintillator technology could be available for transfer to industry by september 2009 , but the project was canceled in january 2010 .

it is difficult to evaluate prospects for r&d projects .

based on tracking the technologies presented in this report , it appears extremely difficult to evaluate how likely an r&d project is to succeed , even for the agencies that fund them , and one should not confuse a technical explanation and briefing slides with prospects for success .

to succeed , a project must overcome many hurdles between concept and deployment .

 ( 1 ) the concept has to be scientifically sound .

this is not always a given for projects that push the state of the art .

 ( 2 ) even if scientifically sound , the underlying science must be transformed into a prototype through engineering .

but materials may prove impossible to develop ; laboratory - scale proof - of - concept equipment , where size and complexity are not a concern , may prove difficult to shrink in size ; and algorithms may be unstable or may be confused by background radiation .

 ( 3 ) the prototype must be made into a system that is rugged enough to survive the bumps , vibrations , heat , cold , rain , humidity , dust , salt air , gasoline fumes , and whatever else people and nature may throw at it .

 ( 4 ) there must be a workable concept of operations: if it takes 1000 seconds to perform a scan , or if the false positive and false negative rates are too high , or if the operator cannot use the equipment easily , the equipment is useless .

 ( 5 ) the system must be affordable , however defined .

it is hard to predict if a concept will make it past the next hurdle , let alone all five ( and any others ) .

here are several examples drawn from this report .

nanocomposite scintillators held the promise of being a gamma - ray detection material that would be sensitive , yet inexpensive and easy to produce on a large scale .

early research started in 2004 , but dndo and dtra terminated the project in 2010 .

the as&e caars project appeared promising , but encountered unspecified technical problems and dndo terminated it ; however , some of its technology is being applied to another project .

conversely , saic's caars depended on the development of an "interleaved" accelerator , one that could switch x - ray beams between two energy levels many times a second .

an earlier attempt to develop such an accelerator failed , but saic's subcontractor , accuray , was able to develop one that exceeded requirements by a substantial margin , contributing to the system's ability to differentiate among up to 15 bands of z rather than simply indicating whether material in a cargo container was high - z or not .

this enhanced capability could help cbp agents search for contraband as well as snm .

it is easier , less costly , and potentially more effective to accelerate a program in r&d than in production .

dtra believes that a significant increase in funding for proton beam technology , a standoff detection technology in early r&d , might shorten time to deployment by several years by enabling researchers to consider many technical alternatives simultaneously to determine the most promising approach faster .

it is hard to attain large schedule gains by accelerating production ; such gains may entail high cost , such as multiple shifts or more production lines ; and a rush to production may cause a project to fail .

while r&d projects may also fail , more risk is tolerable in r&d because the investment is much less .

a modest amount of money spent in r&d can avoid looming problems .

for example , gadras , a widely used algorithm for detecting snm and other materials , runs on the standard microsoft windows operating system ( os ) for personal computers .

microsoft introduces new generations of oss from time to time .

typically , new oss will support programs written for several generations of previous such systems .

however , the graphic user interface ( gui ) for gadras is written with the visual basic 6.0 compiler , which microsoft no longer supports .

at some point , microsoft will likely introduce a new os that will no longer support applications that are written with this compiler ; gadras would then be unavailable to its users until it is updated .

according to dean mitchell , who created gadras , updating that algorithm to run on current - generation oss would avoid that problem , at a cost of perhaps $1 million a year for two years .

r&d that leads to products that many systems can use may have a large impact on detection capability .

many detector systems have common elements — an accelerator , gamma - ray detector material , computers , algorithms — so improving any of these "building blocks" might improve the capability of many detector systems , including those in the field .

improved gamma - ray detector material can improve sensitivity , reduce cost , or both .

an improved algorithm can boost performance .

a more powerful computer permits the use of a more powerful algorithm , which may reduce false positives and false negatives .

on the other hand , it may not be possible to upgrade systems simply by swapping new components for old .

edward mckigney listed possible difficulties in the ( hypothetical ) case of upgrading systems by substituting higher - for lower - performance detector material: ( 1 ) detector modules that cannot detect light with high efficiency would need to be redesigned .

this is particularly relevant for existing portal monitors that use plastic scintillator material , where the optical design is poor .

 ( 2 ) electronics for converting signals from detectors into data for algorithms ( "readout electronics" ) that are not suitable for high - resolution readout and analysis , or are mismatched for the technology ( such as if the old electronics read electrical charge while the new ones read optical signals ) , would have to be replaced .

 ( 3 ) data analysis algorithms that cannot process signals from the new detector module would have to be replaced .

 ( 4 ) the volume of data from the new detector module might be greater than the existing algorithms , data transmission system or computers could handle , requiring new computers , algorithms , data transmission system , or some combination .

 ( 5 ) electrical power systems would have to be changed if the power requirements for the old and upgraded systems did not match .

so , at the extremes , it might be possible to upgrade only the detector module , or the only features of the old system that would remain after an upgrade would be the wide spot in the road and the guard shack .

i would recommend that the next generation of detector systems should be more modular so upgrades could be done while retaining as much of the value of deployed systems as possible .

synergisms may arise between technologies .

beams of neutrons or high - energy gamma rays used to induce fission in snm may harm some products , expose stowaways to high doses of radiation , and require shielding to protect workers .

improved detector material and algorithms could lower the amount of radiation required for this technique , perhaps making it more usable for scanning containers .

technical advances can place two systems in competition unexpectedly .

work is underway on several systems designed to induce fission as a way of detecting snm .

caars was not begun as a system of this sort .

however , dndo is investigating a technology add - on to give it that capability .

if work proceeds on that path , caars and other such systems could be in competition .

competition at the r&d level may be desirable .

william hagan , assistant director , transformational and applied research , dndo , states , if we can squeeze additional functionality out of a system , we want to do that .

this will cause various approaches to be in competition for achieving a capability at the r&d stage but that is what we want to do so we can drive towards the most effective .

more generally , i think that having multiple organizations pursuing the same r&d goal is a good thing because it allows for different approaches or more capable organizations to compete for the objective .

this is a very effective mechanism in r&d .

a classic recent example is the race to decode the human genome .

another is the race for commercial space flight .

this kind of competition goes on all the time in the basic research community and i think we should encourage it .

there is , of course , some limit to this , but we are far from that limit right now for radiation detection .

the competitive position of systems in r&d may change over time .

technology development is dynamic .

this report presents several examples .

the saic caars overcame a key technical hurdle , the development of an interleaved accelerator , resulting in better performance than expected .

the as&e caars encountered problems that led to its termination .

the rapiscan eagle , with an added algorithm to detect high - z material , became a competitor to caars through the jinii program .

decision sciences corporation addressed problems with the original concept for its muon tomography scanner , such as using boron - 10 instead of helium - 3 in drift tubes because of the latter material's scarcity and designing a top / bottom scanner rather than a top / bottom / both sides scanner to make the footprint more compatible with traffic lanes at ports. .

concept of operations " ( conops ) is crucial to the effectiveness of detection systems .

conops details how a detection system would be operated to gather data and how the data would be used .

without it , a detection system would be valueless .

since conops and systems are mutually dependent , the design of each must take the capabilities and limitations of the other into account .

current equipment to detect and identify snm makes use of two main signatures of this material , opacity for radiography to detect snm , and gamma - ray emissions for spectroscopy to detect and identify snm .

however , as discussed in chapter 2 and the appendix , snm has many signatures in addition to opacity and gamma - ray emissions , and some systems under development attempt to make use of these other signatures .

if systems utilizing these other signatures were to be deployed , methods that might be used in an attempt to hide or mask opacity and gamma - ray signatures would not necessarily defeat these systems under development — complicating any terrorist attempts to smuggle nuclear weapons or snm into the united states .

at the same time , these future systems tend to be more costly and complex than current systems ; whether the added benefits are worth the added costs is a political decision .

detection systems have their limits .

systems to detect snm at close range , such as at ports and land border crossings , are generally not applicable to detection of terrorists smuggling a weapon across a remote stretch of border .

but that is not a flaw of the detection system .

detectors can work at "points," i.e. , places where people or cargo may enter the united states legally .

there , detectors attempt to find snm or weapons that may be hidden in cargo .

in contrast , at "lines," the vast distances between "points" along coasts or borders , any entry is illegal , so interdiction is a matter of law enforcement .

effective intrusion detection systems ( tv cameras , seismic monitors ) coupled with a conops that provides rapid response may suffice , though they have a long way to go to become effective .

at the same time , standoff radiation detection systems that have yet to be developed , mounted along borders at natural choke points or smuggling routes , might be of value for this mission .

congress has supported a broad portfolio of detection r&d projects that has created a pipeline with technologies expected to become available for operational systems from near - term to long - term .

these systems exploit many signatures in addition to those of currently deployed systems , offering congress the prospect of improved detection capability and a broader menu of choices .

several technical factors may influence the choice among technologies to support .

for example: ( 1 ) projects will advance at different rates .

 ( 2 ) projects may benefit differently from an advance in a related technology .

 ( 3 ) as a project moves from research to development to deployment , cost and capability may vary from early projections .

congress may wish to reevaluate current deployment decisions if it concludes that significantly more capable systems will be available in a year or two .

of course , any such decision would depend on comparing such factors as cost , footprint , ease of use , production rate , and the like for competing systems , and caution is necessary in assessing contending claims .

on the other hand , it is difficult for congress to choose among contending technologies .

each requires evaluation in such terms as cost , scan time , ease of use , reliability , schedule , footprint , radiation exposure , spatial resolution , and ability to thwart shielding .

yet these data are difficult to obtain .

some are proprietary .

some are unknown: schedules may slip and costs rise , or technical advances may cause the opposite to occur .

developers of a technology tend to be its advocates , and see the strengths of their technology and a path to overcome its weaknesses .

even if these data can be obtained , it is necessary to weight data elements to support a choice among contending technologies .

with many variables to be traded off against each other , how are weights to be assigned , and who decides ? .

and can this weighting system function despite weaknesses in the data ? .

congress has focused much attention on preventing terrorists from smuggling nuclear weapons or snm into the united states in cargo containers .

for example , p.l .

110 - 53 , implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 , section 1701 , states , "a container that was loaded on a vessel in a foreign port shall not enter the united states ( either directly or via a foreign port ) unless the container was scanned by nonintrusive imaging equipment and radiation detection equipment at a foreign port before it was loaded on a vessel. .

while terrorists might attempt to smuggle in a nuclear weapon by other means , developing technology to scan containers at seaports is a reasonable place to start .

container - scanning technology can be modified for use in other situations , such as monitoring air cargo containers or passenger cars , which are easier to scan because they can contain much less shielding .

developing and deploying detection equipment for use at seaports ensures ruggedness and ease of use adequate for real - world applications , and forces governments at all levels to plan conops .

more generally , some could argue that it is impossible to prevent terrorists from smuggling nuclear weapons into the united states , so there is no point in spending large sums in a futile effort .

congress has rejected that approach , and has appropriated , in total , billions of dollars to deploy available systems and to support r&d on advanced technologies .

supporters of the r&d and deployment approach assert that it offers several advantages .

it has provided some capability quickly , increasing the odds of detecting weapons or snm .

an important example of this is the rapid deployment of passive radiation detectors to scan maritime cargo containers .

this limited detection capability would help deter terrorists and would complicate plans to smuggle in weapons or snm .

initial deployments provide data of use to subsequent deployments .

they help refine what throughput , robustness , etc. , front - line inspectors require of a system .

they help refine conops .

they help define desirable features of an architecture .

these results can make future technologies , systems , and architectures more effective .

it has created an r&d pipeline that is intended to generate a steady stream of new technologies and systems .

the resulting improvements in individual technologies , operations , and architectures can improve overall system effectiveness .

as technologies become more capable , they can plug gaps in the current architecture .

for example , remote detection might offer a way to monitor choke points in the united states or overseas that terrorists might pass through in transporting snm or weapons .

congress may wish to address gaps and synergisms in this portfolio .

for example: gaps: several systems may use helium - 3 tubes for neutron detection , yet the supply is limited .

alternatives are available , but the longer developers take to switch to these alternatives , the longer it would take to deploy their systems because of the need to incorporate different detectors , modify algorithms , and test the revised system .

other gaps include sensors that can detect snm at long range ( eg , over 100 m ) , sensors that can operate autonomously in remote areas , and large but inexpensive detectors that can distinguish snm from other radioactive material .

synergisms: a component , algorithm , or material developed for one system may be applicable to another .

projects are under way to develop more sensitive materials to detect gamma rays and neutrons .

these materials can be used in systems that induce fission in snm .

their improved sensitivity permits a smaller source ( eg , an accelerator ) to generate the interrogation beam , reducing cost , complexity , and radiation dose .

similarly , if detector material offers only fair resolution of gamma ray spectra , then peaks in a spectrum may blur , requiring a complicated algorithm to deal with the uncertainties .

sharper resolution from improved materials would reduce these uncertainties , permitting simpler algorithms to be used .

more powerful computers could support faster , more powerful algorithms , reducing scan time , false positives , and false negatives .

minimizing gaps and maximizing synergisms have the potential to lead to more capable systems faster and at lower cost .

companies that considered using helium - 3 for neutron detection might expedite deployment and reduce costs by sharing effort to develop an alternative neutron detector for their common use .

information on progress in developing more sensitive detector material would permit companies to incorporate such materials into their systems sooner , also speeding deployment and lowering costs .

is there a way that development could be shared or licensed so that companies , especially those working on government - funded projects , could avoid duplicating effort ? .

and could this be done while retaining the benefits of competition ? .

in considering the advanced spectroscopic portal , congress and the government accountability office examined in detail whether dndo had followed proper procedures for testing competing systems .

an alternative means by which congress could address testing is to direct the executive agency in charge of a system to conduct specified tests .

these tests would need to be designed , and perhaps overseen , by experts not affiliated with the relevant agency , company , or laboratory .

congress has ample access to the technical expertise required .

the relevant congressional committees could consult with individual experts or with groups that have a long history of providing independent technical advice to the government , such as the american association for the advancement of science , the jason defense advisory group , the national academy of sciences , the national council on radiation protection and measurements , and the national institute of standards and technology .

in this way , congress could seek a fair comparison between systems on variables of interest , such as scan times or the ability to detect specified targets in containers with specified cargoes , enhancing confidence in the test results and decisions based on them .

other alternatives exist .

congress could require dhs to establish an independent test and evaluation unit ; obtain an outside review of dhs test and evaluation procedures ; require dndo to provide detailed reporting of each step in the acquisition process as it occurs ; or provide for an external review of a program .

ongoing improvement in u.s. detection capabilities produces uncertainties for terrorists that seem likely to increase over time , adding another layer of deterrence beyond that of the capabilities themselves .

capability of fielded equipment may be upgraded .

terrorists may not know the capability or availability of future detectors .

more advanced technologies should improve detection capability .

it should be harder for terrorists to evade new systems than current ones .

detection may affect terrorists in another way .

a nuclear weapon would be of immense value to them .

therefore , increasing the risk of detection would have a much greater deterrent effect for them than for drug smugglers , where detection and confiscation of drugs are part of the cost of doing business .

the multiplication of technical obstacles to a successful terrorist attack may thus help deter an attack or an attempt to undertake a project to launch one .

at the same time , it is important to avoid the " fallacy of the last move. .

herbert york , a former director of defense research and engineering , coined this term to argue that in the cold war nuclear arms race , one side's actions typically led to countervailing actions by the other side .

the same principle applies to nuclear detection .

this report suggests that some u.s. detection systems nearing readiness for deployment are more capable than current detectors .

yet if terrorists were to attempt to bring a nuclear weapon or snm into the united states , they could use various techniques to evade detection by such systems , though these techniques might complicate the plot and increase the risk of detection by non - technical means .

further , the threat might increase in various ways , such as if new terrorist groups emerged or if more nations built nuclear power plants or nuclear weapons .

for such reasons , congress has funded , and executive agencies are pursuing , r&d with short - and longer - term time horizons .

also for such reasons , the global nuclear detection architecture may need to be updated from time to time .

thus , while the united states has an immense technical advantage in a competition of detection vs. evasion , and a pipeline of increasingly more capable technologies , it is important to recognize not only the dynamic aspects of advances in detection capabilities but also the dynamic aspects of the competition .

detectors must detect complete weapons , which can be quite small .

during the cold war , the united states made 155 mm and 8 inch ( diameter ) nuclear artillery shells .

the united states made even smaller atomic demolition munitions , and there have been reports of soviet - era "suitcase bombs. .

a weapon that terrorists fabricated without state assistance would surely be less sophisticated and , as a result , probably much larger .

detectors must also detect the types of uranium and plutonium used in nuclear weapons .

the type of uranium used in weapons is harder to detect than plutonium because it emits much less radiation ; it is also much easier to fabricate into a weapon component .

it is important to detect small quantities of these materials in order to interdict stolen and smuggled materials because small quantities suffice to fuel a bomb .

according to a widely quoted report by five nuclear weapon scientists from los alamos national laboratory , it would take 26 kg of uranium , or 5 kg of plutonium ( both of types discussed later ) to fuel an atomic bomb .

these masses would fit into cubes 11.2 cm or 6.3 cm , respectively , on a side .

the ability to detect even smaller masses would help thwart nuclear smuggling .

how is it possible to find weapons or materials among the vast amount of cargo that reaches the united states each day ? .

fortunately , there are many clues .

nuclear detection makes extensive use of photons .

photons are packets of energy with no rest mass and no electrical charge .

electromagnetic radiation consists of photons , and may be measured as wavelength , frequency , or energy ; for consistency , this report uses only energy , expressed in units of electron volts ( ev ) .

levels of energy commonly used in nuclear detection are thousands or millions of electron volts , kev and mev , respectively .

the electromagnetic spectrum ranges from radio waves ( some of which have photon energies of 10 - 9 ev ) , through visible light ( a few ev ) , to higher - energy x - rays ( 10 kev and up ) and gamma rays ( mostly 100 kev and up ) .

an x - ray photon and a gamma - ray photon of the same energy are identical .

gamma rays originate in processes in an atom's nucleus .

each chemical element has two or more isotopes .

isotopes of an element have the same number of electrons , and thus in most cases similar chemical properties , but different numbers of neutrons in their nuclei , and thus different nuclear properties .

each radioactive isotope emits gamma rays in a unique spectrum , a plot of energy levels ( horizontal axis ) and number of gamma rays detected at each energy level ( vertical axis ) .

these spectra are a series of spikes at particular energy levels .

figure 1 and figure 2 show the spectra of uranium - 235 and plutonium - 239 , respectively .

such spectra are the only way to identify an isotope outside a well - equipped laboratory .

a detector with a form of "identify" or "spectrum" in its name , such as advanced spectroscopic portal or radioactive isotope identification device , identifies isotopes by their gamma - ray spectra .

x - rays originate in interactions with an atom's electrons .

many detection systems use x - ray beams , which can have higher energies than gamma rays and thus are more penetrating .

x - ray beams are often generated through the bremsstrahlung process , german for "braking radiation," which works as follows .

an accelerator creates a magnetic field that accelerates charged particles , such as electrons , which slam into a target of heavy metal .

when they slow or change direction as a result of interactions with atoms , they release energy as x - rays whose energy levels are distributed from near zero to the energy of the electron beam .

they do not exhibit spectral peaks like gamma rays .

this difference is important for detection .

radioactive atoms are unstable .

they decay by emitting radiation , principally alpha particles ( a helium nucleus consisting of two neutrons and two protons , thus having a double positive charge ) , beta particles ( electrons or positrons , the latter being electrons with a positive charge ) , and gamma rays ( high - energy photons ) .

these forms of radiation are of differing relevance for detection .

alpha particles , being massive ( on a subatomic scale ) and electrically charged , are easily stopped , such as by a sheet of paper or an inch or two of air .

beta particles , while much lighter and faster , are also electrically charged and are stopped by a thin layer of material .

gamma rays have no charge and can penetrate much more material than can alpha or beta particles .

depending on their energy , they may travel through several hundred feet of air .

when an atom decays by emitting an alpha particle or beta particle , it transforms itself into a different element ; it does not do so when it emits a gamma ray .

gamma - ray emission typically follows alpha or beta decay .

as discussed in more detail below , each radioactive isotope that emits gamma rays does so in a spectrum of energies unique to that isotope .

for example , the spectrum of u - 235 has a prominent peak at 186 kev .

in addition to these typical means of radioactive decay , atoms of some heavy elements fission , or split into two smaller atoms .

of the naturally occurring isotopes , only u - 238 spontaneously fissions with an appreciable rate ( about 7 fissions per second per kg ) .

one by - product of fission is the emission of neutrons ( typically 2-3 neutrons per fission ) .

neutrons have no electrical charge and can penetrate dense materials , as well as many tens of meters of air .

some isotopes of heavy elements fission spontaneously or when struck by neutrons or high - energy photons , emitting neutrons and gamma rays in the process .

u - 235 and pu - 239 are unique in that neutrons of any energy can cause them to fission ; they are called "fissile. .

neutrons of much higher energies are required to cause other isotopes to fission .

this characteristic of u - 235 and pu - 239 allows them to support a nuclear chain reaction .

fissile material is essential for nuclear weapons ; u - 235 and pu - 239 are the standard fissile materials used in modern nuclear weapons .

the atomic energy act of 1954 designates them as "special nuclear material" ( snm ) .

plutonium is not found in nature .

it is produced from uranium fuel rods in a nuclear reactor and is separated from uranium and other elements using chemical processes .

weapons - grade plutonium ( wgpu ) is at least 93% pu - 239 .

in contrast , uranium in nature consists of 99.3% u - 238 and 0.7% u - 235 , with very small amounts of other isotopes .

enriching it in the isotope 235 for use as nuclear reactor fuel or in nuclear weapons cannot be done through chemical means because isotopes of an element are nearly chemically identical , so other means must be used .

for example , uranium may be converted to the gas uranium hexafluoride and placed in centrifuges specially designed to separate u - 235 from u - 238 based on the very slight differences in the weight of individual molecules .

uranium enriched to 20% in the isotope 235 is termed highly enriched uranium , or heu ; for use in nuclear weapons , uranium is typically enriched to 90% or so , though lower enrichments could be used .

for purposes of this report , "heu" is used to refer to uranium of 90% enrichment .

heu may also be produced from material that has been in a nuclear reactor .

heu produced in this manner contains small amounts of another isotope , u - 232 , which , as we shall see , is easier to detect than is u - 235 .

nuclear detection uses neutrons and high - energy photons in various ways .

because they can penetrate different materials , they are the main forms of radiation by which most radioactive material can be detected passively , by "listening" for signals coming out of a container without sending signals in .

because of their penetrating properties , they can be used in an active mode to probe a container for dense material .

x - rays or gamma rays are used for radiography , that is , creating an opacity map like a medical x - ray .

neutrons of any energy level , and photons above 6 million electron volts ( mev ) , can be shot into a container to induce fission in snm .

fission results in the emission of neutrons and gamma rays , which can be detected .

gamma rays can also be used to identify a radioactive source .

neutrons , in contrast , do not have a characteristic energy spectrum by which an isotope can be identified , and it is difficult to measure their energy , though the presence of neutrons in certain situations , as discussed below , can indicate that snm is present .

another characteristic of radioactive materials important for detection is the rate at which a material decays .

the half - life of an isotope , or the time it takes for half the atoms in a sample to decay , is an indicator of the rate of decay , with shorter half - lives indicating faster decay .

the half - lives of cobalt - 60 , plutonium - 239 , and uranium - 235 are 5.3 years , 24,000 years , and 700 million years , respectively .

even if a source emits high - energy gamma rays , it will be difficult to detect if it emits only a few of them .

thus type , energy level , and quantity of radiation are important for detection .

different materials attenuate neutrons and gamma rays in different ways .

heavy , dense materials like lead , tungsten , uranium , and plutonium have a high atomic number ( the number of protons in the nucleus ) , or "z. .

high - z materials attenuate gamma rays efficiently .

in contrast , neutrons are stopped most efficiently by collisions with the nuclei of light atoms , with hydrogen being the most effective because it has about the same weight as neutrons .

the element with the nucleus closest in weight to a neutron is hydrogen , which in its most common isotope consists of one proton and one electron .

thus hydrogen - containing material like water , wood , plastic , or food are particularly efficient at stopping neutrons ; other low - z material is less efficient at stopping neutrons , but nonetheless more effective than high - z material .

conversely , gamma rays are less attenuated by low - z material and neutrons are less attenuated by high - z material .

different amounts of material are needed to attenuate gamma rays depending on their energy level .

gamma rays from wgpu are sufficiently energetic and plentiful that it is more difficult to shield wgpu than heu .

in contrast , as explained in the footnote , an inch of lead would render gamma rays from u - 235 essentially undetectable , though as discussed later other uranium isotopes that may be present in heu are more readily detectable .

indeed , 186-kev gamma rays from u - 235 have so little energy that many are absorbed by the uranium itself , a process known as self - shielding , so that the number of gamma rays emitted by a piece of u - 235 depends on surface area , not mass .

unclassified demonstrations performed at los alamos national laboratory for the author in june 2006 indicate how shielding and self - shielding impair the detection of low - energy gamma rays from heu .

the demonstrations used a top - of - the - line detector that had an excellent ability to identify materials by their gamma - ray spectra .

in the first demonstration , the detector picked up gamma rays from a thin sheet of heu foil at perhaps 30 feet away and quickly identified them as coming from heu .

the foil had a large surface area and little thickness , so there was little self - shielding .

in the second , the detector gradually picked up gamma rays from a marble of heu as it was brought closer to the detector .

because the marble had much more thickness and much less surface area than the heu foil , there was considerable self - shielding , greatly reducing the gamma - ray output .

in the third , the marble of heu was placed in a capsule of a high - z material , lead , perhaps 1 cm thick , and the detector picked up nothing even when the capsule was touching the window of the detector .

sources of radiation other than snm complicate detection .

background radiation from naturally occurring radioactive material , such as thorium , uranium , and their decay products such as radon , is present everywhere , albeit often in trace amounts .

cosmic rays generate low levels of neutrons .

some legitimate commercial goods contain radioactive material , such as ceramics ( which may contain uranium ) , kitty litter ( which may contain thorium and uranium ) , and gas mantles made of thorium oxide .

other radioactive isotopes are widely used in medicine and industry .

finally , a terrorist group might conceivably place radioactive material in a shipment containing a weapon or snm chosen so as to mask the unique gamma - ray spectrum of snm by presenting a spectrum of several known innocuous materials with peaks to interfere with those of snm or that have an intensity much higher than snm .

for purposes of this report , a signature is a property by which a substance ( in particular , snm ) may be detected or identified .

a nuclear weapon or its fissile material may be detected by various signatures , some of which are discussed next .

atomic number , abbreviated "z," is the number of protons in an atom's nucleus .

for example , the z's of beryllium , iron , and uranium are 4 , 26 , and 92 , respectively .

z is a property of individual atoms .

in contrast , density is a bulk property , and is expressed as mass per unit volume , eg , grams per cubic centimeter .

the densities of beryllium , iron , and uranium are 1.848 , 7.874 , and 19.050 g / cc , respectively .

at its most basic , density measures how many neutrons and protons ( which constitute almost all of an atom's mass ) of a substance are packed into a volume .

in general , the densest materials are those of high z .

these properties may be used to detect uranium and plutonium .

uranium is the densest and highest - z element found in nature ( other than in trace quantities ) ; plutonium has a slightly higher z ( 94 ) , and its density varies from slightly more to slightly less than uranium , depending on its crystal structure .

some detection methods discussed in chapter 2 , such as effective z , make use of z ; and some , such as radiography and muon tomography , make use of z and density combined .

an object's opacity to a photon beam depends on its z and density , the amount of material in the path of the beam , and the energy of the photons .

gamma rays and x - rays can penetrate more matter than can lower - energy photons , but dense , high - z material absorbs or scatters them .

thus a way to detect an object , such as a bomb , in a container is to beam in x - rays or gamma rays to create a radiograph ( an opacity map ) like a medical x - ray .

background gamma radiation is ubiquitous .

since many materials , including snm , emit gamma radiation , elevated levels of gamma radiation may or may not indicate the presence of snm .

cosmic rays and naturally occurring uranium generate a very low background flux of neutrons .

most materials do not emit neutrons spontaneously , but heu and plutonium do .

the spontaneous emission rates for 1 kg of plutonium and 1 kg of of heu are 60,000 neutrons per second and 3 neutrons per second , respectively .

as a result , neutrons above the cosmic ray background coming from a cargo container would be suspicious .

for heu , however , the rate is not too different from the background and thus is not a strong signature .

each isotope has a unique gamma ray spectrum .

for example , uranium - 235 produces gamma ray peaks at several dozen discrete energy levels .

this spectrum of energies is well characterized for each isotope , and is the only way to identify a particular isotope outside a well - equipped laboratory .

as a result , any detector with a variant of "spectrum" or "identify" in its name , such as advanced spectroscopic portal or radioactive isotope identification device , relies on identifying isotopes by their gamma - ray spectra .

heu presents other gamma ray signatures as well .

heu contains some u - 238 , which produces a gamma - ray peak at an energy of 1.001 mev .

while these gamma rays are energetic , they would be hard to detect unless the detector is very close to the uranium because they are emitted at a very low rate , and could easily be missed because trace amounts of naturally occurring uranium , such as in clay and soil , also generate 1.001 mev gamma rays .

heu derived from spent nuclear reactor fuel rods also contains small amounts of uranium - 232 , which is formed when uranium is bombarded with neutrons in a nuclear reactor .

uranium - 232 decays through a long decay chain of short - lived isotopes to thallium - 208 , which has a gamma ray of 2.614 mev , one of the highest - energy gamma rays produced by radioactive decay , so it is distinctive as well as highly penetrating ; it takes 2.041 cm of lead to attenuate half the gamma rays of that energy .

thallium - 208 is also a decay product of naturally occurring thorium - 232 .

u - 232 decays very much faster than u - 235 or u - 238 ( half - lives of 69 years , 700 million years , and 4.5 billion years , respectively ) , and thallium - 208 decays even faster ( half - life of 3 minutes ) , so even a very small amount of u - 232 produces many gamma rays .

similarly , wgpu presents various gamma ray signatures because it is a mix of several isotopes of plutonium and their decay products .

snm is unique in that it can fission when struck by low - energy ( "thermal" ) neutrons .

like some other materials , it also fissions when struck by high - energy gamma rays .

in a sufficiently large mass of snm , the neutrons ( usually two or three ) released by the fission of one atom cause other atoms to fission , releasing more neutrons in a chain reaction .

snm also fissions spontaneously , and neutrons released by these fissions have a non - negligible probability of causing other snm atoms to fission .

characteristic products of fission offer indications that snm is present .

these products include neutrons that may be emitted over periods ranging from nanoseconds to many seconds , whether as a result of spontaneous fission or of fission induced by gamma rays or neutrons , and gamma rays emitted within nanoseconds of induced fission .

when u - 235 and pu - 239 fission , they release a nearly instantaneous burst of 2 or 3 neutrons and 6 to 10 gamma rays .

these prompt neutrons are emitted in a continuum of energies , with an average of about 1 to 2 mev , and are termed fast or high - energy neutrons .

the prompt gamma rays are also emitted in a spectrum of many narrow lines .

only snm will fission when struck by low - energy neutrons , so a beam of low - energy neutrons that results in a burst of neutrons and gamma rays indicates the presence of snm .

a beam of high - energy gamma rays ( with energy greater than 6 mev ) will also cause snm to fission .

however , that beam will also cause other materials to fission , including natural uranium , so emission of a burst of neutrons and gamma rays resulting from interrogation by a high - energy gamma ray beam is a possible , but not a definitive , indicator by itself of the presence of snm .

when u - 235 or pu - 239 atoms fission , they split into two smaller fission fragments in any of approximately 40 ways for each isotope , resulting in "[s]omething like 80 different fission fragments" for u - 235 or pu - 239 .

these fission fragments are unstable and decay radioactively into isotopes of various elements .

fission is a statistical process , so that fissioning of a great many u - 235 or pu - 239 atoms produces a complex mixture of some 300 isotopes of 36 elements .

these isotopes have a great range of half - lives , from a small fraction of a second to millions of years , but the isotopes with a half - life greater than approximately 30 years emit only very low levels of radiation .

this process produces thousands of times more gamma rays than neutrons .

since much cargo consists of low - z material and since gamma rays penetrate low - z cargo much more readily than do neutrons , many more gamma rays than neutrons resulting from fission of snm escape containers holding such cargo .

higher - z cargo will attenuate the gamma rays more than the neutrons .

some of the gamma rays have energies exceeding those of thallium - 208 , 2.614 mev , the highest energy typically observed in natural backgrounds .

"their high energy makes this gamma radiation a characteristic of fission , very distinct from normal radioactive background that typically produces no gamma radiation exceeding an energy of 2.6 mev. .

note that some other isotopes , such as u - 238 and pu - 240 , are "fissionable," that is , they can undergo fission only when struck by high - energy ( fast ) neutrons .

the high - energy gamma rays resulting from fission are a strong indicator of the presence of snm .

the intensity of the neutron and gamma - ray flux over a short period , caused by rapid decay of many of the fission products , and the prompt response to a probe , are distinctive signatures as well .

there is another time - delay signature .

a neutron beam makes atoms of some other elements radioactive , in particular transforming some atoms of stable oxygen - 16 to radioactive nitrogen - 16 .

researchers at lawrence livermore national laboratory conducted experiments in which they bombarded a target of natural uranium ( 99.3% u - 238 , 0.7% u - 235 ) inside a cargo container with a neutron beam , and recorded the gamma ray spectrum resulting from radioactive decay .

after they turned off the neutron beam , they found that the high - energy portion of the spectrum was dominated by gamma rays from the decay of nitrogen - 16 for the first 15 seconds , and after that the dominant signal was from the decay of radioactive fission products , with an average half - life of about 55 seconds .

this time difference is an indicator of the presence of snm .

interrogation of snm with a beam of neutrons or high - energy photons to induce fission produces another unique signature .

while the beam may cause neutrons to be emitted immediately through various nuclear reactions ( eg , fission ) , materials other than snm will not support a nuclear chain reaction .

in contrast , even a subcritical mass of snm can sustain a chain reaction for a short time .

as a result , fission in a multi - kilogram block of snm will continue to produce neutrons for a short time after the beam has been turned off , with the intensity and duration of the neutron flux depending on the amount of snm and the cargo loading .

this delayed neutron time signature is called differential die - away , is measured on the order of a thousandth of a second after the beam is turned off , and is specific to u - 235 and pu - 239 ( and , rarely , other fissile isotopes ) .

this technique depends on the detection of the prompt fission signal , but hydrogenous materials such as those found in cargo tend to attenuate this signal , and there may be background neutrons , so that some difficult scans may require more time , possibly two minutes , and some may not be feasible .

a subcritical mass of snm is too small to support a supercritical chain reaction because too many neutrons escape the snm for the number of neutrons to increase exponentially .

nonetheless , chain reactions do occur in snm , triggered by a neutron from spontaneous fission or a background neutron .

these chain reactions may last several to dozens of generations , producing a burst of neutrons and gamma rays over some billionths of a second .

no other material produces this signature .

in contrast , most background neutrons and gamma rays arrive at a detector in a random pattern .

the one exception is that neutrons generated as cosmic rays strike matter also tend to be generated in bursts ; work is under way to try to differentiate between bursts of neutrons induced by cosmic rays and those generated by fission chains .

detection of this signature is therefore a strong sign of the presence of snm .

unlike differential die - away or delayed neutrons and gamma rays , this signature can be detected with passive means provided the snm is not well shielded .

this technique places great demands on detector technology but can be done with state - of - the - art electronics .

chapter 2 discusses in detail two other signatures — deflection of muons and nuclear resonance fluorescence and absorption — and their detection .

detection involves using detector elements to gain data , converting data to usable information through algorithms , and acting on that information through concept of operations , or conops .

detectors , algorithms , and conops are the eyes and ears , brains , and hands of nuclear detection: effective detection requires all three .

since photons or neutrons have no electrical charge , their energy is converted to electrical pulses that can be measured .

this is the task of detectors , discussed next .

the pulses are fed to algorithms .

an algorithm , such as a computer program , is a finite set of logical steps for solving a problem .

for nuclear detection , an algorithm must process data into usable information fast enough to be of use to an operator .

it receives data from a detector's hardware , such as pulses representing the time and energy of each photon arriving at the detector .

it converts the pulses to a format that a user can understand , such as displaying a gamma ray spectrum , identifying the material creating the spectrum , or flashing "alarm. .

every detector uses one or more algorithms .

improvements to algorithms can contribute as much as hardware improvements to detector capability .

algorithms may be improved in many ways , such as by a better understanding of the physics of a problem , or by improving the computers in detection equipment so they can process more elaborate algorithms .

conops may be divided into two parts .

one specifies how a detection unit is to be operated to gain data .

how many containers must the unit scan per hour ? .

how close would a detector be to a container ? .

shall the unit screen cargo in a single pass , or shall it be used for primary screening , with suspicious cargo sent for a more detailed secondary screening ? .

a second part details how the data are to be used .

what happens if the equipment detects a possible threat ? .

which alarms are to be resolved on - site and which are to be referred to off - site experts ? .

under what circumstances would a port or border crossing be closed ? .

more generally , how is the flow of data managed , in both directions ? .

what types of intelligence information do cbp agents receive , and how do data from detection systems flow to federal , state , and local officials for analysis or action ? .

while this report does not focus on conops because is not a technology , it is an essential part of nuclear detection .

a discussion of how detectors work is essential to understanding the capabilities and limits of current detectors and how detectors may be improved .

detecting each signature of a nuclear weapon or snm requires a detector that is appropriate for that signature .

further , there is a hierarchy of gamma ray detectors .

the simplest can only detect the presence of gamma radiation .

the next step up , detectors with low energy resolution , have a modest capability to identify an isotope by its gamma ray spectrum .

next , detectors with high energy resolution have very accurate isotope identification capabilities .

more sophisticated detector systems can also identify the presence of snm by the time pattern of gamma rays released when such material fissions .

the most sophisticated detector systems can produce an image showing where each gamma ray came from .

detectors require a signal - to - noise ratio sufficient to permit detection .

that is , they must be able to extract the true signal ( such as a gamma - ray spectrum ) from noise ( spurious signals caused , for example , by background radioactive material or by imperfect detectors or data - processing algorithms ) .

two concepts are central to gamma - ray detector sensitivity: detection efficiency and spectral resolution .

the former refers to the amount of signal a detector records .

one aspect of detection efficiency is the fraction of the total emitted radiation that the detector receives .

radiation diminishes according to an inverse square law ; that is , the intensity of radiation ( eg , number of photons per unit of area ) from a source is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the source .

since a lump of snm emits radiation in all directions , moving a detector closer to snm , or increasing its size , increases efficiency .

reducing the cost of the active material in a detector may increase efficiency by making a larger sensor area affordable .

another aspect is the fraction of the radiation striking the detector that creates a detectable signal .

for example , a detector that can absorb 90% of the energy of photons striking it is more efficient than one that can absorb 10% .

a more efficient detector will collect information faster , reducing the time it takes to screen a cargo container .

spectral resolution refers to the sharpness with which a detector presents energy peaks in a radiation spectrum .

a graph of the gamma - ray spectrum of a radioactive isotope plots energy levels along the horizontal axis of the graph and the number of counts per unit time at each energy level along the vertical axis .

a perfect device would record the energy levels of a gamma - ray spectrum as a graph with vertical "needles" of zero width because each radioactive isotope releases gamma rays only at specific energy levels .

in practice , however , detectors are not perfect , and 186-kev gamma rays will be recorded as a bell curve centered on 186 kev .

the narrower the spread of the bell curve , the more useful the information is .

polyvinyl toluene ( pvt ) , a plastic that is widely used in radiation detectors because it can be fielded in large sheets at low cost , is sensitive but has poor resolution , i.e. , extremely wide bell curves for each gamma - ray energy level .

as a result , while pvt can detect radiation , the peaks from gamma rays of different energy levels blur together , making it impossible to identify an isotope .

figure 3 makes this point ; it shows the spectra of 90% u - 235 and background radiation as recorded by a pvt detector .

at the other extreme , high - purity germanium ( hpge ) produces very sharp peaks , permitting clear identification of specific isotopes .

these detectors are expensive , heavy , have a small detector area , and must be cooled to extremely low temperatures with liquid nitrogen or a mechanical system , making them less than ideal for use in the field .

however , mechanically cooled hpge detectors weighing some 2.5 kg are being developed for field use .

figure 4 shows the spectrum of pu - 239 as recorded by various types of detectors with better resolution than pvt .

various means can improve detector sensitivity .

one type of semiconductor detector crystal is cadmium - zinc - telluride , or czt .

the peak on the far right of each spectrum in figure 5 shows improvement in the resolution of the gamma - ray spectrum for cesium - 137 ( a radioactive isotope ) taken with different czt detectors that , for the years indicated , were at the high end of sensitivity .

the top line shows a spectrum taken with a capture device developed by ev products ( 1995-1998 ) ; the middle line shows a spectrum taken with a coplanar - grid device developed by lawrence berkeley national laboratory ( 2000-2003 ) ; and the bottom line shows a spectrum taken with a 3-d device developed by the university of michigan ( 2008 ) .

better czt crystals and better ways to overcome limitations of these crystals have both improved sensitivity in various ways: researchers have been able to grow larger crystals .

czt crystal volume for the three devices was 1.00 cc in 1995-1998 , 2.25 cc in 2000-2003 , and 6.00 cc at present .

larger crystals are more efficient , i.e. , they can capture more photons , and more of the energy of individual photons , permitting more counts per unit time ( i.e. , more data ) .

crystal quality has improved .

a more uniform crystal structure and fewer impurities allow for better transport of the photon - induced electrical charge through the crystal and thus more accurate determination of the energy of each photon .

university of michigan researchers have constructed three - dimensional arrays of czt crystals , permitting their detector to determine the 3-d coordinates of each individual gamma ray photon as it interacts with the czt crystal , in turn permitting location as well as identification of gamma - ray sources .

electronics have improved .

researchers have made significant progress in reducing the noise inherent in electronic circuits ( application - specific integrated circuits ) that translate signals from the interaction of photons with czt into a form in which algorithms can process them .

reducing the noise in these circuits permits more accurate measurement of gamma - ray energy .

for example , a circuit developed in 2007 by brookhaven national laboratory has improved energy resolution substantially , and other advances in detector electronics in the last few years enable electronic components to compensate for defects in the crystals ( analogous to adaptive optics in astronomy ) .

algorithms to reconstruct the signal from gamma rays have improved , also permitting more accurate measurement of gamma ray energy .

another factor that affects the ability to detect snm is the time available for a detector to scan a container or other object , often called "integration time. .

detectors build up radiography or tomography images , or gamma - ray spectra , over time .

more time enables a detector to have more photons per pixel ( in the case of radiography ) or per bin ( in the case of gamma - ray spectra ) , or more muons per voxel .

more time also enables a neutron detector to detect more neutrons and measure their times of arrival , as discussed below , helping to determine if the neutrons are generated by snm or by background materials .

more time thus provides better data , which provides for better separation of signal from noise , better separation of different sources of radiation , fewer false alarms , and a better chance of detecting and identifying shielded threat material .

figure 16 illustrates how one system builds up an image over time .

from a physics perspective , then , increasing integration time improves the accuracy of the result , but from a port operator's perspective , longer integration time impedes the flow of commerce , which costs money , so a balance must be struck between these two opposed goals .

this balance may be stated formally in a concept of operations ( discussed in more detail below ) , which specifies how , among other things , a detection system will be operated ; detection equipment must be designed to operate within the time required , and port operations must allow that amount of time for scans .

still another means of improving the ability to detect snm is to increase the spatial resolution of a detector .

according to dtra , this is easily demonstrated in the example of a shielded versus unshielded radiation detector .

unshielded detectors are sensitive to radiation impinging on it in all directions , which is characteristic of the nature of naturally - occurring background radiation .

by adding shielding , a detector's field - of - view can be controlled , and background radiation levels reduced , increasing the signal - to - noise ratio for the detector in the direction the detector is aimed .

gamma rays do not have an electrical charge , but an electrical signal is needed to measure them .

there are two main ways by which a gamma ray can be turned into electrical energy .

one is with a scintillator material , such as pvt or sodium iodide .

when a single higher energy photon , such as a gamma ray , strikes the scintillator and interacts with it , the scintillator emits a large number of photons of lower energy , usually visible light ( "optical photons" ) .

a photomultiplier tube ( pmt ) converts the optical photons to electrons , then multiplies the electrons to generate a measurable pulse of electricity whose voltage is proportional to the number of optical photons , which is in turn proportional to the energy deposited by the gamma ray .

an electronic device called a multi - channel analyzer sorts the pulse into a "bin" depending on its energy and increases the number of counts in that bin by one .

a software package then draws a histogram with energy level on the horizontal axis and number of counts on the vertical axis .

the histogram is the gamma ray spectrum for that isotope .

in contrast , a semiconductor material , such as hpge , turns gamma rays directly into an electrical signal proportional to the gamma - ray energy deposited .

a voltage is applied across the semiconductor material , with one side of the material being the positive electrode and the other being the negative electrode .

when a gamma ray strikes the material , it knocks some electrons loose from the semiconductor's crystal lattice .

the voltage sweeps these electrons to the positive electrode .

their motion produces an electric current whose voltage is proportional to the energy of each gamma ray .

each pulse of current is then sorted into a bin depending on its voltage and the spectrum is computed as described above .

this approach , with either type of detector , is used to detect the various gamma - ray signatures described earlier .

however , the requirements for detecting time signatures varies somewhat .

because prompt gamma rays are emitted so quickly , identifying them requires the ability to record time of arrival to several billionths of a second .

delayed gamma rays of interest are generated over a period of tens of seconds , so the ability to record precise time of arrival is less important .

detecting fission chain time signature requires a high - efficiency detector because long fission chains are relatively rare .

thus to detect snm rapidly , the detector must have a high efficiency for detecting every fission chain .

while the delayed emissions from fission chains are too weak to detect passively , fission chain time signature focuses on detecting the prompt emissions from fission , which are stronger .

high efficiency is also important for neutron and gamma - ray interrogation , but the emphasis is less stringent because far more fissions are induced ( i.e. , the signal is stronger ) .

detecting nuclear resonance fluorescence requires high - resolution detectors in order to differentiate between the various materials being analyzed .

neutrons , like photons , do not have an electrical charge , but the two interact with matter differently .

photons interact chiefly with electrons , while neutrons interact with atomic nuclei .

as a result , neutrons are counted by a different process .

a common neutron detector is a tube of helium - 3 gas connected to a high - voltage power supply , with positively and negatively charged plates or wires in the tube .

in its rest state , current cannot pass through the helium because it acts as an insulator .

when a low - energy neutron passes through the tube , it is absorbed by a helium - 3 atom , producing a triton ( 1 proton and 2 neutrons ) and a proton .

these particles are highly energetic and lose their energy by knocking electrons off other helium - 3 atoms .

positively charged ions of helium - 3 move to the negative plate , while electrons move to the positive plate .

since electric current is the movement of charged particles , these particles generate a tiny electric current that is measured and counted .

neutrons are emitted as a continuum of energies .

while the mean energy of each neutron spectrum varies somewhat from one isotope to the next , neutron energy spectra do not have lines representing discrete energies as with gamma rays .

moreover , neutrons lose energy as they collide with low - z material , further blurring their spectra .

thus neutron spectra are of little value for identifying isotopes .

instead , the total neutron count is an important means of identifying snm because only snm gives off neutrons spontaneously in significant numbers , though some neutron background is generated mainly when cosmic rays knock neutrons off atoms .

several other methods of detecting snm by neutron emission , discussed above , rely on the time pattern in which a group of neutrons arrives .

several systems detect neutrons with tubes filled with helium - 3 ( he - 3 ) , a standard method .

doe obtains he - 3 as a byproduct from the decay of tritium used in nuclear warheads .

with the decades - long decline in numbers of warheads and a hiatus in tritium production for many years , there is little new supply of he - 3 .

doe plans to supply customers with 10,000 liters of he - 3 a year , with a starting bid price expected to be around $72 per liter , and states , "this appears short of what customers are requesting. .

 ( russia sells he - 3 to u.s. companies , but quantities are proprietary and not available. ) .

deploying he - 3 neutron detection systems in large numbers would require a considerable amount of he - 3 .

customs and border protection ( cbp ) states that "based on our rpm [radiation portal monitor] deployments cbp would need approximately 2500 [detector] units to cover sea and land borders. .

 ( data for number of units needed for air cargo are not available. ) .

given the shortage and cost of he - 3 , deployment of neutron detectors using large amounts of he - 3 , or large numbers of units requiring small amounts of he - 3 , does not appear feasible .

alternative neutron detection systems are possible .

they include tubes coated with boron - 10 or lithium - 6 , tubes filled with boron - 10 trifluoride ( a toxic gas ) , nanocomposite scintillators , and "neutron straws," thin tubes being developed commercially under sponsorship of the defense threat reduction agency .

substituting any of these technologies for he - 3 in a system would necessitate re - engineering the system's neutron detectors , revising algorithms , conducting tests , perhaps modifying the resulting system for operational conditions , and so on .

those changes have the potential to add delay and affect system performance ( for better or worse ) , though given the high cost of he - 3 ( about $2.7 million for 38,000 liters ) they might well reduce cost .

photons of sufficiently high energy can penetrate solid objects .

denser , higher - z material within a solid object absorbs photons of lower energy and scatters photons of higher energy .

for cargo scanning , a fan - shaped planar beam of photons is sent through a cargo container as the container passes through the beam , and a detector array on the other side consisting of semiconductor or scintillator material records the opacity of each pixel to the photons .

an algorithm then creates a two - dimensional opacity map of the contents of the container and displays it as an image on a computer screen .

increasing the energy of photons allows them to penetrate more material .

radiography is used to search cargo containers for terrorist nuclear weapons , among other things .

a radiograph would reveal clearly a large dense object , such as a nuclear weapon encased in lead shielding .

two limitations of radiography are noteworthy .

first , radiographs do not detect radiation and thus do not specifically detect snm , just high - density , high - z material .

second , if a terrorist bomb is placed in a shipment of dense or mixed objects , the image of the bomb might be hidden or a radiographic equipment operator might not notice it .

it would be much harder to detect a small piece of snm using radiography than to detect a bomb .

in order to understand the capabilities of detection systems , it is important to know their weaknesses as well as their strengths .

however , detailed discussions of means of evasion tend to become classified .

some references are made throughout this report , but some are withheld to keep the report unclassified .

in general , an enemy could use various means in an effort to defeat these technologies .

for example , high - z material absorbs and deflects gamma rays , low - z material deflects neutrons , radiography might miss a small piece of snm ( especially if mixed in with other dense material ) , and reducing the apparent density and z of snm by mixing it with a low - z substance reduces the deflection of muons .

further , enemy attempts to defeat one type of detection system may complicate plans or make a plot more vulnerable to detection by other means , as several examples illustrate .

 ( 1 ) the use of multiple detection systems that detect different phenomena are harder to defeat than those detecting one phenomenon only .

placing a lead shield around a bomb in order to attenuate gamma rays from plutonium would create a large , opaque image that would be quite obvious on a radiograph .

it is for this reason that congress mandated , "a container that was loaded on a vessel in a foreign port shall not enter the united states ( either directly or via a foreign port ) unless the container was scanned by nonintrusive imaging equipment and radiation detection equipment at a foreign port before it was loaded on a vessel. .

this restriction is to apply by july 1 , 2012 .

 ( 2 ) an enemy could attempt salvage fuzing , which would detonate a weapon if the weapon sensed attempts to detect it , such as with photon beams , or if it was tampered with .

however , salvage fuzing has various shortcomings .

it could result in a weapon detonating by accident or if it is scanned overseas .

it could detonate a weapon in a u.s. port , where it would do much less damage than in a city center .

 ( 3 ) enemy attempts to smuggle heu into the united states in order to avoid detection of a complete bomb would require fabricating the weapon inside this nation , which in turn could require such activities as smuggling other weapon components and purchase of specialized equipment , and could run the risk of accidents ( such as with explosives ) , any of which could provide clues to law enforcement personnel .

for these reasons , it is important to view technology development not only as advances in capabilities per se but also in the context of an offense - defense competition .

