the president's authority to issue pardons is delineated in article ii , section 2 , clause 1 of the constitution , which states: "the president shall ... have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offences against the united states , except in cases of impeachment. .

this express language itself implies the inherent limits of the pardon power .

first , the pardon power is limited to "offenses against the united states," preventing the president from intruding upon state criminal or civil proceedings .

likewise , the pardon power does not extend to "cases of impeachment," preventing presidential interference with congress's power to impeach .

absent these limitations , the president's authority to grant pardons is essentially unfettered .

for instance , a pardon may be bestowed at any time after the commission of an offense , irrespective of whether charges have actually been pressed .

also , a pardon may be issued subsequent to conviction and during the service of sentence .

additionally , a pardon may be granted after a sentence has been served , in order to restore the civil rights of the individual in question .

furthermore , the president may also pardon a large group of offenders , as was done subsequent to the civil war .

the establishment of the pardon power in the constitution was derived from english custom and the view of the framers that "there may be instances where , though a man offends against the letter of the law ... peculiar circumstances in his case may entitle him to mercy. .

further , this power was properly reposed in the president , according to alexander hamilton , as "one man appears to be a more eligible dispenser of the mercy of the government , than a body of men. .

in determining that the president should exercise the pardon power , the framers further decided that minimal limitations should be placed on the power .

for instance , the framers rejected a proposal that the senate have consent power over pardons .

the framers likewise rejected james madison's argument that treason should be excepted .

based upon this broad grant of authority under the constitution , the courts have traditionally held that the president's pardoning power may not be circumscribed by congress .

in ex parte garland , for instance , the supreme court held that the pardon power "is not subject to legislative control .

congress can neither limit the effect of his pardon , nor exclude from its exercise any class of offenders .

the benign prerogative of mercy reposed in him cannot be fettered by any legislative restrictions. .

the court repeated this maxim in united states v. klein ( "[t]o the executive alone is intrusted the power of pardon ; and it is granted without limit" ) , and again in ex parte grossman ( "[t]he executive can reprieve or pardon all offenses ... without modification or regulation by congress" ) .

finally , in schick v. reed , the court declared that the president's pardon power "flows from the constitution alone , not any legislative enactments," and "cannot be modified , abridged , or diminished by the congress. .

however , members of congress have introduced resolutions expressing the sense of congress that the president either should or should not grant pardons to certain individuals or groups of individuals .

members of congress have also proposed constitutional amendments that would restrict the president's pardon power .

it appears that the pardon power is generally used to pardon specific offenders for any of a broad range of crimes that might stem from a series of related events .

in the case of the pardon of president nixon , for instance , president ford issued a pardon "for all offenses ... which he ... has committed or may have committed or taken part in," precluding any prosecution of president nixon related to the watergate scandal .

another high - profile example of broad use of the pardon power is seen in president bush's pardon of individuals facing charges relating to the iran - contra affair .

specifically , president bush issued full pardons for six persons who had either pled guilty , been convicted , or were facing trial .

while the above examples indicate that pardons are often used to completely absolve a pardonee for his or her illegal act ( s ) , the inherent flexibility of the pardon power also establishes that the president may grant limited or conditional pardons .

this is seen primarily in the commutation of sentences , which has been described by the judiciary as an inherent power woven into the president's pardon authority .

in ex parte wells , for instance , the supreme court rejected the argument that the power to pardon did not include the authority to commute , declaring that "the mistake in the argument is , in considering an incident of the power to pardon the exercise of a new power , instead of its being a part of the power to pardon. .

the court went on to note that "[t]he power to offer a condition , without ability to enforce its acceptance , when accepted by the convict , is the substitution by himself , of a lesser punishment than the law has imposed upon him , and he cannot complain if the law executes the choice he has made. .

while the cases discussed above seem to establish conclusively the broad scope of the president's pardoning power , the actual legal effect of executive clemency is less clear .

specifically , courts have disagreed as to whether a pardon erases only the punishment for an offense , or whether a pardon also blots out the existence of an offender's guilt .

in united states v. wilson , for instance , chief justice marshall declared that a pardon "exempts the individual , on whom it is bestowed , from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed. .

the court's initial declaration that a pardon merely remits punishment was repudiated during the reconstruction era , however .

specifically , in ex parte garland , chief justice field declared that "a pardon reaches both the punishment prescribed for the offense and the guilt of the offender ; and when the pardon is full , it releases the punishment and blots out of existence the guilt , so that in the eye of the law the offender is as innocent as if he had never committed the offense .

if granted before conviction , it prevents any of the penalties and disabilities consequent upon conviction from attaching ; if granted after conviction , it removes the penalties and disabilities , and restores him to all his civil rights ; it makes him , as it were , a new man , and gives him a new credit and capacity. .

this broad interpretation of the pardoning power was subsequently narrowed by the court in the early part of the 20th century .

in carlesi v. new york , the court considered a situation where an individual who had received a presidential pardon was subsequently convicted of forgery in a state court .

upon conviction of the later offense , the individual was sentenced as a second offender , predicated upon the pardoned offense .

the supreme court approved of the basis for the increased sentence , stating: "... we must not be understood as in the slightest degree intimating that a pardon would operate to limit the power of the united states in punishing crimes against its authority to provide for taking into consideration past offenses committed by the accused as a circumstance of aggravation even although for such past offenses there had been a pardon granted. .

this view has adhered in the modern era .

in nixon v. united states , for instance , the court determined that "the granting of a pardon is in no sense an overturning of a judgment of conviction by some other tribunal ; it is an executive action that mitigates or sets aside punishment for a crime. .

this restricted view of the effect of a pardon was further reinforced in two cases stemming from the pardons of officials involved in the iran - contra affair .

in in re north , the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia held that a pardon did not remove an indictment from a former cia official's criminal record , precluding the recovery of attorneys fees under the ethics in government act .

a similar result was reached in in re elliott a br ams , where the d.c. court of appeals , sitting en banc , held that a pardon did not preclude an individual from being disciplined for professional misconduct .

these recent decisions seem to represent an implicit rejection of the sweeping language employed in garland , in favor of a return to the view that a pardon only nullifies the punishment for an offense , with the underlying guilt remaining in effect .

regarding the legal nature of warrants of pardon and their delivery and acceptance , it appears that pardons must be physically delivered before they become legally effective .

in united states v. wilson , chief justice marshall , writing for the court , stated: "a pardon is an act of grace , proceeding from the power entrusted with the execution of the laws , which exempts the individual , on whom it is bestowed , from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed .

it is the private , though official act of the executive magistrate , delivered to the individual for whose benefit it is intended ..." the court further declared: "a pardon is a deed , to the validity of which delivery is essential , and delivery is not complete , without acceptance. .

chief justice marshall went on to explain that a warrant of pardon must be pleaded like any other private instrument before any court may take judicial notice thereof .

this standard was reiterated in burdick v. united states , where the court stressed that the contention that pardons have automatic effect by their "mere issue" was rejected in wilson "with particularity and emphasis. .

the court further stressed in burdick that a pardon may be refused , since its acceptance may involve "consequences of even greater disgrace than those from which it purports to relieve. .

it also appears that a pardon may be revoked at any time prior to acceptance or delivery .

in in re de puy , the district court for the southern district of new york addressed a situation where a pardon issued by president johnson on march 3 , 1869 was revoked on march 6th , 1869 by incoming president grant .

the court held that the pardon had been properly withdrawn , as it had not yet been delivered to the grantee , a person on his behalf , or to the official with exclusive custody and control over him .

in an analogous situation , president george w. bush sent a master warrant of clemency to the pardon attorney on december 23 , 2008 for 19 individuals .

one day later , the president "directed the pardon attorney not to execute and deliver" a pardon to one of the individuals , isaac r. toussie , a real estate developer who plead guilty to mail fraud and using false documents to receive government - insured mortgages , after it was disclosed that his father had donated $28,500 to the republican national committee .

rather , the pardon attorney was given an opportunity to review the toussie case , which had not been reviewed according to department of justice regulations , discussed below , or the recipient of a recommendation by the pardon attorney on whether to grant clemency .

as a practical aid to the consideration of requests for presidential clemency , the office of the pardon attorney is charged with accepting and reviewing applications for clemency , and preparing recommendations as to the appropriate disposition of applications .

pursuant to department of justice regulations , a person "seeking executive clemency by pardon , reprieve , commutation of sentence , or remission of fine shall execute a formal petition" addressed to the president and submitted to the office of the pardon attorney in washington , d.c .

these regulations state that a petition for pardon should not be filed "until the expiration of a waiting period of at least five years after the date of the release of the petitioner from confinement or , in case no prison sentence was imposed , until the expiration of a period of at least five years after the date of the conviction of the petitioner. .

furthermore , the regulations state that "[g]enerally , no petition should be submitted by a person who is on probation , parole , or supervised release. .

after a petition for executive clemency is received , an investigation is conducted by employing the services of appropriate governmental agencies , such as the federal bureau of investigation .

subsequently , the pardon attorney presents the petition and related material to the attorney general via the associate attorney general , along with a recommendation as to the proper disposition of the petition .

in turn , the attorney general reviews the petition and all related information , and makes the final decision as to whether the petition merits approval or disapproval by the president .

this recommendation is then submitted to the president in writing .

pursuant to regulations , the petition for clemency , as well as all "reports , memoranda , and communications submitted or furnished in connection with the consideration" of a petition are generally available only to the officials involved in the proceedings .

however , these documents may be made available for whole or partial inspection , where the attorney general determines that "their disclosure is required by law or the ends of justice. .

it is important to note that these regulations do not appear to impose rigid restrictions on the pardon attorney's ability to consider petitions for pardon , but , rather , are identified as being advisory in nature .

indeed , these regulations have been cited by the courts as being "primarily intended for the internal guidance of the personnel of the department of justice. .

furthermore , it is important to note that the aforementioned regulations do not have any binding effect , do not create any legally enforceable rights in persons applying for clemency , and do not circumscribe the president's "plenary power under the constitution to grant pardons and reprieves" to any individual he deems fit , irrespective of whether an application has been filed .

