o n on february 13 , 2009 , both the house and the senate passed the conference version of h.r .

1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , hereafter referred to as the "conference version" ) .

the primary purposes of the arra focus on promoting economic recovery , assisting those most affected by the recession , improving economic efficiency by "spurring technological advances in science and health," investing in infrastructure , and stabilizing state and local government budgets .

the house had previously passed its version of h.r .

1 ( hereafter referred to as the "house bill" ) on january 28 , 2009 , while the senate passed s.amdt .

570 , an amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

1 ( hereafter referred to as the senate bill ) , on february 10 , 2009 .

under the house bill and the senate bill , funds would have been provided to several existing workforce development programs administered by the u.s. department of labor ( dol ) , including programs authorized by the workforce investment act ( wia ) .

the conference version provides $4.81 billion in funding for these workforce development programs .

this report provides a brief overview of the key provisions related to workforce development programs administered by dol that were included in the conference version under division a , title viii , department of labor .

it also provides estimates of state grants for programs for which these estimates are relevant and for which data needed to produce the estimates are available .

the estimates are shown in appendix tables that present state - by - state allocations for adult , youth , and dislocated worker programs .

it also includes a discussion of relevant provisions that were included in the house - and senate - passed versions of h.r .

1 .

under the house bill , an additional $5.0 billion would have been provided for existing workforce development and related programs administered by dol ; the senate bill would have provided $3.93 billion for these same programs .

the conference version provides $4.81 billion for workforce development programs .

table 1 gives an overview of the specific funding provided under the house and senate bills and the conference version .

the remainder of this report provides a more detailed discussion of the specific funding provisions .

the house and senate bills would have provided , and the conference version did provide , funding for a number of existing workforce development programs , including the three state formula grant programs that provide funding for youth , adults , and dislocated workers — title i - b of the wia .

other programs authorized by the wia will receive funding from the conference version ( and would have received funding under the house and senate bills ) : national reserve ( wia title i - d , section 173 ) , youthbuild ( wia title i - d , section 173a ) , and pilot and demonstration programs ( wia title i - d , section 171 ) .

additional workforce development programs provided for in the arra include state unemployment insurance and employment service operations , title v of the older americans act of 1965 , and dol management .

provisions applicable to each of these programs are discussed below .

the workforce investment act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-220 ) provides job training and related services to unemployed and underemployed individuals .

wia programs are administered by the dol , primarily through its employment and training administration ( eta ) .

state and local wia training and employment activities are provided through a system of one - stop career centers .

authorization of appropriations under wia expired in fy2003 but is annually extended through appropriations acts .

wia authorizes numerous job training programs , including: state formula grants for youth , adult , and dislocated worker employment and training activities ; job corps ; and national programs , including the native american program , the migrant and seasonal farmworker program , the veterans' workforce investment program , responsible reintegration for young offenders , the prisoner reentry program , community - based job training grants , and youthbuild .

in fy2008 , programs and activities noted above were funded through the wia at $5.2 billion , including $3.1 billion for state formula grants for adult , youth , and dislocated worker training and employment activities .

this section discusses wia title i programs that received additional funding through the arra .

where appropriate , appendix tables provide estimates of the amounts that states will receive .

the adult program provides training and related services to individuals ages 18 and older through formula grants allocated to states , which in turn allocate funds to local entities .

any individual may receive "core" services ( eg , job search assistance ) .

to receive "intensive" services ( eg , individual career planning and job training ) , an individual must have received core services and need intensive services to become employed or to obtain or retain employment that allows for self - sufficiency .

to receive training services ( eg , occupational skills training ) , an individual must have received intensive services and need training services to become employed or to obtain or retain employment that allows for self - sufficiency .

both the house and senate bills would have provided an additional $500 million for title i - b grants to states for adult employment and training activities , which would have been available for obligation on the date of enactment of the arra .

the senate bill would have required that priority for use of these funds be given to recipients of public assistance and other low - income individuals for intensive services and training .

the house bill , however , did not indicate prioritization for use of funds under this section of the act .

the conference version provides an additional $500 million for title i - b grants to states for adult employment and training activities .

similar to the senate bill , the conference version requires that priority for use of these funds be given to recipients of public assistance and other low - income individuals for intensive services and training .

funds for adult employment and training are allocated through the state grant formulas .

estimated state grants were calculated using these formulas after reserving 0.25% of the total appropriation for the outlying areas ( as is done when making regular title i - b allocations ) .

appendix table a - 1 details the results of these calculations .

the youth program provides training and related services to low - income youth ages 14-21 through formula grants allocated to states , which , in turn , allocate funds to local entities .

both the house and senate bills would have provided a total of $1.2 billion for grants for youth activities , including summer employment , which would be available for obligation on the date of enactment of the arra .

each measure includes provisions affecting the expenditure of these funds: the house and senate bills specified that no portion of this additional funding would be available for youth opportunity grants .

the house and senate bills would have changed the age for an "eligible youth" in these programs from 21 to 24 .

the house bill would have stipulated that the only performance measure to be used in assessing the effectiveness of summer jobs for youth is attainment of basic skills and , as appropriate , work readiness or occupational skills .

the senate bill would have required the use of the same performance indicator but would have applied it to all youth activities supported with funds from this section .

the conference version provides $1.2 billion for grants for youth activities and specifies that: no portion of this additional funding is available for youth opportunity grants ; the age for an "eligible youth" in these programs from will increase from 21 to 24 years of age ; the only performance measure to be used in assessing the effectiveness of summer employment for youth is attainment of basic skills and , as appropriate , work readiness or occupational skills ; and the formula allocation for grants provided under this section is to remain the same as if the total allocation were less than $1 billion .

appendix table a - 2 provides estimated state grants under this program .

a majority of wia dislocated worker funds are allocated by formula grants to states ( which in turn allocate funds to local entities ) to provide training and related services to individuals who have lost their jobs and are unlikely to return to those jobs or similar jobs in the same industry .

the remainder of the appropriation is reserved by dol for a national reserve account , which in part provides for national emergency grants to states or local entities ( as specified under section 173 ) .

both the house and senate bills would have provided a total of $1.0 billion for formula grants to states for employment and training activities for dislocated workers , which would have been available for obligation on the date of enactment of the arra .

the house bill would have provided a total of $500 million for the dislocated workers national reserve for grants to eligible entities serving areas of high unemployment or high poverty and experiencing major economic dislocations .

additionally , the house bill would have directed the secretary of labor to ensure that applicants for these funds demonstrate the manner in which supportive services ( e.g .

income support , child care ) necessary for participation in job training would be provided .

the senate bill would have provided a total of $450 million for the dislocated workers national reserve , $200 million of which would have been for national emergency grants .

additionally , the senate bill would have directed the remaining $250 million for competitive grants to train workers for high growth and emerging industry sectors ( see details in section on " title i - d grants for high growth and emerging industry sectors ," below ) .

the conference version provides a total of $1.25 billion for formula grants to states for employment and training for dislocated workers .

in addition , the conference version provides $200 million for the dislocated workers national reserve , which is used for technical assistance , projects , and emergency grants .

appendix table a - 3 provides estimated state grants under this program .

this competitive grant program funds projects that provide education and construction skills training for disadvantaged youth .

since its inception in 1992 , the program was administered by the department of housing and urban development , but was moved to dol by the youthbuild transfer act ( p.l .

109-281 ) , effective for fy2007 .

participating youth work primarily through mentorship and apprenticeship programs to rehabilitate and construct housing for homeless and low - income families .

both the house and senate bills would have provided additional funding for youthbuild , which would be available for obligation on the date of enactment of the arra .

the house bill would have provided $50 million for youthbuild activities , but , unlike the senate bill , did not specify any stipulations on expenditures .

the senate bill would have provided $100 million for youthbuild grants .

however , the senate bill would have allowed , in program years 2008 and 2009 , participation for individuals who have dropped out of high school and re - enrolled in an alternative school .

in addition , the senate bill would have allowed a local youthbuild board to award a training contract to an institution of higher education if such a choice would facilitate the training of multiple individuals in high - demand occupations .

the conference version provides $50 million for youthbuild and , similar to the senate bill , allows , in program years 2008 and 2009 , participation for individuals who have dropped out of high school and re - enrolled in an alternative school , if that re - enrollment is part of a "sequential service strategy" ( see footnote 8 ) .

funds for this program would be distributed by a competitive grant process to provide worker training and placement in high growth and emerging industry sectors .

the house bill would have provided a total of $750 million for these grants .

of the total proposed allotment in the house bill , $500 million would have been reserved for research , labor exchange , and job training projects that prepare workers for careers in the following energy efficiency and renewable energy industries: energy - efficient building , construction , and retrofits industries ; renewable electric power industry ; energy - efficient and advanced drive train vehicle industry ; biofuels industry ; deconstruction and materials use industry ; energy efficiency assessment industry serving the residential , commercial , or industrial sectors ; and manufacturers that produce sustainable products using environmentally sustainable processes and materials .

in the house bill , the remainder of $250 million would have been allocated on the basis of priority for projects preparing workers for careers in the health care industry .

the senate bill would have required the secretary of labor , in awarding the $250 million from the dislocated workers national reserve , to give priority to projects that prepare workers for careers in the energy efficiency and renewable energy industries listed above and for careers in the health care sector .

the conference version provides $750 million for competitive grants for worker training in high - growth and emerging sectors .

the conference version specifies that: of the $750 million , $500 million is reserved for research , labor exchange , and job training projects that prepare workers for careers in energy efficiency and renewable energy industries ( listed above ) ; the secretary of labor should give priority to projects in the health care industry when granting the remaining $250 million ; a local workforce investment board may award a training contract to an institution of higher education if such a choice would facilitate the training of multiple individuals in high - demand occupations ; and the $750 million is to remain available through june 10 , 2010 .

job corps is a residential job training program first established in 1964 that provides services to low - income individuals ages 16-24 primarily through contracts administered by dol with corporations and nonprofit organizations .

currently , there are 122 job corps centers in 48 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

on february 8 , 2007 , dol announced that three new centers will open , including the first centers in each of the remaining two states , new hampshire and wyoming .

the house bill would have provided a total of $300 million to the job corps program , and the senate bill would have provided $160 million for the job corps program .

both allocations would have been available for obligation on the date of enactment of the arra and would have remained available for obligation through june 30 , 2010 .

while both the house and senate bills would have allowed the secretary of labor to transfer up to 15% of the allocated funds for operational needs of job corps centers , the house and senate bills contained different stipulations: funds provided in the house bill would have been available for construction , rehabilitation , and acquisition of job corps centers ; in the senate bill , funds were to be used only for the construction , rehabilitation , or repair of facilities .

the house bill would have allowed a partial exception to the requirement to close an account after five years , in order to give priority to projects that can begin construction within 120 days of enactment of the act .

the house bill would also have given priority to activities that could start promptly and would have had the greatest impact on the energy efficiency of job corps facilities .

the house bill would have required the secretary of labor to report to the committee on appropriations in the house and senate on actual obligations , expenditures , and unobligated balances for each activity funded by this section .

the initial report would have been due by september 30 , 2009 , and quarterly thereafter .

the senate bill would have required the secretary of labor , within 90 days of enactment of the bill , to provide to the committee on appropriations in the house and senate an operating plan describing the uses of funds in this provision .

the conference version provides $250 million for the construction , rehabilitation , and acquisition of job corps centers , with the following provisions: the funds will remain available for obligation through june 30 , 2010 .

there will be a partial exception to the requirement to close an account after five years , in order to give priority to projects that can begin construction within 120 days of enactment of the act .

the secretary of labor is permitted to transfer up to 15% of the allocated funds for operational needs of job corps centers .

the secretary of labor is required to provide to the committee on appropriations in the house and senate an operating plan on the allocation of funds and a report on actual obligations , expenditures , and unobligated balances for each activity funded by this section .

the initial report is due by september 30 , 2009 , and quarterly thereafter .

in addition to adding funds to the job training programs in title i of wia , both the house and senate bills would have provided additional funding for three related programs: the house bill would have allocated $500 million for state employment services operations , 50% of which would have been allocated for reemployment services for unemployment insurance claimants .

in addition , the house bill would have altered the allocation formula for funds under this provision .

the senate bill would have allocated $400 million for these services , would have required that $250 million be allocated for reemployment services for unemployment insurance claimants , and would have required the secretary of labor to establish planning and reporting procedures to provide oversight of these funds .

both the house and senate bills would have allocated $120 million for the community service employment for older americans program , which would have been allotted in proportion to grantees' py2008 allocation within 30 days for the enactment of this legislation .

the house bill would have provided $80 million for dol departmental management for the enforcement of worker protection laws , oversight , and coordination activities related to the infrastructure and unemployment insurance investments in the arra .

the senate bill would have provided $3 million for the dol office of the inspector general to provide oversight and audit of programs , grants , and projects funded under this act .

the conference version also provides additional funding for three workforce development - related programs: $400 million for state employment services operations , $250 million of which must be used for reemployment services for unemployment insurance claimants ; it would also require the secretary of labor to establish planning and reporting procedures to provide oversight of these funds .

the funds are to remain available to states through september 30 , 2010 .

$120 million for the community service employment for older americans program , which is to be allotted in proportion to grantees' py2008 allocation within 30 days for the enactment of this legislation .

funds are to remain available through june 30 , 2010 .

$80 million for dol departmental management for the enforcement of worker protection laws , oversight , and coordination activities related to the infrastructure and unemployment insurance investments in the arra .

$6 million for the dol office of the inspector general to provide oversight and audit of programs , grants , and projects funded under this act .

