biochar — a charcoal produced under high temperatures using crop residues , animal manure , or other organic material — has the potential to offer multiple environmental benefits .

some contend that biochar can meet pressing environmental demands by sequestering large amounts of carbon in soil .

it is of interest to those seeking to sell or purchase carbon offsets , increase soil conservation efforts , improve crop yield , and produce renewable energy .

however , little is known about how biochar production systems could successfully be implemented and what the effect would be on long - term operations in the u.s. agriculture and forestry sectors .

some contend that it will be a considerable amount of time before this technology reaches its full potential .

studies underway at federal government research institutions and in academia are focused on ensuring that biochar production systems are a practical and reliable technology for producers to adopt .

biochar is a soil supplement that sequesters carbon in the soil and thus may help to mitigate global climate change .

it has the potential to curtail greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental hazards in the near term and to benefit agricultural producers as a soil amendment and source of renewable energy .

thus far , biochar use in the united states has been confined to small - scale applications reflective of the limited but growing number of researchers in this area over the last few years .

biochar is similar in appearance to potting soil or to a charred substance , depending on the feedstock ( figure 1 ) .

modern biochar production is based on an ancient amazon technique for creating a nutrient - rich soil , terra preta .

as a charcoal containing high levels of organic matter , biochar is formed from plant and crop residues or animal manure under pyrolysis conditions .

pyrolysis is the chemical breakdown of a substance under extremely high temperatures in the absence of oxygen .

the quantity and quality of biochar production depends on the feedstock , pyrolysis temperature , and pyrolysis processing time .

a "fast" pyrolysis ( ~500°c ) produces biochar in a matter of seconds , while a "slow" pyrolysis produces considerably more biochar but in a matter of hours .

biochar production via pyrolysis is considered a carbon - negative process because the biochar sequesters carbon while simultaneously enhancing the fertility of the soil on which the feedstock used to produce the bioenergy grows ( figure 2 ) .

the biochar production system is operated using energy produced by the system .

the three main outputs of a biochar production system are syngas , bio - oil , and biochar ( figure 3 ) .

according to a u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) agricultural research service ( ars ) official , an estimated $2.6 million was spent in 2010 on in - house biochar research by ars .

ars has multiple projects underway to ascertain biochar's value as a soil amendment given varying soil , climate , and cropping system conditions .

additionally , ars is examining feedstock types and pyrolysis conditions for biochar production .

ars estimates that the united states could use biochar to sequester 139 tg of carbon on an annual basis if it were to harvest and pyrolyze 1.3 billion tons of biomass .

