most americans with private group health insurance are covered through an employer , or through the employer of a family member .

in 2012 , about 61% of private employers offered health insurance coverage to their full - time employees , and most employers extended those health benefits to the families of their workers .

a recent study by the robert wood johnson foundation found that in 2012 , 59.5% of insured americans had their insurance through an employer .

when workers lose their jobs , they can also lose their health insurance .

if that health insurance is family coverage , then a worker's family members can also become uninsured .

title x of the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 ( cobra ; p.l .

99-272 ) requires employers who offer health insurance to continue coverage for their employees under certain circumstances .

congress enacted the legislation to expand access to coverage for at least those people who became uninsured as a result of changes in their employment or family status .

although the law allows employers to charge 102% of the group plan premium , this can be less expensive than similar coverage available in the individual insurance market .

the law affects private sector employer group health plans through amendments to the employee retirement income security act ( erisa ) and the internal revenue code .

cobra continuation coverage for employees of state and local governments is required under amendments to the public health service act .

continuation coverage similar to cobra is provided to federal employees and employees of the washington , dc , district government through the law authorizing the federal employees health benefits program under title 5 of the u.s. code .

before enactment of cobra , if an employee's job was terminated ( voluntarily or involuntarily ) , the insurance offered by the employer also ceased , usually within 30 to 60 days .

women were especially vulnerable to loss of insurance coverage if they became unemployed , widowed , or divorced .

although some employers offered the option of buying into the group plan , there was no certainty of that option .

in 1985 , 10 states had laws requiring insurance policies sold in their states to include a continuation of coverage option for laid - off workers .

however , self - insured employers ( employers that assume the risk of the health care costs of their employees rather than using private insurers ) were not regulated by these state - mandated benefit laws ; self - insured plans were regulated at the federal level under erisa .

health insurance coverage for these affected workers and their families was not consistently available .

"cobra" refers to title x of the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985 , p.l .

99-272 .

the regulations for cobra are written by the department of labor ( dol ) and the internal revenue service ( irs ) .

this section provides a simplified explanation of who qualifies and how , what the responsibilities of the employer are , and what the employee is responsible for .

more detailed information is available from dol's cobra continuation coverage , employee benefits security administration , at http: / / www.dol.gov / ebsa / cobra.html .

currently , there is no legislation in the 113 th congress to amend cobra .

in the 112 th congress , legislation to extend cobra coverage to additional people , domestic partners for example , or expand cobra coverage , to span the time between retirement and medicare eligibility for example , was introduced , but no major action was taken .

throughout 2008-2009 , the unemployment rate in the united states climbed from 5% to a peak of 10% in october 2009 .

a slow recovery was predicted and many who lost their jobs anticipated a long period of being either underemployed or unemployed .

as a result , many who were eligible to continue their employer - sponsored health insurance did not elect coverage under cobra , leaving their families at risk .

the 111 th congress addressed this problem by creating a temporary cobra premium subsidy under title iii of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

the subsidy was limited to 15 months and covered 65% of the cobra premium .

the individuals had to pay the remaining balance .

this provision has since expired .

the cobra subsidy , as amended by subsequent laws , was available to individuals who met the income test and who were involuntarily terminated on or after september 1 , 2008 , and before june 1 , 2010 .

