the robinson - patman act ( r - p ) ( 15 u.s.c .

§§13 , 13a , 13b , 21a ) was enacted in 1936 with the specific purpose of creating and maintaining a market atmosphere in which small business could compete effectively , at least in the purchase of commodities , with its larger rivals .

the immediate impetus for that depression - era legislation was concern for smaller grocery store operators who complained that their businesses were suffering as the direct result of the activities of the chain grocery stores generally and the great atlantic & pacific tea company ( a&p ) particularly .

in pertinent part , the statute states that it shall be unlawful for any person engaged in commerce , in the course of such commerce , either directly or indirectly , to discriminate in price between different purchasers of commodities of like grade and quality , where either or any of the purchases involved in such discrimination are in commerce , where such commodities are sold for use , consumption , or sale within the united states ... , and where the effect of such discrimination may be substantially to lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly in any line of commerce , or to injure , destroy , or prevent competition with any person who either grants or knowingly receives the benefit of such discrimination , or with the customers of either of them .

as is noted in a 1986 article , "[f]or the first time within the umbrella of the federal antitrust laws , the congress declared that it was enacting legislation to remedy injury to competitors rather than a generalized injury to competition itself. .

very simply , the act prohibits sellers in interstate commerce from charging different purchasers different prices for goods of "like grade and quality. .

it applies only to the sale of goods ( i.e. , it does not apply to the sale of services ) and only where each sale is of goods purchased for resale within the united states ( i.e. , it does not prohibit price differentials between goods sold for resale within the united states and those sold for export ) .

since its enactment in 1936 , the robinson - patman act has been less than enthusiastically viewed by the department of justice , which believes that the act is not beneficial to consumers .

in its 1977 report on the robinson - patman act , the antitrust division noted that it should not be surprising ... that robinson - patman can be shown to have many adverse effects on the economy .

to be sure , there are some who do not recognize these effects or who argue that they are outweighed by benefits to specific sectors of the economy , notably small business ; to competition by preventing increased concentration in a line of commerce ; and to public values in general by establishing as a legal norm the concept of 'fair dealing' in pricing .

but any discussion of the benefits of robinson - patman can be made only with a clear understanding of the burdens that the statute places on american economic activity .

government enforcement of the act , therefore , has always been entrusted to the federal trade commission ( ftc ) , which over the years has acted inconsistently with respect to r - p actions .

the bulk of r - p cases have generally been brought by disfavored buyers .

if none of the affirmative defenses set out above justifies a challenged price differential , and the non - profit exemption is unavailable to the defendant , price discrimination in violation of the robinson - patman act is proved .

that the successful plaintiff is entitled to damages in the amount of the unlawful price differential is not , however , a foregone conclusion .

in j.truett payne company , inc. v. chrysler motors corporation , the supreme court , deciding "the appropriate measure of damages in a suit brought under § 2 ( a ) of the clayton act," rejected the contention that "once [a plaintiff] has proved a price discrimination in violation of § 2 ( a ) it is entitled at a minimum to so - called 'automatic damages' in the amount of the price discrimination:" to recover treble damages [the measure of antitrust damages under 15 u.s.c .

§ 15 , which requires as a prerequisite to recovery that one have been 'injured in his business or property'] , then , a plaintiff must make some showing of actual injury attributable to something the antitrust laws were designed to prevent .

previously , the court had noted that "[t]he automatic - damages theory has split the lower courts," but found more persuasive the opinions that rejected it , noting that robinson - patman "is violated merely upon showing that 'the effect of such discrimination may be substantially to lessen competition.' .

in the mid 1970s , the 94 th congress , through an ad hoc subcommittee of the house small business committee , held hearings on and considered proposals to amend or repeal the robinson - patman act .

at that time , representatives of small business , and others , contended that retention of robinson - patman was essential .

although the subcommittee received several draft bills from the department of justice to either substantially amend , or to repeal the act , no legislation was introduced at that time , and crs is not aware of any introduced at any time thereafter .

the antitrust modernization commission was authorized in p.l .

107-273 , "21 st century department of justice appropriations authorization act," to "examine whether the need exists to modernize the antitrust laws and to identify and study related issues," and issued its final report in april 2007 .

in its chapter on "government exceptions to free - market competition," it devoted several pages to its study of the robinson - patman act , noting that despite the aim of supporters of its passage to remedy the "concern of small businesses … that they were losing share to larger supermarkets and chain stores and in some cases were being forced to leave the market," [i]n its operation … the act has had the unintended effect of limiting the extent of discounting generally and therefore has likely caused consumers to pay higher prices than they otherwise would .

the commission recommended that "congress should repeal the robinson - patman act in its entirety. .

whether the current economic climate will result in a further renewal of efforts to modify or repeal the statute , or whether congress will determine that statutory intervention is appropriate , is not known at this time .

