the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) , which the president signed into law on february 17 , 2009 , provided $17.15 billion in supplemental fy2009 discretionary appropriations for biomedical research , public health , and other health - related programs within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

arra also included new authorizing language to promote the widespread adoption of electronic health records and other health information technology ( hit ) , and established a federal interagency advisory panel to coordinate comparative effectiveness research .

this report discusses the health - related programs and activities funded by arra and provides details on how the administering hhs agencies and offices are allocating and obligating the funds .

arra funds were designated as emergency supplemental appropriations for fy2009 .

unless otherwise specified in the law , the arra funds are to remain available for obligation through the end of fy2010 ( i.e. , september 30 , 2010 ) .

most of the health - related programs and activities for which arra provided supplemental funds also receive funding in annual appropriations acts through regular procedures .

hhs fy2009 appropriations were included in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , which was signed into law on march 11 , 2009 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) , signed on december 16 , 2009 , included hhs appropriations for fy2010 .

for more information , see crs report rl34577 , labor , health and human services , and education: fy2009 appropriations ; and crs report r40730 , labor , health and human services , and education: highlights of fy2010 budget and appropriations .

table 1 summarizes arra's discretionary health funding , by hhs agency and office .

figure 1 shows the percentage distribution of the arra funds , by hhs agency and office .

two additional tables that appear at the end of this report provide more details on the arra funding .

table 4 shows the arra health funding , by type of activity funded , and includes a comparison of the amounts provided in arra with the regular fy2009 and fy2010 appropriations and the fy2011 budget request .

table 5 shows the obligation of arra funds , by type of activity funding , for fy2009 and fy2010 .

as part of its efforts to ensure transparency and accountability in the use of arra funds , the office of management and budget ( omb ) issued detailed government - wide guidance for implementing arra and established a website , "recovery.gov," which allows the public to track arra spending .

the guidance required each federal agency to establish a recovery page on its existing website , linked to recovery.gov , on which they must post all agency - specific information related to arra .

in most cases , arra specified that the agency receiving funding had to submit an initial implementation plan before the funds could be obligated .

those plans are posted on the hhs recovery plans website .

in addition , arra required that a report on the actual obligations , expenditures , and unobligated balances for each arra - funded activity be submitted by november 1 , 2009 , and each six months thereafter as long as funding remains available for obligation or expenditure .

each arra grant recipient is required to submit to the funding agency a quarterly report that includes the following information: ( 1 ) the total amount of arra funds received , ( 2 ) the amount of arra funds received that have been expended on projects and activities , and ( 3 ) details about the funded project or activity , including an estimate of the number of jobs created and the number of jobs retained by the project or activity .

arra requires that the information submitted by grantees be posted on the funding agency's recovery website .

in addition to funding health - related programs and activities , arra included discretionary funds for human services programs administered by hhs .

it provided $100 million to the administration on aging ( aoa ) for senior nutrition programs authorized under title iii of the older americans act , and gave $5.15 billion to the administration for children and families ( acf ) for the child care and development block grant , the community services block grant , and head start .

for more information on those funds , see crs report rl33880 , older americans act: funding ; and crs report r40211 , human services provisions of the american recovery and reinvestment act .

throughout this report , unless otherwise specified , all references to the secretary refer to the hhs secretary .

arra provided $2 billion to the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) for grants to health centers authorized under section 330 of the public health service ( phs ) act .

of this total , $1.5 billion is for the construction and renovation of health centers and the acquisition of hit systems .

the remaining $500 million is for operating grants to health centers to increase the number of underinsured and uninsured patients who receive health care services at these facilities .

the implementation plan for arra funding of health center capital projects is available on the hhs recovery plans website .

for more information on health centers , see crs report rl32046 , federal health centers program .

arra provided $500 million to hrsa for health workforce programs authorized in the phs act .

of this total , $300 million is for the national health service corps ( nhsc ) recruitment and field activities ( phs act title iii ) , $75 million of which is to remain available through september 30 , 2011 .

the remaining $200 million is for the health professions programs authorized in phs act title vii ( health professions education ) and title viii ( nursing workforce development ) .

some of these funds may also be used to develop interstate licensing agreements to promote telemedicine ( phs act section 330l ) .

arra provided $10.0 billion directly to the national institutes of health ( nih ) for biomedical research and extramural research facilities , plus $400 million more through a transfer from ahrq for comparative effectiveness research ( discussed below ) .

of the $10.0 billion , the law provided $8.2 billion to the office of the director for broad support of nih scientific research , both extramural and intramural .

most of that funding , $7.4 billion , was transferred to the nih institutes and centers and the common fund in proportion to their regular appropriations .

the remaining $800 million is being used at the director's discretion , with an emphasis on short - term ( two - year ) projects , including $400 million that may be used under the director's flexible research authority .

also included in the $10.0 billion total was $1 billion to the national centers for research resources ( ncrr ) for grants to construct and renovate university research facilities , as well as $300 million to ncrr for grants for shared instrumentation and other capital research equipment at extramural research facilities .

finally , the buildings and facilities account received $500 million for construction , repair , and improvement of nih intramural facilities .

nih received a program level total of $30.3 billion in regular fy2009 appropriations and $30.9 billion in fy2010 appropriations .

the additional funds from arra , which are being obligated at roughly $5 billion in each of the two years , have therefore boosted nih resources by about one - sixth each year .

the $8.2 billion in arra research funding is being used by the institutes and centers and the director for a wide variety of competitive grant programs , as is the case with the regular appropriations .

the intent , however , is to "follow the spirit of the arra by funding projects that will stimulate the economy , create or retain jobs , and have the potential for making scientific progress in 2 years. .

the $1 billion for ncrr construction and renovation grants for extramural research facilities is being spent under a program that has received no regular funding since fy2005 , while the $300 million for shared instrumentation grants is several times larger than the usual funding for that program ( see table 4 ) .

nih activities with arra funding are being tracked on the nih recovery website , which includes links to news releases , information on current grant funding opportunities , awards already made , and arra - funded job postings at nih .

nih's arra implementation plans for the various funding categories are available on the hhs recovery plans website .

nih is focusing activities on ( 1 ) funding new and recently peer - reviewed , highly meritorious research grant applications that can be accomplished in two years or less ; ( 2 ) giving targeted supplemental awards to current grants to push research forward ; and ( 3 ) supporting a new initiative called the nih challenge grants in health and science research for research on specific topics that would benefit from significant two - year jumpstart funds ( grants have budgets under $500,000 per year ) .

another new program , called research and research infrastructure "grand opportunities" ( go ) grants , will devote about $200 million to large - scale research projects ( budgets over $500,000 per year ) that work in areas of specific knowledge gaps , create new technologies , or develop new approaches to multi - and interdisciplinary research teams .

on september 30 , 2009 , president obama spoke about the nearly $5 billion that nih had awarded in arra funding in fy2009 , supporting over 12,000 grants to research institutions in every state ( see table 5 ) .

a white house press release highlighted examples of research in cancer , heart disease , and autism , particularly over $1 billion in research applying the technology produced by the human genome project .

on february 1 , 2010 , nih released actual fy2009 spending in 218 major research , disease , and condition categories , including the amounts provided under arra .

spending estimates for fy2010 , fy2010 arra ( partial ) , and fy2011 are also available .

arra provided $1.1 billion to the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) for comparative effectiveness research ( cer ) , also referred to as patient - centered health research .

these funds are to be used to support research that ( 1 ) compares the clinical outcomes , effectiveness , and appropriateness of preventive , diagnostic , and therapeutic items , services , and procedures ; and ( 2 ) encourages the development and use of clinical registries , clinical data networks , and other forms of electronic health data that can be used to generate or obtain outcomes data .

of the total amount of funding provided , $300 million is for ahrq to invest in cer activities , $400 million was transferred to nih , and $400 million is to be allocated at the discretion of the secretary .

arra also stipulated that ahrq could use no more than 1% of the $300 million under its own discretion for additional ftes .

according to the agency , that amount ( i.e. , $3 million ) provides sufficient funding to hire approximately 15 ftes ( two - year appointments ) .

the $1.1 billion that arra provided for cer represents a substantial increase in federal research funding in this area .

in its regular appropriations , ahrq received $50 million in fy2009 for cer , and $21 million in fy2010 .

the agency's fy2011 budget request includes $286 million for cer ( see table 4 ) .

ahrq's research on comparative effectiveness is authorized by section 1013 of the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-173 ) and is part of the agency's effective health care program .

arra instructed the secretary to contract with the institute of medicine ( iom ) to produce a report with recommendations on national cer priorities .

iom released its report on june 30 , 2009 .

reflecting broad stakeholder input , the iom report identified 100 health topics as high - priority areas for cer .

almost one - quarter of the priority topics address the health care delivery system .

they include topics related to dissemination of cer study results ; patient decision making ; health behavior and care management ; comparing settings of care ; and utilization of surgical , radiological , and medical procedures .

the iom concluded that the country needs a robust cer infrastructure to sustain the research well into the future , including carrying out the research recommended in the report and studying new topics identified by future priority setting .

in addition , arra established an interagency advisory panel to help coordinate and support cer .

the federal coordinating council for comparative effectiveness research , composed of senior officials from federal agencies with health - related programs , was instructed to submit an initial report describing current federal cer activities and providing recommendations for future research .

thereafter , the council is to prepare an annual report on its activities and include recommendations on infrastructure needs and coordination of federal cer .

importantly , arra included language stating that ( 1 ) the council may not mandate coverage , reimbursement , or other policies for public and private payers of health care ; and ( 2 ) council reports and recommendations may not be construed as mandates or clinical guidelines for payment , coverage , or treatment .

the council published its initial report on june 30 , 2009 .

the report's recommendations focused on ( 1 ) the importance of disseminating cer findings to doctors and patients ; ( 2 ) targeting cer to the needs of priority populations such as racial and ethnic minorities , and persons with multiple chronic conditions ; ( 3 ) researching high - impact health arenas such as medical and assistive devices , surgical procedures , and behavioral interventions and prevention ; and ( 4 ) electronic data networks and exchange .

three implementation plans for arra - funded cer — one for funds to be obligated by ahrq , a second for the nih funds , and a third for the funds to be allocated at the discretion of the secretary — are available on the hhs recovery plans website .

while nih obligated almost half of its arra funds for cer in fy2009 , with the remainder to be obligated in fy2010 , almost all of the arra funds for cer that are to be obligated by ahrq or at the discretion of the secretary will be awarded in fy2010 ( see table 5 ) .

ahrq has published 11 cer funding announcements for arra funds to date ; these announcements are available on ahrq's website .

arra provided $2 billion to the hhs office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onc ) to fund activities and grant programs authorized by the health information technology for economic and clinical health ( hitech ) act , which was incorporated in arra .

of that amount , $300 million is to support regional health information exchange networks .

in addition , the secretary was instructed to transfer $20 million to the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) for hit standards analysis and testing .

an implementation plan that discusses onc's administrative and regulatory responsibilities under arra is available on the hhs recovery plans website .

onc received $61 million in regular appropriations in both fy2009 and fy2010 ( see table 4 ) .

details of the allocation and obligation of arra funds for the various hitech act grant programs are provided below , following a brief overview of the hitech act .

the hitech act is intended to promote the widespread adoption of hit for the electronic sharing of clinical data among hospitals , physicians , and other health care providers .

to that end , the hitech act included the following provisions .

first , it codified onc within the office of the hhs secretary .

created by a presidential executive order in 2004 , onc has played an important role directing hit activities both inside and outside the federal government .

it has focused on developing technical standards necessary to achieve interoperability among varying ehr applications ; establishing criteria for certifying that hit products meet those standards ; ensuring the privacy and security of electronic health information ; and helping facilitate the creation of prototype health information networks .

the goal is to develop a national capability to exchange standards - based health care data in a secure computer environment .

the hitech act required the hhs secretary , by december 31 , 2009 , to issue a comprehensive set of interoperability standards and certification criteria for ehrs .

second , the hitech act established six grant programs to provide funding for investing in hit infrastructure , purchasing certified ehrs , training , and disseminating information on best practices , among other things ( see below ) .

third , the hitech act authorized hit incentive payments under the medicare and medicaid programs .

beginning in 2011 , the medicare program will begin providing bonus payments to doctors and hospitals that adopt and use certified ehrs in such a way as to improve the quality and coordination of health care .

those incentive payments are phased out over time and replaced by financial penalties for physicians and hospitals that are not using certified ehrs .

the hitech act also provides for a 100% federal match for payments to certain qualifying medicaid providers who acquire and use certified ehr technology .

finally , the hitech act included a series of privacy and security provisions that amended and expanded the current federal standards under the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) .

among other things , it established a breach notification requirement for health information that is not encrypted , strengthened enforcement of the hipaa standards , placed new restrictions on marketing activities by health plans and providers , and created transparency by allowing patients to request an audit trail showing all disclosures of their electronic health information .

for more information , see crs report r40161 , the health information technology for economic and clinical health ( hitech ) act .

arra provided $1 billion to the secretary for a prevention and wellness fund , for three specified activities: ( 1 ) $300 million to the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) for phs act "section 317" immunization grants ; ( 2 ) $50 million for state activities to reduce health care - associated infections ( hais ) ; and ( 3 ) $650 million for evidence - based clinical and community prevention and wellness programs that address chronic diseases .

arra provided a total of $500 million for the indian health service ( ihs ) — $415 million for ihs health facilities - related activities , including maintenance and improvement , and $85 million for hit activities .

within the health facilities account , ihs received $227 million for health care facilities construction , $100 million for facilities maintenance and improvement , $68 million for sanitation facilities construction , and $20 million for equipment ( including hit ) .

the $85 million ihs received for hit activities , including funds for telehealth services , were included in the ihs health services account but could also include hit - related infrastructure activities .

these funds were to be allocated at the discretion of the ihs director .

as of january 29 , 2010 , ihs has obligated over 65% of these funds ; the remaining funds will be obligated by the end of fy2010 .

table 4 compares arra funding with regular ihs fy2009-fy2010 appropriations and fy2011-requested appropriations for the same activities .

ihs constructs , maintains , and operates hospitals , clinics , and health centers throughout indian country , and also funds construction of indian sanitation facilities .

for health care facilities construction , arra required that the $227 million be used to complete up to two facilities from ihs's current priority list on which work had already begun .

the facilities chosen are the norton sound regional hospital in nome , ak , and the hospital and staff quarters at eagle butte health center in south dakota .

both projects are expected to be completed by the fourth quarter of fy2012 .

as of january 29 , 2010 , approximately $150 million had been obligated , with an estimated 95 jobs created or saved as a result of the construction projects .

funds for facilities maintenance and improvement , sanitation , construction , and medical equipment were to be obligated in fy2009 and fy2010 .

obligations for fy2009 through january 29 , 2010 are included in table 3 .

the table also includes information on the scheduled completion data of projects and estimates on the number of jobs created or saved as of the end of the first quarter of fy2010 ( i.e. , end of december 2009 ) .

for a list of the ihs construction projects and equipment , organized by state and type of project , see the hhs recovery website , tribal pre - award funding by state .

ihs has existing hit operations for both personal health services and public health activities , funded chiefly through the hospital and health clinics budget in ihs's health services account .

arra directed that the additional $85 million in hit funds be allocated by the ihs director .

ihs distributed the hit funds for the development of existing management and ehr software , and to telehealth infrastructure and development , with 20% allocated to hardware .

ihs identified non - localized hit projects , with $61.4 million going for ehr development and deployment , $2.45 million for personal health record development , $16.96 million for telehealth and network infrastructure , and $4.0 million for administration .

of the hit funds , ihs obligated $53.55 million as of january 29 , 2010 , with the remainder to be obligated by the end of fy2010 .

unlike the rest of hhs , ihs received its appropriations under arra's title for interior and environment appropriations ( title vii ) .

the provision for ihs facilities in title vii excluded ihs health facilities funds from the interior and environment appropriations bill's usual annual spending caps for medical equipment , and also excluded them from arra's general provision requiring payment of prevailing wage rates under the davis - bacon act for construction and repair projects .

 ( separate prevailing wage rate requirements apply to ihs construction activities. ) .

arra report language for title vii allowed agencies covered by the title to expend up to 5% of arra funds for administrative and support costs , but also noted that oversight of ihs activities under arra was to be included in the general oversight of hhs's arra activities funded under arra's title for hhs appropriations ( title viii ) .

further information on ihs's arra expenditures , by project category , with links to more detailed implementation plans , is available on the hhs recovery website .

for more on ihs appropriations in fy2009 and fy2010 , see crs report r40685 , interior , environment , and related agencies: fy2010 appropriations .

for general information on ihs , see crs report rl33022 , indian health service: health care delivery , status , funding , and legislative issues .

