following the terrorist attacks of 9 / 11 , congress passed the authorization for the use of military force ( aumf ) , which granted the president the authority "to use all necessary and appropriate force against those ... [who] planned , authorized , committed , or aided the terrorist attacks" against the united states .

as part of the subsequent "war on terror," many persons captured during military operations in afghanistan and elsewhere were transferred to the u.s .

naval station at guantanamo bay , cuba , for detention and possible prosecution before military tribunals .

although nearly 800 persons were transported to guantanamo from early 2002 through 2008 , the substantial majority of guantanamo detainees have ultimately been transferred to a third country for continued detention or release .

detainees who remain fall into three categories: persons who have been placed in preventive detention to stop them from returning to the battlefield ( formerly labeled "enemy combatants" by the bush administration ) .

preventive detention of captured belligerents is non - penal in nature , and must be ended upon the cessation of hostilities .

persons who , besides being subject to preventive detention , have been brought or are expected to be brought before a military or other tribunal to face criminal charges , including for alleged violations of the law of war .

if convicted , such persons may be subject to criminal penalty , which in the case of the most severe offenses may include life imprisonment or death .

persons who have been cleared for transfer or release to a foreign country , either because ( 1 ) they are not believed to have been engaged in hostilities , or ( 2 ) although they were found to have been enemy belligerents , they are no longer considered a threat to u.s. security .

such persons remain detained at guantanamo until their transfer may be effectuated .

the decision by the bush administration to detain suspected belligerents at guantanamo was based upon both policy and legal considerations .

from a policy standpoint , the u.s. facility at guantanamo offered a safe and secure location away from the battlefield where captured persons could be interrogated and potentially tried by military tribunals for any war crimes they may have committed .

from a legal standpoint , the bush administration sought to avoid the possibility that suspected enemy combatants could pursue legal challenges regarding their detention or other wartime actions taken by the executive .

the bush administration initially believed that guantanamo was largely beyond the jurisdiction of the federal courts , and noncitizens held there would not have access to the same substantive and procedural protections that would be required if they were detained in the united states .

the legal support for this policy was significantly eroded by a series of supreme court rulings permitting guantanamo detainees to seek judicial review of the circumstances of their detention .

although congress attempted to limit federal courts' jurisdiction over detainees through the enactment of the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( dta ; p.l .

109-148 , title x ) and the military commissions act of 2006 ( mca ; p.l .

109-366 ) , these efforts were subject to judicial challenge .

in 2008 , the supreme court ruled in boumediene v. bush that the constitutional writ of habeas corpus extends to noncitizens held at guantanamo , and found that provisions of the dta and mca eliminating federal habeas jurisdiction over guantanamo detainees acted as an unconstitutional suspension of the writ .

as a result , guantanamo detainees may seek habeas review of the legality of their detention .

nonetheless , several legal issues were not definitively settled by the boumediene decision , including the scope of habeas review available to guantanamo detainees , the remedy available for those persons found to be unlawfully held by the united states , and the extent to which other constitutional provisions extend to noncitizens held at guantanamo .

litigation addressing these matters is ongoing in the d.c .

circuit , with several rulings being issued by the circuit court of appeals .

these rulings have generally been favorable to the legal position advanced by the government .

the supreme court has denied certiorari with respect to all such decisions thus far , but may prove willing to take on another guantanamo case in the future .

in the meantime , it appears that the circuit court's rulings will remain controlling .

on january 22 , 2009 , president barack obama issued executive order 13492 , requiring that the guantanamo detention facility be closed as soon as practicable , and no later than a year from the date of the order .

any persons who continue to be held at guantanamo at the time of closure were to be either transferred to a third country for continued detention or release , or transferred to another u.s. detention facility .

the order further provided that specified officials would review all guantanamo detentions to assess whether the detainee should continue to be held by the united states , transferred or released to a third country , or be prosecuted by the united states for criminal offenses .

reviewing authorities were required to identify and consider the legal , logistical , and security issues that would arise in the event that some detainees are transferred to the united states .

the order also mandated that the reviewing authorities to assess the feasibility of prosecuting detainees in an article iii court .

during this review period , the secretary of defense was required to take steps to ensure that all proceedings before military commissions and the united states court of military commission review were halted .

on the same day that the executive order to close the guantanamo detention facility was issued , president obama issued two other executive orders which created separate task forces — the special task force on detainee disposition and the special task force on interrogation and transfer policies — charged with reviewing aspects of u.s. detention policy , including the options available for the detention , trial , or transfer of wartime detainees , whether held at guantanamo or elsewhere .

although these task forces are distinct from the task force responsible for reviewing guantanamo detentions , their work and recommendations may have implications on u.s. policy with respect to guantanamo .

since the issuance of the executive order to close guantanamo , only one detainee formerly held there has been transferred to the united states .

in june 2009 , ahmed ghailani was transferred to the united states to face criminal charges in federal civilian court for his alleged role in the 1998 bombings of u.s. embassies in tanzania and kenya ( the transfer occurred shortly before congress enacted the first of several restrictions on the use of appropriated funds to bring guantanamo detainees to the united states ) .

ghailani was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment for his part in the conspiracy .

on october 28 , 2009 , the national defense authorization act for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-81 ) was signed into law , and modified rules governing military commissions .

soon thereafter , the departments of justice and defense made an announcement regarding the forums in which 10 other guantanamo detainees , who had previously been charged before military commissions , would be tried .

the attorney general and secretary of defense determined that military commission proceedings against five guantanamo detainees may be resumed however , the department of justice stated that it intended to bring charges against five detainees in the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york for criminal offenses related to the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , and the charges brought before these individuals before military commissions were withdrawn without prejudice in january 2010 .

the decision to try some guantanamo detainees in federal civilian court proved controversial .

plans to bring charges in federal court against khalid sheik mohammed , the alleged mastermind of the 9 / 11 attacks , were placed on hold until the attorney general announced in april 2011 that the administration had reversed course and the 9 / 11 conspirators would be tried before military commissions .

the november 2010 conviction of ahmed ghailani for one of the more than 280 charges he faced in connection to the 1998 embassy bombings has fueled the debate over terrorism trials .

while some have characterized ghailani's conviction as demonstrating that federal civilian courts serve as an appropriate forum for the prosecution of some guantanamo detainees , others view ghailani's acquittal of most charges as evidence that civilian courts are an inappropriate forum for the criminal prosecution of wartime detainees .

on january 22 , 2010 , the guantanamo task force issued its final report concerning the appropriate disposition of each detainee held at guantanamo .

the task force concluded that 36 detainees remained subject to active criminal investigations or prosecutions ; 48 detainees should remain in preventive detention without criminal trial , as they are "too dangerous to transfer but not feasible for prosecution" ; and the remaining detainees could be transferred , either immediately or eventually , to a foreign country .

in december 2009 , president obama issued a memorandum directing the attorney general and secretary of defense to take steps to acquire the thomson correctional facility in thomson , il , so that at least some guantanamo detainees may be relocated there for continued internment .

beginning in fy2011 , however , congress began including a provision in annual appropriations or defense authorization enactments that barred funds from being used to construct or modify a facility in the united states to house detainees who remain under the custody or control of the department of defense ( dod ) .

although the thomson facility was purchased in 2012 , administration officials have averred that it will not be used to house guantanamo detainees , but instead serve to hold high - security prison inmates .

although the original deadline for the closure of the guantanamo detention facility established by executive order 13492 was not met , the administration has stated that it still intends to close the facility as expeditiously as possible .

efforts by the executive branch to close the facility have been hampered by a series of congressional enactments limiting executive discretion to transfer or release detainees into the united states , with the most significant limitations initially established by the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 ( 2011 ndaa ; p.l .

111-383 ) , which was signed into law on january 7 , 2011 , and the department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( 2011 caa ; p.l .

112-10 ) .

by prohibiting funds from being used to transfer or release detainees into the united states , or to assist in the transfer or release of detainees into the country , these and subsequent similar acts seem to ensure that the guantanamo detention facility remains open for the foreseeable future .

moreover , the measures appear to make military tribunals the only viable forum by which guantanamo detainees could be tried for criminal offenses , as no civilian court operates within guantanamo .

when signing each of these measures into law , president obama issued a statement expressing his opposition to those provisions limiting executive discretion to transfer detainees into the united states or to the custody of certain foreign governments or entities .

while highly critical of these provisions' effect , president obama's signing statements did not allege that the restrictions on transfers to the united states represented an unconstitutional infringement upon executive authority , or claim that the executive branch was not legally bound to comply with the provisions' requirements .

president obama did , however , state that his "administration will work with the congress to seek repeal of these restrictions , will seek to mitigate their effects , and will oppose any attempt to extend or expand them in the future. .

on march 7 , 2011 , president obama issued executive order 13567 , establishing a process for the periodic review of the continued detention of persons currently held at guantanamo who have either been ( 1 ) designated for preventive detention under the laws of war or ( 2 ) referred for criminal prosecution , but have not been convicted of a crime and do not have formal charges pending against them .

the executive order establishes a periodic review board ( prb ) to assess whether the continued detention of a covered individual is warranted in order "to protect against a significant threat to the security of the united states. .

in instances where a person's continued detention is not deemed warranted , the secretaries of state and defense are designated responsibility "for ensuring that vigorous efforts are undertaken to identify a suitable transfer location for any such detainee , outside of the united states , consistent with the national security and foreign policy interests of the united states" and relevant legal requirements .

an initial review of each individual covered by the order , which involves a hearing before the prb in which the detainee and his representative may challenge the government's basis for his continued detention and introduce evidence on his own behalf , must occur within a year of the order's issuance .

those persons deemed to be subject to continued detention will have their cases reviewed periodically thereafter .

the order also specifies that the process it establishes is discretionary ; does not create any additional basis for detention authority or modify the scope of authority granted under existing law ; and is not intended to affect federal courts' jurisdiction to determine the legality of a person's continued detention .

on the same day that executive order 13567 was issued , the white house also released a statement concerning matters relevant to u.s. detention policy generally and to guantanamo specifically .

among other things , the statement reaffirmed the executive's commitment to close the guantanamo detention facility .

the statement also announced that the secretary of defense would authorize the swearing and referring of new charges to military commissions — a practice which had been halted following the issuance of executive order 13492 in january 2009 .

the white house statement also reaffirmed the administration's commitment to prosecute some detainees in article iii courts , and declared that it would work to repeal legislation that bars it from transferring detainees into the country for trial before civilian courts .

congress has enacted similar restrictions as part of subsequent defense authorization legislation and other measures .

the national defense authorization act of fy2012 , p.l .

112-81 , authorizes the detention of certain categories of persons and requires the military detention of a subset of them ( albeit not necessarily in guantanamo and subject to waiver by the president ) ; regulates status determinations for persons held pursuant to the aumf , regardless of location ; regulates periodic review proceedings concerning the continued detention of guantanamo detainees ; and continues funding restrictions that relate to guantanamo detainee transfers to foreign countries .

despite an earlier threat to veto the bill , president obama signed the 2012 ndaa into law while issuing a signing statement claiming that certain of its detainee - related restrictions violate separation - of - powers principles .

congress continued the funding restrictions on transfers of detainees from guantanamo in the national defense authorization act for fy2013 ( 2013 ndaa ) , p.l .

112-239 .

president obama objected to these provisions in a signing statement , complaining that "the congress designed these sections , and has here renewed them once more , in order to foreclose my ability to shut down the guantanamo bay detention facility .

i continue to believe that operating the facility weakens our national security by wasting resources , damaging our relationships with key allies , and strengthening our enemies. .

the president also charged that the restrictions could violate the constitution: my administration will interpret these provisions as consistent with existing and future determinations by the agencies of the executive responsible for detainee transfers .

and , in the event that these statutory restrictions operate in a manner that violates constitutional separation of powers principles , my administration will implement them in a manner that avoids the constitutional conflict .

the president reiterated his intention to work toward the closure of guantanamo in remarks he made at a press conference on april 30 , 2013 .

criticizing the guantanamo detention policy as counterproductive in terms of international support for counterterrorism efforts and as providing a recruiting tool for extremists , he stated that his administration would review possible administrative actions and reengage with congress to bring about the closure of the detention facility .

the closure of the guantanamo detention facility would raise a number of legal issues with respect to the individuals presently interned there , particularly if those detainees were transferred to the united states .

the nature and scope of constitutional protections owed to detainees within the united states may be different from those available to persons held at guantanamo or elsewhere .

this may have implications for the continued detention or prosecution of persons transferred to the united states .

the transfer of detainees to the united states may have additional consequences , as some detainees might qualify for asylum or other protections under immigration law .

the executive order issued by president obama to effectuate the closure of guantanamo also contemplates that the administration "work with congress on any legislation that may be appropriate" relating to the transfer of detainees to the united states .

this report provides an overview of major legal issues that are likely to arise in the event of executive and legislative action to close the guantanamo detention facility .

it discusses legal issues related to the transfer or release of guantanamo detainees ( either to a foreign country or into the united states ) , the continued detention of such persons in the united states , and the possible removal of persons brought to the united states .

it considers selected constitutional issues that may arise in the criminal prosecution of detainees , emphasizing the procedural and substantive protections that exist in different adjudicatory forums .

issues discussed include detainees' right to a speedy trial , the prohibition against prosecution under ex post facto laws , and limitations upon the admissibility of hearsay and secret evidence in criminal cases .

these issues are likely to be relevant not only to the treatment of guantanamo detainees , but also to other terrorist suspects or enemy belligerents apprehended by the united states in the future .

any proposal to close the guantanamo detention facility must necessarily address the transfer of persons currently detained there .

while some detainees may be transferred to other countries for continued detention , supervision , or release , some proposals to close the guantanamo detention facility have contemplated transferring at least some detainees to the united states , either for continued detention or , in the case of some detainees who are not considered a threat to u.s. security , possible release .

many of the rules and standards governing the detention and treatment of persons at guantanamo would remain applicable to detainees transferred into the united states .

however , non - citizens held in the united states may be entitled to more protections under the constitution than those detained abroad .

if there are no longer legal grounds to hold a detainee , the united states must terminate custody either through transfer or release .

persons held in the united states may have greater legal redress against their unwilling transfer to another country than those held abroad , and may potentially seek judicial review of transfer decisions through habeas proceedings .

cat article 3 and its implementing legislation prohibit the transfer of detainees from the united states to countries where they would more likely than not face torture .

this prohibition is absolute and without regard to whether an individual has been involved in terrorist or criminal activity .

while the bush administration took the position that cat article 3 and its implementing legislation do not govern the transfer of detainees held outside the united states , there appears to be little if any dispute regarding cat's application to the transfer of persons from within the country .

detainees transferred to the united states who may no longer be held by military authorities might potentially seek relief from removal under u.s. immigration laws .

an alien who is physically present or arrives in the united states , regardless of immigration status , may apply for asylum , a discretionary form of relief from removal available to aliens who have a well - founded fear of persecution if transferred to another country .

persons granted asylum may thereafter apply for adjustment of status to that of a legal permanent resident .

certain potentially over - lapping categories of aliens are disqualified from asylum eligibility , including those involved in terrorism - related activity ( including members of the taliban and al qaeda ) and those who are reasonably believed to pose a danger to u.s. security .

nonetheless , it is possible that some detainees who have been found not to have fought on behalf of the taliban or al qaeda may qualify for asylum or other forms of relief from removal if transferred to the united states .

further , if a detainee is declared ineligible for asylum or another form of relief from removal and is thereafter ordered removed by immigration officials , immigration authorities may be required to provide evidence forming the basis of this determination in the face of a legal challenge by the detainee .

it is important to note that asylum only constitutes relief from removal under immigration laws .

it would not bar the transfer of a detainee pursuant to some other legal authority ( eg , extradition ) .

as discussed , proposals may be considered that would clarify the application of immigration laws to guantanamo detainees transferred to the united states .

former secretary of defense gates stated that the obama administration will seek legislation from congress addressing detainees' immigration status , possibly including barring them from asylum eligibility .

as previously mentioned , the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-83 ) and the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) contained provisions barring any funds they made available from being used to provide any immigration benefit to guantanamo detainees brought to the united states , or to provide for a detainee's classification as a refugee or applicant for asylum .

congress extended the restrictions imposed by fy2010 appropriation enactments through the 2011 fiscal year , but has not renewed the restriction since that time .

while many persons currently held at guantanamo are only being detained as a preventive measure to stop them from returning to battle , the united states has brought or intends to pursue criminal charges against some detainees .

various constitutional provisions , most notably those arising from the fifth and sixth amendments to the u.s. constitution , apply to defendants throughout the process of criminal prosecutions .

prosecuting guantanamo detainees inside the united states would raise at least two major legal questions .

first , does a detainee's status as an enemy belligerent reduce the degree of constitutional protections to which he is entitled ? .

secondly , would the choice of judicial forum — that is , civilian court , military commission , or court - martial — affect interpretations of constitutional rights implicated in detainee prosecutions ? .

as previously discussed , the nature and extent to which the constitution applies to noncitizens detained at guantanamo is a matter of continuing legal dispute .

although the supreme court held in boumediene that the constitutional writ of habeas extends to detainees held at guantanamo , it left open the nature and degree to which other constitutional protections , including those relating to substantive and procedural due process , may also apply .

the boumediene court noted that the constitution's application to noncitizens in places like guantanamo that are located outside the united states turns on "objective factors and practical concerns. .

the court has also repeatedly recognized that at least some constitutional protections are "unavailable to aliens outside our geographic borders. .

the application of constitutional principles to the prosecution of aliens located at guantanamo remains unsettled .

on the other hand , it is clear that if guantanamo detainees are subject to criminal prosecution in united states , the constitutional provisions related to such proceedings would apply .

the application of these constitutional requirements might nevertheless differ depending upon the forum in which charges are brought .

the fifth amendment's requirement that no person be held to answer for a capital or infamous crime unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury , and the sixth amendment's requirements concerning trial by jury , have been found to be inapplicable to trials by military commissions or courts - martial .

the application of due process protections in military court proceedings may also differ from civilian court proceedings , in part because the constitution "contemplates that congress has 'plenary control over rights , duties , and responsibilities in the framework of the military establishment , including regulations , procedures , and remedies related to military discipline.' .

in the past , courts have been more accepting of security measures taken against "enemy aliens" than u.s. citizens , particularly as they relate to authority to detain or restrict movement on grounds of wartime security .

it is possible that the rights owed to enemy belligerents in criminal prosecutions would be interpreted more narrowly by a reviewing court than those owed to defendants in other , more routine cases , particularly when the constitutional right at issue is subject to a balancing test .

there are several forums in which detainees could potentially be prosecuted for alleged criminal activity , including in federal civilian court , before military commissions , or possibly in general courts - martial proceedings .

the procedural protections afforded to the accused in each of these forums may differ , along with the types of offenses for which the accused may be prosecuted .

the mca initially authorized the establishment of military commissions with jurisdiction to try alien "unlawful enemy combatants" for offenses made punishable by the mca or the law of war , and afforded the accused fewer procedural protections than would be available to defendants in military courts - martial or federal civilian court proceedings .

the statutory framework for military commissions was amended by the military commissions act of 2009 ( mca 2009 ) , enacted as part of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2010 ( p.l .

111-84 ) , so that the procedural protections afforded to the accused ( now referred to as alien "unprivileged enemy belligerents" ) more closely resemble those found in military courts - martial proceedings , though differences between the two forums remain .

the modifications made by the mca 2009 are discussed in detail in crs report r40932 , comparison of rights in military commission trials and trials in federal criminal court , by [author name scrubbed] .

critics raised questions regarding the constitutionality of the military commission system initially established by the original mca , and some of these arguments may also be raised even following the amendments made by the mca 2009 .

courts have yet to rule on the constitutional legitimacy of many procedures used by military commissions .

military commissions are not statutorily restricted from exercising jurisdiction within the united states , and the supreme court has previously upheld the use of commissions against enemy belligerents tried in the country .

in november 2009 , the department of justice and department of defense announced that military commission prosecutions against five guantanamo detainees , which had been halted following president obama's january 2009 executive order , may be resumed .

it appears likely that several other detainees will be tried before military commissions as well .

detainees could also potentially be prosecuted in federal civilian court for offenses under federal criminal statutes .

provisions in the u.s. criminal code relating to war crimes and terrorist activity apply extraterritorially and may be applicable to some detainees , though ex post facto and statute of limitation concerns may limit their application to certain offenses .

in june 2009 , one detainee was transferred from guantanamo to the united states for trial in federal court for his alleged role in the 1998 bombings of the u.s. embassies in tanzania and kenya .

in november 2009 , the doj and dod announced plans to bring charges in federal court against five detainees for their alleged role in the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , but opposition to the plan caused the attorney general to place it on indefinite hold .

the plan was eventually dropped in favor of trying the 9 / 11 conspirators by military commission , but attorney general holder did not foreclose civilian trials for other guantanamo detainees .

currently , funding bars on transferring detainees to the united states seem to foreclose civilian trials for those detained at guantanamo .

although they have yet to be used for this purpose , military courts - martial could also be employed to try detainees by exercising jurisdiction under the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) over persons subject to military tribunals under the law of war .

detainees brought before military courts - martial could be charged with offenses under the ucmj and the law of war , though courts - martial rules concerning the accused's right to a speedy trial , as well as statute of limitations issues , may pose an obstacle to prosecution .

the executive currently retains at least technical discretion to determine the appropriate forum in which to prosecute detainees ( though various funding measures have effectively precluded guantanamo detainees from being tried in civilian court through the 2013 fiscal year , through their provisions barring the transfer of detainees into the united states for any purpose ) .

the administration has repeatedly expressed its desire to prosecute some guantanamo detainees in article iii courts and others before military commissions .

legislative proposals have been introduced that would require prosecutions to occur in a particular forum or modify the procedural rules applicable to the prosecution of detainees .

pursuant to existing statutory authorization , the executive could also potentially modify military commission procedural rules to some degree , including by amending existing procedures so that they more closely resemble those employed by courts - martial .

some commentators have proposed the creation of an entirely new forum for the prosecution of detainees , such as a national security court .

the scope and effect of such proposals may be shaped by constitutional constraints , including with respect to the rights owed to the accused in criminal proceedings .

the following sections discuss selected constitutional issues that may arise in the criminal prosecution of detainees , emphasizing the procedural and substantive protections that apply in different adjudicatory forums .

since its inception , the policy of detaining suspected belligerents at guantanamo has been the subject of controversy .

in particular , there has been significant international and domestic criticism of the treatment of detainees held there , as well as detainees' limited access to federal courts to challenge aspects of their detention .

defenders of the policy argue that guantanamo offers a safe and secure location away from the battlefield where suspected belligerents can be detained and prosecuted for war crimes when appropriate .

they contend that enemy belligerents should not receive the same access to federal courts as civilians within the united states .

to a degree , these conflicting viewpoints are reflected in the divergent actions taken by the executive and legislative branches .

while the obama administration has made efforts to close the facility , and has stated its interest in bringing at least some persons held at guantanamo into the united states for continued detention or prosecution , its efforts to close the facility have been impeded , in part , by congressional enactments that have effectively prevented the executive from transferring any guantanamo detainee into the united states .

it remains to be seen whether congress and the administration will reassess their respective positions in the foreseeable future .

in any event , the closure of the guantanamo detention facility may raise complex legal issues , particularly if detainees are transferred to the united states .

the nature and scope of constitutional protections owed to detainees within the united states may be different from the protections owed to those held elsewhere .

the transfer of detainees into the country may also have immigration consequences .

criminal charges could also be brought against detainees in one of several forums — that is , federal trial courts , the courts - martial system , or military commissions .

the procedural protections afforded to the accused in each of these forums may differ , along with the types of offenses for which persons may be charged .

this may affect the ability of u.s. authorities to pursue criminal charges against some detainees .

whether the military commissions established to try detainees for war crimes fulfill constitutional requirements concerning a defendant's right to a fair trial is likely to become a matter of debate , if not litigation .

there is considerable prosecutorial discretion within the executive branch regarding which forum to utilize , but legislative enactments may potentially limit the exercise of such discretion , including by requiring detainees to be charged in a particular forum .

the issues raised by the proposed closure of the guantanamo detention facility have broad implications .

executive policies , legislative enactments , and judicial rulings concerning the rights and privileges owed to enemy belligerents may have long - term consequences for u.s. detention policy , both in the conflict with al qaeda and the taliban and in future armed conflicts .

