one consequence of unemployment is that individuals and their family members can lose their health insurance .

loss of insurance may have little impact on individuals who do not use many health care services .

however , for those who have health problems or who are injured , loss of coverage can be serious .

without insurance , individuals often have difficulty obtaining needed care and have problems paying for the care they receive .

unemployed individuals and their family members who cannot postpone care may incur large bills that create or add to financial distress .

some of the unemployed and / or their family members will be eligible for medicaid coverage .

others may be able to obtain insurance through a spouse or parent or by paying consolidated omnibus budge reconciliation act ( cobra ) premiums , though the cost of cobra premiums can be prohibitive .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 as amended ) is intended to improve access to health insurance coverage , but it does not necessarily provide immediate access to coverage for unemployed individuals and their family members .

some provisions of the aca that improve access to care have been implemented , but they apply to specific populations ( eg , individuals with preexisting conditions ) .

other provisions of the aca that more broadly apply to individuals , including unemployed individuals ( eg , health insurance exchanges ) , will generally not be implemented until 2014 .

this results in an interim period when unemployed individuals may have few health insurance options and / or lack the resources to pay for insurance .

concern about unemployment and health insurance has grown because of the recent economic recession and the jobless recovery .

in december 2011 , the nation's unemployment rate was 8.5% ( about 13.1 million individuals ) , whereas the underemployment rate , which includes individuals who are working part - time because their hours have been cut and other individuals who have given up looking for jobs , reached 15.2% ( about 23.4 million individuals ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) expects the unemployment rate to remain above 8.0% through 2014 , indicating that the impact of unemployment on health insurance is likely to continue for some time to come .

this report contains information and analysis intended to inform congressional debate over whether to address these issues , and if so , how , and to what extent .

it is divided into five parts: 1. analysis showing the diversity of the unemployed population ; 2. analysis showing the relationship between unemployment and loss of employer - sponsored health insurance ; 3. analysis of certain unemployed individuals at risk for being uninsured ; 4. summaries of current federal programs and tax treatments that can help some unemployed individuals obtain or retain health insurance ; and 5. additional options that might be considered .

the unemployed are a diverse population in terms of age , gender , marital status , income , and other characteristics .

these attributes indicate that they likely have differing health care needs and different capacities to pay for care and insurance .

this section describes the diversity of the unemployed population , broken down by various demographic categories .

employer - sponsored health insurance represents the largest source of coverage to workers and their dependents .

in 2010 , about 68.0% of workers received employer - sponsored coverage from an employer , either in their own names ( 51.0% ) or as dependents of another family member's employer ( 17.0% ) .

among other factors , the nature of unemployment for an individual ( i.e. , whether an individual is permanently or temporarily laid off ) and the industry in which an individual had been employed can affect an individual's likelihood of having employer - sponsored coverage .

those most likely to have lost employer - sponsored coverage are the nearly 6.4 million unemployed who report that they have been permanently laid off from their jobs , comprising nearly half ( 48.3% ) of the 13.1 million unemployed workers as of december 2011 .

another 1.4 million individuals ( 9.0% of the unemployed ) have been temporarily laid off .

these workers may still have access to health insurance and other employer - provided benefits ( if they were available prior to their change in work status ) .

about 900,000 individuals , 7.0% of the unemployed , left their jobs voluntarily .

complicating the analysis of unemployment and insurance coverage are certain other at - risk groups who are not technically unemployed but who do not have coverage due to a change in work status .

these other at - risk groups include involuntary part - time workers and discouraged workers who have left the workforce altogether .

if these individuals were counted in the december 2011 unemployment rate , it would increase from 8.5% to 15.2% .

legislative proposals to help the unemployed with health insurance typically focus solely on individuals who do not have a job and are actively searching for work ; however , individuals in other at - risk groups may also be without health insurance .

current federal law includes several programs and tax treatments that might help some unemployed with respect to health insurance .

programs and tax treatments for which coverage is directly or otherwise closely related to being unemployed include the mechanisms listed below .

in subsequent sections , each of these programs and tax treatments is briefly summarized and assessed .

the assessment considers the advantages and disadvantages of each mechanism from the perspective of unemployed individuals .

cobra health coverage tax credit medicaid itemized deduction for medical expenses health savings account .

the aca provides a number of immediate reforms to the health insurance market .

several provisions of the aca are intended to increase consumer access to health insurance .

for example , the aca creates the pre - existing condition insurance plan ( pcip ) .

the pcip is a temporary , high - risk pool program that provides coverage to individuals who have been uninsured for at least six months , have a preexisting condition or have been denied coverage because of a health condition , and are u.s. citizens or legal aliens .

the pcip provides access to health insurance to these individuals , but it does not provide financial assistance to the individuals .

the pcip operates in every state and is to remain in effect until 2014 , when individuals in the program will have access to coverage through the health insurance exchanges created by the aca .

as of november 2011 , there were 44,852 individuals throughout the country enrolled in the pcip .

an aca provision that is helping certain unemployed individuals under age 26 obtain or retain health insurance is the expansion of dependent coverage .

effective for plan years beginning after september 23 , 2010 , the aca generally requires that if a plan provides for dependent coverage of children , the plan must continue to make such coverage available for an adult child until age 26 .

this provision is effective only if the parent has health insurance and that insurance covers dependents .

recently , the department of health and human services reported that since the policy took effect in september 2010 , the percentage of adults aged 19-25 who are covered by private insurance has increased significantly , from 64% in september 2010 to 73% in june 2011 .

beyond the immediate reforms to the health insurance market , beginning in 2014 the aca will also provide premium tax credits and cost - sharing subsidies for certain eligible individuals who obtain coverage through a health insurance exchange , which could include some unemployed individuals .

the premium tax credit will be an advanceable , refundable tax credit , meaning taxpayers can benefit from the credit before the end of the tax year and may claim the full credit amount even if they have little or no federal income tax liability .

those who qualify for premium credits and are enrolled in certain plans in the health insurance exchange could also be eligible for assistance in paying any required cost - sharing for their health services .

in addition , in 2014 , or sooner at state option , the aca will expand medicaid access to certain individuals who are under age 65 with modified adjusted gross income ( magi ) up to 133% of the federal poverty level ( $30,657 for a family of four in 2012 ) .

the aca not only expands eligibility to a group that is not currently eligible for medicaid ( low - income childless adults ) , but also raises medicaid's mandatory income eligibility level for certain existing groups up to 133% of fpl .

since most of these provisions will not be implemented until 2014 , this results in an interim period when unemployed individuals lack assistance in obtaining health insurance coverage .

while some unemployed individuals may access coverage before then ( due to possible early state expansions , for example ) , most unemployed individuals will not obtain financial assistance for coverage before 2014 .

it is difficult to predict how long americans will continue to feel the effects of the recent economic recession .

even if economic growth recovers , growth in employment may lag ; the cbo expects the national unemployment rate to remain above 8.0% through 2014 .

unemployment could remain high in some areas and for some groups even after the national average goes down .

whatever the pattern , the unemployed might have difficulty obtaining and / or affording health insurance for some time .

as shown in the preceding discussions , the unemployed are not a homogenous group .

some individuals lose employer - sponsored health insurance when they lose their jobs , but other unemployed individuals may not have coverage to begin with .

in addition , there are involuntary part - time workers and discouraged workers who do not have coverage .

these issues raise related policy questions , including , should the federal government provide assistance to all of these groups ? .

if so , what are the advantages and disadvantages of providing assistance ? .

for those considering assistance , what are the advantages and disadvantages to giving higher priority to some groups ? .

several issues are involved: given that many people will receive assistance in 2014 , is it preferable to maintain the status quo until then ? .

among those who support more assistance and / or immediate assistance: in general , there appears to be a trade - off between concerns about cost and concerns about equity .

providing assistance to all the groups mentioned above would cost more than helping just those who lost employer - sponsored coverage , but on grounds of equity it may be difficult to justify not helping all .

however , if the immediate goal is not to allow the number of uninsured individuals to increase , there is something to be said for giving higher priority to those who recently had coverage .

if assistance is given to those who did not have employer - sponsored coverage , what form of coverage should they have ? .

should they be enrolled in public programs such as medicaid or medicare , or should they be permitted private insurance options ? .

if the latter were allowed , what benefit and consumer protection standards might apply ? .

while comprehensive health care reform has been enacted , it will not provide immediate health insurance coverage to all currently unemployed individuals .

for those considering more immediate action , there are a number of legislative proposals that could be considered in the 112 th congress .

the proposed programs would likely be temporary , however , and would provide some coverage until the aca is fully implemented and the health care exchanges are operational ( in 2014 ) .

legislative proposals to extend cobra include extending the eligibility period for the cobra premium subsidy included in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 and subsequently extended ) to those unemployed after may 31 , 2010 , and / or extending the eligibility period for receiving cobra at unsubsidized rates beyond 18 months .

a provision of arra , as extended through subsequent amendments , provided a 65% cobra subsidy in the form of an employer tax credit for eligible workers who became unemployed before may 31 , 2010 .

the subsidy was limited to 15 months , and individuals had to pay the remaining balance .

this provision has since expired .

the cobra premium subsidy was not available for those who lost their jobs after may 31 , 2010 .

one advantage of further expanding eligibility for cobra premium subsidies is that the legislative and regulatory frameworks ( including administrative procedures and legal interpretations ) are already in place .

a disadvantage for the unemployed is that cobra subsidies are limited to only a portion of those out of work , and they do not apply to those who may be just entering or re - entering the workforce after an extended absence .

in addition , some employers find changes to cobra administratively burdensome , and the extensions would add expenditures to an already strained federal budget .

in addition to extending the cobra premium subsidy , another possible option is to extend the cobra eligibility period , which now is generally limited to 18 months .

an extension could help individuals who need more time in a prolonged recession ( or in its after effects ) to find jobs that provide health insurance .

as noted earlier , a limitation of unsubsidized cobra for the unemployed has been that covered individuals usually have to pay 102% of the health plan's full premium .

because most employers subsidize health insurance premiums for their workers , the 102% cobra premium may not be affordable for the unemployed , especially when compared with the average level of unemployment compensation .

employers might argue that extended coverage would be most attractive to individuals who have ( or whose family members have ) serious health problems .

if this were the case , covering these individuals in the plan could raise costs for others in the plan .

while extending cobra would not increase federal expenditures , it would provide access to health insurance , but not necessarily financial relief from paying for the coverage , to individuals .

as noted in the preceding discussion , individuals aged 55 and older are a growing segment of the unemployed population .

unemployed individuals in this age group often have more difficulty finding another job ( or at least another job comparable to the one they lost ) , have fewer working years remaining to recover financially , and are at an increased risk of health problems .

some have proposed allowing older unemployed individuals to buy into medicare early , that is , to join the medicare program by paying premiums .

individuals are generally not eligible for medicare until age 65 .

many different design options need to be considered in this approach , including who would be eligible and the possibility of subsidies .

one approach is not to provide subsidies , but instead to fully fund the program by charging premiums for individuals aged 62 to 64 .

individuals who do not have employer - sponsored health insurance or medicaid could voluntarily enroll in medicare .

premiums would equal the average expected cost of the program plus an administrative fee of 5% .

cbo estimated that the annual premium for single coverage would be $7,600 in 2011 .

cbo also estimated that this would indirectly increase mandatory spending for social security , as it may encourage some individuals to retire earlier than they otherwise would have .

a medicare buy - in is similar in some ways to expanding the eligibility period for cobra beyond the 18-month window .

both would require enrollees to pay the full cost of the coverage .

there are advantages , however , to the cobra option versus the medicare buy - in .

first , the cobra option would be available to all the unemployed who have access to employer - sponsored insurance through former employment , regardless of age .

second , for the older unemployed , the premiums would most likely be lower under the cobra option because the pool of applicants would include a more diverse group in terms of age and the administrative cost ( of 2% ) is lower .

the advantage of the medicare buy - in proposal compared to the cobra option is that the medicare buy - in would cover older workers re - entering the labor force , whereas the cobra option would apply only to those individuals who had left a job .

