a spate of autumn 2008 news stories reported the downsizing or closure of periodicals and their publishers due to financial challenges: u.s. news & world report magazine will reduce its paper issues to once per month ; time inc. , which publishes 24 magazines for the u.s. market , has said it will cut 600 jobs , about 6% of its workforce ; alpha media group , publishers of maxim and other magazines for young men , will lay off 50 to 60 of its staffers ; hearst magazines will transition cosmogirl magazine to a web - only publication ; condé nast announced that it would reduce its business magazine , portfolio , from 12 issues per year to 10 , and men ' s vogue from 10 issues per year to 2 ; radar magazine ceased operations in october , and manhattan media inc. announced that it had put off its plans to restart publication of 02138 , a lifestyle magazine for harvard university alumni ; and the century - old christian science monitor , a newspaper that is delivered via u.s. mail five days per week , will cease publishing in paper format in april 2009 .

except for a weekend paper edition , the newspaper will become a web - only publication .

these are not the only periodicals so affected .

since 2006 , revenue shortfalls have compelled many other magazines to cease publication or to become web - only publications .

generally , observers have cited three causes for periodicals' recent difficulties: ( 1 ) a decline in subscriptions , ( 2 ) a rise in paper costs , and ( 3 ) a decline in advertising revenue due to the downturn of the u.s. economy and advertisers' decisions to spend larger portions of their advertising budgets on websites instead of print publications .

the aforementioned factors are not the only factors that have negatively affected the survival of periodicals .

as with any business , firm - specific causes , such as managerial errors ( eg , financial mismanagement ) and oversupply ( eg , too many periodicals competing for the same audience of readers ) , also have come into play .

in light of these high profile incidents , and because of a possible u.s .

postal service postage increase in 2009 , the 111 th congress may be asked to help periodical publishers reduce their operating costs by providing them with increased postage subsidies .

some publishers sought postage relief during the 110 th congress .

such assistance would not be unprecedented .

in fact , as this report details , congress has subsidized periodicals postage since the founding of the united states .

in the late 1960s , the post office was widely recognized to be in crisis .

the department had been running deficits for years .

in fy1967 , it spent $1.2 billion more than it earned .

periodicals mail was the biggest money loser for the post office , contributing nearly $400 million to the department's deficit that year .

the postage on periodicals covered only about a quarter of the delivery costs .

as before , taxpayers made up the shortfalls through annual appropriations .

congress addressed this problem and many others afflicting the post office by enacting the postal reorganization act of 1970 ( pra ; 84 stat .

719-787 ; 39 u.s.c .

101 et seq. ) .

the statute abolished the post office department , replacing it with the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) , an "independent establishment of the executive branch. .

this new entity was designed to be financially self - sufficient , that is , it was to operate without annual congressional appropriations .

to this end , the pra provided the usps with greater authority over its operations so that it could control its costs and boost its revenues .

the law also had effects on periodicals , which had continued to fail to provide the usps with revenues that covered the cost of their delivery .

the enactment of the postal accountability and enhancement act ( paea ; p.l .

109-435 ; 120 stat .

3198-3263 ) in december 2006 made the future of the postage subsidy for periodicals less clear .

the paea requires the new postal regulatory commission ( prc ) to devise a new postage rate - setting system .

the statute states that an "objective" of the new system is that it will allocate "the total institutional costs of the postal service appropriately between market - dominant and competitive products" ( 120 stat .

3201 ) .

additionally , one of the "factors" that the prc had to consider in establishing the new pricing system is the requirement that each class of mail or type of mail service bear the direct and indirect postal costs attributable to each class or type of mail service through reliably identified causal relationships plus that portion of all other costs of the postal service reasonably assignable to such class or type ( 120 stat .

3201 ) .

prima facie , it might appear that this provision requires each mail class , including periodicals , to cover all of its costs .

were this the case , it might be expected that the periodicals subsidy would diminish .

this interpretation , however , does not appear to be correct .

first , the paea does not state that each mail classes must cover its total costs .

rather , the law requires each mail class to cover its "attributable" costs .

second , the paea only requires that the usps's institutional costs be allocated among mail classes "appropriately. .

the law does not define what "appropriately" means .

the prc interpreted it to mean that competitive products ( overnight mail and other products ) must contribute a minimum of 5.5% of the usps's institutional costs .

this would mean that up to 94.5% of the usps institutional costs would need to be covered by market dominant products .

however , neither the law nor the prc's rules require periodicals or any other market dominant product to cover a particular percentage of these institutional costs .

third , the paea contains provisions that clearly favor the continued subsidization of periodicals as a class of mail .

the paea did not abolish the longstanding statutory policy of lower postage rates for the editorial portion of a periodical .

also , the paea stipulates that one of the factors that the prc is to consider in devising the new postage rate system is "the educational , cultural , scientific , and informational value to the recipient of mail matter" ( 120 stat .

3202 ) .

in light of these points , nothing in the law would appear to indicate that the postage subsidy for periodicals need diminish .

that said , the paea may provide one means under which periodicals postage could be greatly increased and its subsidies greatly reduced .

the new rate - setting system mandated by the paea must limit the annual postage increases for periodicals and other market dominant products .

postage may not be increased more than the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) ( 120 stat .

3202-3203 ) .

thus far , it appears that both the prc and the usps strongly respect the paea's rate cap .

on february 11 , 2008 , the usps filed its first notice of increased postage for market dominant products .

the postal service proposed to raise postage beginning may 12 , 2008 .

it sought to increase periodicals postage 2.71% , an amount beneath the cpu - u of 2.9% .

on march 17 , 2008 , the prc found the proposal appropriate under the paea .

however , the paea does permit postage increases in excess of the cpi - u in the event of an "extraordinary and exceptional circumstance. .

neither the law nor the prc's rules define what would constitute such a circumstance .

notably , the usps may file its second annual notice for increased postage for periodicals and other non - market products in the winter of 2009 .

during 2008 , the monthly cpi - u has been between 3.0% and 4.5% .

the usps is experiencing financial distress and operating deficits , due in part to a decline in mail volume .

if the usps's revenues continue to drop significantly and its operating costs increase , the usps may argue that it is experiencing an "extraordinary and exceptional circumstance" that would justify raising the postage of periodicals and other market dominant products sharply .

it is unclear whether the prc would agree and accede to such an argument .

nor is it clear whether the prc would interpret the law to permit the usps to raise periodicals postage at a rate higher than that charged to other mail classes .

over the long - term , it is unclear whether the periodicals postage subsidy will increase or decrease .

to date , the new rate schedule and the paea have not had any obvious effects on the periodicals postage subsidy .

a prc analysis found that in fy2007 periodicals postage revenues covered only 83% of the class's attributable costs , a shortfall of $448 million , and made no contribution toward the usps's institutional costs .

government provision of postage subsidies for periodicals long has been a contentious issue because it involves disputed principles and vexing implementation issues .

some persons argue that periodicals play a unique role in a representative democracy , that they provide for a flow of information and ideas that benefit the nation .

adherents of this viewpoint argue that this special role means that periodicals deserve subsidization , and that this role was recognized by pra , which requires usps to "have as its basic function the obligation to provide postal services to bind the nation together through the personal , educational , literary , and business correspondence of the people" ( 39 u.s.c .

101 ( a ) ) .

not everyone agrees with this policy .

some persons contest the purported contribution of periodicals to the public weal or suggest that other means of information transmission , such as the telephone , television , and the world wide web are at least equally effective .

still other individuals take the position that fairness requires that each mailer should pay his or her total postage costs .

meanwhile , other observers accept the importance of periodicals to a representative democracy , but suggest that actuating this idea into a policy has been an overly complex undertaking .

as the above review of postage subsidy policy indicates , none has worked perfectly .

postage subsidies policies inevitably have raised two contentious questions: ( 1 ) which periodicals should receive these subsidies ? .

 ; and ( 2 ) who should pay for these subsidies ? .

the sheer diversity and plenitude of periodicals — from the atlantic monthly to people to sports illustrated to zymurgy — has made enacting periodical postage subsidies a challenging and , frequently , expensive undertaking .

should congress wish to consider attempting to assist periodicals publishers , it may wish to consider the following seven issues: ( 1 ) are the conditions that are negatively affecting periodicals likely to continue ? .

 ( 2 ) does the closure of some periodicals negatively affect the health of the u.s.'s democratic republic ? .

 ( 3 ) is the transformation of periodicals from paper publications to online publications a positive or negative development ? .

 ( 4 ) would increased postage subsidies greatly decrease the probability that more publishers will cease publication ? .

 ( 5 ) would some other form of governmental aid — such as below market loans — be more helpful to periodicals publishers ? .

 ( 6 ) should government assistance be provided to all periodicals regardless of their editorial subject matter ( eg , government and politics , celebrity news , sports , and hobbies ) ? .

 ( 7 ) if periodicals should be further subsidized , what should be the goal of that subsidy ? .

should it cover the shortfall between periodicals postage revenues and periodicals attributable costs ? .

or should it also provide a contribution toward periodicals institutional costs ? .

