the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; h.r .

1 ) , which the president signed into law on february 17 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , incorporated the health information technology for economic and clinical health ( hitech ) act .

the hitech act , based on legislation introduced in the 110 th congress , is intended to promote the widespread adoption of health information technology ( hit ) for the electronic sharing of clinical data among hospitals , physicians , and other health care stakeholders .

hit , which generally refers to the use of computer applications in medical practice , is widely viewed as a necessary and vital component of health care reform .

it encompasses interoperable electronic health records ( ehrs ) — including computerized systems to order tests and medications , and support systems to aid clinical decision making — and the development of a national health information network to permit the secure exchange of electronic health information among providers .

the promise of hit comes not from automating existing practices , but rather as a tool to help overhaul the delivery of care .

hit enables providers to render care more efficiently , for example , by eliminating the use of paper - based records and reducing the duplication of diagnostic tests .

it can also improve the quality of care by identifying harmful drug interactions and helping physicians manage patients with multiple conditions .

moreover , the widespread use of hit would provide large amounts of clinical data for comparative effectiveness research , performance measurement , and other activities aimed at improving health care quality .

relatively few health care providers have adopted hit .

the most recent estimate suggests that only about 5% of physicians have a fully functional ehr that incorporates all or most of the recommended capabilities , including electronic documentation of physicians' notes , electronic viewing of lab test results and radiological images , electronic prescribing , clinical decision support , and interoperability with other systems .

the most important barriers to hit adoption include the high implementation and maintenance costs , the limited financial incentives for using hit , and the lack of interoperability .

the hitech act includes three sets of provisions to promote hit adoption .

first , it codifies the office of the national coordinator for health information technology ( onchit ) within the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

created by executive order in 2004 , onchit was charged with developing and implementing a strategic plan to guide the nationwide implementation of hit in the public and private health care sectors .

onchit has focused its activities in the following areas: ( 1 ) developing vocabulary , messaging , and functional standards necessary to achieve interoperability among varying hit applications ; ( 2 ) establishing criteria for certifying that hit products meet those standards ; ( 3 ) ensuring the privacy and security of electronic health information ; and ( 4 ) helping facilitate the creation of prototype health information networks .

the goal is to develop a national capability to exchange standards - based health care data in a secure computer environment .

second , the hitech act through a number of mechanisms provides financial incentives for hit use among health care practitioners .

it establishes several grant programs to provide funding for investing in hit infrastructure , purchasing certified ehrs , training , and the dissemination of best practices .

it also authorizes grants to states for low - interest loans to help providers finance hit .

beginning in 2011 , the legislation provides medicare incentive payments to encourage doctors and hospitals to adopt and use certified ehrs .

those incentive payments are phased out over time and replaced by financial penalties for physicians and hospitals that are not using certified ehrs .

in addition to the medicare incentives , the legislation authorizes a 100% federal match for payments to certain qualifying medicaid providers for the acquisition and use of certified ehr technology .

finally , the hitech act includes a series of privacy and security provisions that amend and expand the current hipaa requirements .

among other things , the legislation strengthens enforcement of the hipaa privacy rule and creates a right to be notified in the event of a breach of identifiable health information .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that the hitech act payment incentives ( and penalties ) will increase spending for the medicare and medicaid programs by a total of $32.7 billion over the 2009-2019 period .

cbo anticipates , however , that widespread adoption of interoperable ehrs will reduce total spending on health care by decreasing the number of duplicate and inappropriate tests and procedures , reducing paperwork and administrative overhead , and eliminating medical errors .

over the 2009-2019 period , it estimates that the hitech act will save the medicare and medicaid programs a total of $12.5 billion .

when savings to the federal employees health benefits program and cms's administrative costs are factored in , cbo estimates overall that the hitect act will increase direct federal spending by $20.8 billion .

under current law , cbo predicts that about 45% of hospitals and 65% of physicians will have adopted hit by 2019 .

cbo estimates that the incentive mechanisms in the hitech act will boost those adoption rates to about 70% for hospitals and about 90% for physicians .

this report provides a summary and explanation of the provisions in the hitech act .

in order to provide some context for that discussion , the report first gives an overview of prior actions taken by congress and the administrations to promote hit , and briefly describes efforts by the 109 th and 110 th congresses to enact comprehensive hit legislation .

the report will continue to be updated to reflect administrative actions related to the implementation of the hitech act .

lawmakers incorporated the hitech act in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; h.r .

1 , h.rept .

111-16 ) , the economic stimulus bill that the president signed into law on february 17 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

the hitech act is an amalgam of the two house bills from the 110 th congress .

it contains three sets of provisions that are expected to boost hit adoption among health care providers in the coming years .

first , it codifies onchit and establishes a process for the development of interoperability standards that support the nationwide electronic exchange of health information among doctors , hospitals , patients , health plans , the federal government , and other health care stakeholders .

it also establishes a voluntary certification process for hit products .

the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) is to provide for the testing of such products to determine if they meet national standards that allow for secure electronic information exchange .

after the adoption of an initial set of standards by the end of 2009 , the national coordinator must make an ehr available at a nominal fee , unless it is determined that the needs and demands of providers are being adequately met by the marketplace .

second , the hitech act authorizes funding for several grant programs to support hit infrastructure , ehr adoption , training , dissemination of best practices , telemedicine , and inclusion of hit in clinical education .

funds also are provided to states for low - interest loans to help health care practitioners finance hit .

in addition , the legislation provides financial incentives through the medicare and medicaid programs to encourage doctors , hospitals , health clinics , and other entities to adopt and use certified ehrs .

medicare incentive payments are phased out over time and replaced with financial penalties for providers that are not using ehrs .

finally , the hitech act expands the hipaa privacy and security standards .

among other things , it establishes a breach notification requirement for health information that is not encrypted , strengthens enforcement of the hipaa standards by increasing penalties for violations and provides greater resources for enforcement and oversight activities , places new restrictions on marketing activities by health plans and providers , and creates transparency by allowing patients to request an audit trail showing all disclosures of their electronic health information .

the hitech act appears in two separate arra titles , each of which is described in the tables below .

table 1 provides a summary of the hitech act provisions in division a , title xiii of the economic stimulus bill .

those provisions include onchit and the development and adoption of standards , the grant and loan programs , and the privacy and security requirements .

table 2 summarizes the hitech act's medicare and medicaid provisions , which are in division b , title iv of the stimulus bill .

for each provision , as appropriate , the tables include additional information on existing federal requirements and other relevant administrative activities .

each mention of the secretary in the tables refers to the secretary of health and human services .

note: table 2 does not include two miscellaneous medicare provisions added to the hitech act , which are unrelated to hit .

in addition to the mandatory funding that would become available to health care providers under the hitech act's medicare and medicaid provisions , the emergency appropriations provisions in arra division a include $2 billion in discretionary funds for onchit to invest in hit architecture ; provide grants to hospitals , physicians , and other health care providers ; and support training programs .

in addition , $85 million is appropriated to the indian health service ( ihs ) for hit and telehealth , to be allocated at the discretion of the ihs director .

