the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ) empowers the secretary of the treasury to act to restore liquidity and stability to the financial system of the united states , and authorizes funds on a graduated scale that the secretary may use for this purpose .

the act immediately authorizes the secretary to have up to $250 billion outstanding at any one time under the program .

this authorized maximum will automatically increase to $350 billion outstanding upon the president's submission to congress of a certification of need .

should the secretary of the treasury wish to have in excess of $350 billion outstanding at any one time under the program , the president must submit a written report to congress detailing the secretary's plan to exercise this additional authority .

the submission of this report triggers a 15-calendar day period during which congress may enact a joint resolution disapproving the request .

the act further establishes special "fast track" parliamentary procedures for congressional consideration of this joint resolution .

should congress either choose not to , or be unable to successfully , enact a disapproval resolution by the expiration of this 15-day period , the secretary's authority would automatically increase up to $700 billion in outstanding purchases at one time .

section 115 ( c ) of eesa establishes a set of expedited parliamentary procedures by which congress may consider a joint resolution rejecting the secretary's plan .

statutes that contain provisions establishing expedited procedures regulating the consideration of particular legislation are frequently called "rulemaking statutes," because their procedures have the same force and effect of standing rules of the house or senate .

these expedited legislative procedures were created by congress to ensure that it could promptly consider and act on the secretary's proposal within the 15-day time frame .

the procedures accomplish this goal by exempting the joint resolution of disapproval from many of the ordinary time - consuming steps and legislative obstacles that apply to most other measures congress considers .

in short , the resolution is considered not under the ordinary parliamentary procedures of the house and senate , which are , by design , slow and uncertain , but on a special parliamentary "fast track. .

these procedures address .

under the terms of eesa , a joint resolution must be enacted in order to disapprove the treasury secretary's plan .

this means that not only would it have to pass both chambers , but it must also be signed by the president , or enacted over his veto by supermajority vote , to take effect .

for this reason , some members have argued that resolutions of disapproval of this type generally put congress at an institutional disadvantage relative to the executive , in that a president is almost certain to veto the resolution and congress would have to muster significant super majorities for a successful override .

during debate over the enactment of a different rulemaking statute which included a joint disapproval resolution , one member voiced this view of the power relationship between the branches , stating , a veto would , of course , be likely since the resolution would be disapproving what the executive has proposed .

then it would take two - thirds majorities in both houses of congress to effectuate the congress' expression of disapproval .

in other words , a resolution of disapproval would allow as few as 34 senators , working with one chief executive , to block the will of ... members of congress .

conversely , others have argued that resolutions of disapproval give the president necessary flexibility to act , while still reserving the prerogative of congress to overrule him and influence important policy questions .

the fact that an expedited procedure like that of eesa is contained in a rulemaking statute does not mean that another law must be passed in order to alter it .

it is sufficient that a majority of members of either chamber agree to ignore or alter the expedited procedure in order to change the way in which its features apply in that chamber at a given time .

because article i , section 5 of the constitution gives each chamber of congress the power to determine the rules of its proceedings , expedited procedure statutes like those contained in eesa can ( like all rules of the house or senate ) be set aside , altered , or amended by either chamber at any time .

these changes can be accomplished by the house through the adoption of a special rule reported by committee on rules , by suspension of the rules , or by unanimous consent .

in fact , prior practice suggests that the house of representatives routinely supplants the terms of rulemaking statutes by adopting special rules by majority vote .

as is discussed above , the house chose to alter some features of the expedited procedure as it relates to the motion to proceed with the adoption on january 15 , 2009 , of h.res .

62 ( 111 th congress ) .

although the same constitutional authority to determine its own rules resides equally in both houses of congress , expedited procedures are , in a sense , more binding on the senate than they are on the house .

the senate operates largely under terms achieved by the unanimous consent of all senators .

if that consent can not be achieved , altering an established rulemaking statute would , in all likelihood , require either the 3 / 5ths of senators chosen and sworn ( 60 if there are no vacancies ) necessary to invoke cloture or the concurrence of two - thirds present and voting ( 67 if all senators vote ) necessary to suspend the rules .

motions to suspend the rules also require written notice one calendar day in advance , and are fully debatable .

on january 12 , 2009 , the president transmitted to congress a report detailing a plan to exercise the authority under 115 ( a ) ( 3 ) of the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 to access additional eesa funds .

based on a submission date of january 12 , 2009 , and the deadlines in the statute , the table below estimates deadlines relating to the introduction and consideration under expedited parliamentary procedures of a joint resolution of disapproval under the eesa .

it is important to note that the dates included below are only estimates calculated by crs .

the house and senate parliamentarians are the sole definitive authorities on questions relating to the rules of the respective chambers ( including statutory rules such as those in the eesa ) , and should be consulted for a formal opinion on any specific question about deadlines under the act .

