federal policymakers have long been concerned about the impact of manmade carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions on global climate change .

to address these concerns , congress has been debating a range of potential initiatives for reducing atmospheric co 2 from u.s. sources .

legislative proposals would seek to limit u.s. co 2 emissions to specific ( historical ) levels through emissions caps , carbon taxes , or other regulatory mechanisms .

many of these proposals dictate or anticipate a declining long - term trajectory for annual u.s. carbon emissions .

in the 110 th congress , the most prominent co 2 proposals sought reductions of nationwide co 2 emissions to 1990 levels or lower by 2030 .

president - elect barack obama has proposed carbon reduction targets as well , intending to cut co 2 emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 , and by an additional 80% by 2050 .

a fundamental policy question which arises from carbon control proposals is how the co 2 reduction targets can be achieved .

numerous analysts have been examining this question and identifying specific measures to reach particular targets — especially in the electricity industry , which is responsible for nearly 40% of u.s. co 2 emissions .

in the electricity sector , these measures typically include some combination of energy efficiency , renewable energy , nuclear power , advanced fossil - fuel power generation , carbon capture and sequestration , plug - in hybrid electric vehicles , and distributed energy resources .

figure 1 illustrates the co 2 abatement potential of these measures in the electricity sector as estimated in a widely cited analysis by the electric power research institute ( epri ) .

in the epri example , overall co 2 emissions associated with the electricity sector would be reduced below 1990 levels by 2030 .

other studies have generated their own projections , with alternative targets and assumptions leading to distinct trajectories for co 2 emissions and different contributions from the various abatement measures .

analyses like that in figure 1 are important for understanding the potential opportunities and limitations of specific technological measures which may be needed to meet co 2 abatement goals .

however , with their focus on technical potential , such studies often have difficulty conveying in a straightforward way the key infrastructural , environmental , regulatory , or operational uncertainties which might affect how much of that potential could practically be achieved .

these uncertainties , nonetheless , are of critical concern to legislators overseeing existing carbon - related programs or considering future co 2 abatement policies .

in addition to their technical aspects , congress faces a need to gauge the overall viability of specific co 2 abatement measures — what are their prospects for helping to achieve co 2 targets in the electricity sector .

legislators also face a need to assess the time frame over which such measures could be expected to work , and how these measures may fit together to achieve overall co 2 abatement goals under a national carbon policy .

figure 1 .

potential co2 reductions in electric powersource: adapted from barbara tyran , electric power research institute , "the power to reduce co2 emissions: the full portfolio," slide presentation ( may 15 , 2008 ) : 7. http: / / www.iea.org / textbase / work / 2008 / roadmap / 2a_tyran_epri%20roadmaps.pdf this report examines key uncertainties associated with the co 2 emissions abatement measures identified in figure 1 .

the report briefly describes each measure and discusses expectations for its potential in the context of past experience , technical challenges , infrastructure requirements , or other factors which may inform performance expectations .

for each measure , it identifies and discusses a critical uncertainty which may influence its overall viability .

the report concludes with a discussion of the implications of these uncertainties in the context of the congressional carbon control debate .

when an energy conversion device , such as a household appliance or automobile engine , undergoes a technical change that enables it to provide the same service ( e.g , cooling , lighting , motor drive ) while using less energy it is said to have increased "energy efficiency. .

the energy - saving result of the efficiency increase is often called "energy conservation. .

the energy efficiency of buildings can likewise be increased through the use of certain design changes such as more insulation , thermal windows , improved ventilation , and solar orientation .

energy efficiency is often viewed as interchangeable with energy supply options like electric generation , oil , or natural gas .

energy efficiency can also reduce energy resource use and associated environmental impacts — like co 2 emissions from power plants .

renewable energy supplies in the electricity sector typically include the following types of power plants: geothermal , solar , wind , biomass , and municipal solid waste / landfill gas .

many carbon control advocates and federal policy makers have high expectations for the potential of renewable generation to help reduce co 2 emissions in the united states .

the widely publicized pickens plan , for example , announced by t. boone pickens in july , 2008 , envisions deploying enough wind generation in the great plains states to produce 20% of u.s. electricity by 2018 .

the obama - biden presidential campaign similarly pledged to establish a federal renewable portfolio standard requiring that 25 percent of electricity consumed in the u.s. be "derived from clean , sustainable energy sources , like solar , wind , and geothermal" by 2025 .

some groups have advocated even more aggressive targets for u.s. renewable power development .

others are less optimistic .

epri , for example , assumes renewable sources ( excluding hydroelectric generation ) could contribute 9% of electricity production in the electric power sector by 2030 .

according to the energy information administration ( eia ) , biomass and wind generation are the two types of renewable power with the greatest overall economic potential , and therefore , the greatest potential to reduce co 2 emissions .

biomass and wind power are inherently different technologies , however , so they face distinct uncertainties related to their potential expansion under a national program of carbon control .

they are discussed , in turn , in the following sections .

nuclear power has been a significant part of the u.s. electricity sector for decades .

the u.s. nuclear power industry currently comprises 104 licensed reactors at 65 plant sites in 31 states and generates about 20% of the nation's electricity .

although no nuclear power plants have been ordered in the united states since 1978 , and more than 100 reactors ( all ordered after 1973 ) have been canceled , nuclear power is receiving renewed interest , prompted by a spike in fossil fuel prices , new federal subsidies and incentives — and possible co 2 mitigation policies .

as of september 30 , 2008 , the nuclear regulatory commission had received , or anticipated receiving , license applications for 20 new nuclear reactor projects comprising 30 reactors in total .

because nuclear power generation is an established technology and produces virtually no direct co 2 emissions , an expansion of u.s. nuclear power is viewed by many as essential for reaching long term co 2 mitigation goals .

for example , in recent remarks before the governor's global climate summit , president - elect obama stated that "we will tap nuclear power" as one way to help "build a clean energy future. .

likewise the intergovernmental panel on climate change fourth assessment report states that "[n]uclear energy ... could make an increasing contribution to carbon free electricity and heat in the future. .

epri proposes a 64% net increase in u.s. nuclear generating capacity , over four times the capacity addition in eia's reference forecast , by 2030 .

a 2003 study by mit postulates a 300% net increase in u.s. nuclear power capacity by 2050 .

one set of technologies that may help to reduce co 2 emissions from coal power plants is advanced coal - fired power generation .

advanced coal technologies include ultra - supercritical pulverized coal plants and integrated gasification combined cycle ( igcc ) units , the latter of which convert coal into a synthetic gas prior to combustion .

compared to conventional coal - fired power plants , which typically operate at around 33% efficiency , advanced technologies under development or demonstration could improve coal plant efficiency to 46% or more .

because they use coal more efficiently , advanced coal plants could yield proportionate reductions in co 2 emissions per unit of electricity output compared to conventional coal plants .

if carbon capture and sequestration technology ( discussed in the next section ) could be added to these plants their co 2 emissions could be further reduced .

some analysts and policy makers anticipate that advanced coal generation , either in the form of new coal - fired plants or upgrades to certain existing plants , will make a significant contribution to u.s. carbon reduction goals .

they argue that , until carbon capture and storage technology is commercialized , advanced coal plants will be a cost - effective option for meeting future electricity demand growth while limiting co 2 emissions growth compared to its current rate of growth .

epri , for example , proposes co 2 reductions from advanced coal plants on par with those from customer energy - efficiency programs through 2030 .

another approach to mitigating atmospheric carbon emissions is direct sequestration of carbon dioxide: capturing co 2 at its source and storing it indefinitely to avoid its release to the atmosphere .

carbon capture and sequestration ( ccs ) is of great interest because potentially large amounts of co 2 emitted from the industrial burning of fossil fuels in the united states could be suitable for sequestration .

in theory , carbon capture technologies are seen as potentially removing 80% - 95% of co 2 emitted from an electric power plant or other industrial facility .

power plants are the most likely initial candidates for ccs because they are predominantly large , single - point sources , and they contribute approximately one - third of u.s. co 2 emissions from fossil fuels .

many analysts and policy makers have high hopes for ccs technology to help meet future co 2 reduction goals in the u.s. electricity sector and worldwide .

for example , one expert has testified before congress that "[c]apturing and sequestering co 2 emissions from coal - fired power plants and eventually all fossil combustion is a foundational technology component of any emissions reduction plan" seeking to stabilize atmospheric co 2 .

in the international energy agency's 2007 forecast ccs is "widely - deployed" under global co 2 stabilization assumptions and accounts for 21% of avoided co 2 emissions by 2030 .

in epri's analysis , ccs makes the single greatest contribution to reduced co 2 emissions among all measures by 2030 .

a recent development in advanced vehicle technologies is the potential introduction in the next few years of plug - in hybrid electric vehicles ( phevs ) .

phevs , like commercially available hybrid electric vehicles ( hevs ) , would combine an electric motor and battery pack with an internal combustion engine to improve overall fuel efficiency .

phevs would use a much higher - capacity battery pack than a typical hev , however , and would be able charge the vehicle on grid power rather than solely by the combustion engine during operation .

with their larger batteries , phevs could achieve an all - electric range of 20 to 40 miles ( the average commuting distance ) .

by using grid electricity rather than gasoline in this way , phevs could lower overall fuel - cycle pollutant emissions — including co 2 emissions — from vehicles .

accordingly , many analysts and policy makers believe phev's offer substantial opportunities to reduce the nation's overall co 2 emissions .

a 2007 joint epri - natural resources defense council ( nrdc ) study , for example , concluded that , through the widespread adoption of phev technology , "cumulative [co 2 ] savings from 2010 to 2050 can be large. .

the obama - biden presidential campaign pledged to "[p]ut 1 million plug - in hybrid cars ... on the road by 2015. .

while phevs are an innovative technology , there are important questions about the impact phevs may have on co 2 emissions over the next 20 ot 30 years .

one key uncertainty is whether such vehicles would be purchased in sufficient numbers ( approximately 50% of new car sales by 2025 , according to the epri / nrdc study ) to have a significant carbon impact despite their high cost .

phevs are projected to retail for over $40,000 per vehicle in the near - term compared to approximately $28,000 for an hev and $23,000 for a conventional vehicle .

as a point of reference , conventional hevs accounted for 2.4% of new vehicle sales in the united states through november 2008 .

of greater uncertainty , perhaps , are the projected carbon emissions of power plants operating to supply phev electricity .

as a general rule , phevs only reduce net carbon emissions if the power plants supplying them produce relatively little carbon per kwh .

but some studies show that , if the u.s. generation portfolio does not significantly reduce its overall carbon intensity , widespread adoption of phevs through 2030 may have only a small effect on , and might actually increase , net co 2 emissions .

thus , the carbon abatement potential of phevs is largely dependent upon the concurrent implementation of renewables , nuclear power , and ccs — each of which face great uncertainties of their own as discussed above .

distributed energy resources are small - scale power generation technologies located near homes or businesses to provide an alternative to , or an enhancement of , conventional grid power .

distributed resources include technologies such as rooftop photovoltaics , natural gas - fired microturbines , wind turbines , and fuel cells .

the category also includes combined heat and power ( chp ) systems , which make productive use of "waste" heat from electricity generation , thereby increasing the total useful energy extracted from electric generation fuels .

distributed energy resources ( der ) offer potential benefits to customers in terms of energy costs , power reliability , and power quality .

der technologies also can help mitigate co 2 emissions because some use renewable energy sources , or , as in the case of chp systems , they make more efficient use of fossil fuels than the utility power generation they displace .

among der technologies , chp is the most widespread , accounting for nearly nine percent of u.s. electric generating capacity in 2007 .

chp is also viewed as having the greatest near - term potential to reduce co 2 emissions .

a 2008 report from oak ridge national laboratory concludes that , by achieving 20 percent generation capacity from chp by 2030 ( an "aggressive target" ) , the united states could avoid 60 percent of the projected increases in co 2 emissions during that time .

a 2007 study by mckinsey & company further concludes that much of this added capacity could be installed at negative marginal cost .

nonetheless , chp , along with other der technologies , has not been implemented to its potential due to technical and utility infrastructure barriers .

chp , or cogeneration , has been around in one form or another for more than 100 years ; it is proven , not speculative .

despite this proven track record , chp remains underutilized and is one of the most compelling sources of energy efficiency that could , with even modest investments , move the nation strongly toward ... a cleaner environment .

other der technologies , such as photovoltaics and fuel cells , likewise face barriers limiting their implementation .

as a united kingdom government study stated , the complexity and novelty of some of the technologies , together with their need to be integrated into the built environment , often by players new to the energy business , means there is a significant gap between potential and delivery .

moreover , many of the technologies are not yet cost - competitive at their current state of development and with current fuel and carbon prices .

analysts also question whether policies imposing costs on co 2 emissions would substantially increase der adoption due to the existing alignment of carbon reduction and cost reduction objectives , even without carbon costs , and the fundamental economics of renewables .

thus , der faces a key uncertainty similar to that faced by energy efficiency .

the key question is whether new programs and the imposition of carbon costs would enable the electricity sector to capture substantially more der potential than it does today .

policy research and technical studies show that substantially reducing co 2 emissions in the u.s. electricity sector over the next few decades likely requires successful deployment of every major carbon mitigation measure at the nation's disposal .

however , it is also clear that significant uncertainties cast doubt on the potential of individual measures to achieve their hoped - for carbon impact .

for the measures discussed in this report , the key uncertainties can be summarized as follows: energy efficiency — can the united states overcome socioeconomic barriers to achieve four times more potential savings than ever before ? .

renewable energy — will there be enough transmission for wind power ? .

is there enough land to grow the needed biomass ? .

nuclear power — could the united states build new plants fast enough to matter ? .

advanced coal power — will banks fund them and regulators approve them ? .

carbon capture and sequestration — will the technology be commercially deployable in 10 years , 25 years , or never ? .

plug - in hybrid electric vehicles — how much "low carbon" electricity would be available to charge their batteries ? .

distributed energy resources — would carbon costs change distributed energy economics enough to spur deployment ? .

policy makers and interest groups recognize these uncertainties , and have put forth numerous proposals to address them .

it is beyond the scope of this report to examine each of these proposals , but they include the broadest range of policy instruments at government's disposal: higher efficiency standards , new regulatory authorities , tax incentives , direct subsidies , research and development ( r&d ) grants , environmental rules , public information campaigns , and a host of other policy instruments .

specific examples include calls for more federally - funded ccs demonstration projects and proposals for federal preemption of state siting authority to promote new transmission development .

while they run the gamut , it remains to be seen which proposals may be pursued by congress and what effects they would have .

consequently , the overall success of a multi - measure co 2 mitigation scheme such as that proposed by epri in figure 1 , and its economic underpinnings , is inherently unpredictable .

the cost of building and operating coal plants with and without ccs systems , the cost of natural gas , nuclear power and renewable sources of power , the cost of emissions offsets from outside the utility sector , and ultimately the market price of co 2 itself are all variables that will dictate the decisions of future power plant developers .

these variables are all highly uncertain from today's perspective and may create a set of economic drivers dramatically different from those anticipated by policymakers .

reducing u.s. emissions of manmade co 2 is a priority of both the president elect and leaders in congress .

comprehensive policies have been proposed to achieve these reductions .

most envision aggressive implementation of a portfolio of major carbon reduction measures , with the goal of reducing u.s. co 2 emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 or 2030 .

numerous studies support the potential of specific measures to lower co 2 emissions , but also identify key implementation uncertainties which may impact their overall viability .

congress is considering policies to address these uncertainties , but which policies may be implemented and how effective they may be cannot be known at this time .

as the nation's co 2 mitigation policies continue to develop , the inherent uncertainty associated with specific carbon measures may be a critical concern .

commitments , either domestic or international , to specific carbon emissions targets over time , or to a specific schedule of carbon costs ( whatever form they may take ) may be greatly affected by the success of the underlying measures relied upon to achieve them .

the reverse is also true ; a schedule of carbon costs may also influence the success of co 2 abatement measures .

therefore , policy makers may benefit from a complete and integrated understanding of measure - specific uncertainties and the range of carbon outcomes they imply .

as one study has concluded , "explicitly including uncertainty in both technical change and in climate damages is important for understanding the relationship between technical change , climate change , and policy.... [o]ptimal policy is different ... when uncertainty is taken into account .

as congress considers implementing co 2 policies , keeping a close eye on the technology and market developments associated with every key measure may be an oversight priority .

success or failure of any particular measure may be apparent early on in its implementation , affording an opportunity through quick action to make policy adjustments to improve a measure's chances for success , or to abandon it in favor of more promising options .

perhaps more importantly , given the complexity and scale of the carbon control problem , congress may also find it useful to expect the unexpected in the electricity sector .

apart from the measures discussed in this report , new technologies , consumer behavior , or infrastructure developments ( eg , a rush to natural gas ) may emerge rapidly and unexpectedly to change fundamental aspects of the nation's carbon emissions trajectory .

one way or another , electricity supply will balance with demand — but perhaps in unanticipated ways .

the recent volatility in global oil prices is a relevant example of unexpected structural changes in energy markets .

balancing responses to energy market volatility and unexpected structural changes against the need for a predictability in r&d and private capital investment may be essential to maintaining the nation on course to meaningful atmospheric co 2 reduction .

