three important principles color the issues in public health and medical preparedness and response .

first , preparedness and response are different functions .

at each level of government , they involve different leadership roles , legal authorities , organizational structures , and funding mechanisms .

generally , during an incident , certain conditions must be met before a jurisdiction can implement response activities , or access funds reserved for that purpose .

second , states and localities , rather than the federal government , are the seats of authority and responsibility for the oversight of both health care and emergency management .

for example , state laws generally authorize governors to order and enforce the evacuation of residents in emergency situations .

except under extraordinary circumstances , the federal government generally does not dictate the conduct of health care or emergency management activities to state or local officials , or to health care providers .

finally , most public health functions — broad , population - based programs , such as restaurant inspections to assure food safety — are inherently governmental .

in contrast , the nation's health care system — which delivers professional health care services to individuals — is primarily private and for - profit .

providers and facilities operate in an increasingly competitive marketplace in which emergency planning is not always seen as a necessary expense .

the 2001 terrorist attacks , the flawed response to hurricane katrina , and concerns about an influenza ( "flu" ) pandemic sharpened congressional interest in the nation's ability to track and respond to health threats .

the 109 th congress established or reauthorized relevant programs and activities in the departments of health and human services ( hhs ) and homeland security ( dhs ) .

the 110 th congress focused on oversight of these activities , in particular ( 1 ) the fitness of hhs and dhs — in terms of authority , funding , policies , and workforce — to respond to health emergencies ; ( 2 ) the effectiveness of federal agency coordination ; and ( 3 ) the status of major initiatives such as pandemic flu preparedness and disaster planning for at - risk populations .

the 111 th congress is likely to remain engaged in oversight of the nation's readiness for health threats .

it faces a different and dynamic landscape , however .

the obama administration will likely usher in some shifts in preparedness priorities , in direction and degree yet to be shown .

the nation's health care system is the subject of a vigorous reform debate .

although emergency management is not the focus of that debate , significant system reforms , if enacted , would likely affect emergency planning needs and system response capacity .

and the nation's unsettled economy poses a dilemma for policy makers .

future spending for public programs may be significantly constrained , unless a program were seen as a means for job creation , or some other engine of economic stimulus .

it remains to be seen where federal programs to address health emergencies will fit into this complex picture .

this report , which will be updated as needed , summarizes key issues in domestic public health and medical preparedness and response , citing other crs reports and sources of additional information .

the 109 th congress enacted two comprehensive laws affecting public health and medical preparedness and response .

the pandemic and all - hazards preparedness act ( pahpa , p.l .

109-417 ) , passed in 2006 , established or extended programs for public health emergency preparedness and response activities in hhs , and established a biomedical advanced research and development authority ( barda ) in hhs to oversee the development and procurement of medical countermeasures ( eg , diagnostic tests , drugs , and vaccines ) .

the post - katrina emergency management reform act of 2006 ( pka , title vi of p.l .

109-295 ) reorganized dhs and , within it , the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

the pka also codified the position of dhs chief medical officer , with primary responsibility within dhs for medical issues related to natural and man - made disasters and terrorism .

the obama administration may reconsider any number of homeland security objectives , and its priorities are likely to differ , at least somewhat , from those of the george w. bush administration .

for example , the bush administration placed considerable emphasis on the detection of and response to a large - scale biological attack .

among other things , it established the biowatch system of air monitors in major cities , and redirected federal funds from states to these cities to bolster planning for mass dispensing of antibiotics in response to an attack .

these efforts were widely critiqued .

some said they were excessive , draining resources from routine public health and biomedical research needs .

others said they were insufficient to protect the public in a timely manner .

still others questioned the basic effectiveness of the programs .

critiques are likely to continue , whether or not the obama administration maintains its predecessors' priorities .

the transition also marks the first transfer of presidential authority for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , and for a number of homeland security positions and programs established since 2001 .

these positions include the assistant secretary for health affairs and chief medical officer at dhs ( dhs cmo ) , the assistant secretary for preparedness and response ( aspr ) in the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and their corresponding offices and activities .

shifts in doctrine or priority in the new administration , if any , may manifest when key positions are filled , or when the budget proposal for fy2010 is unveiled .

the 111 th congress may consider removing fema from dhs and re - establishing it as a separate agency , as it was in the clinton administration .

other substantial reorganizations of federal homeland security agencies do not appear to be under debate at this time .

congress may consider relocating certain programs , however .

 ( see , for example , the subsequent section " select agent program ." ) .

also , president obama may consider reorganizing certain homeland security functions , such as those of the homeland security council ( hsc ) .

president george w. bush established the hsc in the executive office of the president shortly after the 2001 terrorist attacks .

from 2005 through 2008 , the hsc served as the hub of federal preparedness activities for pandemic flu , involving hhs , dhs , the state department , and other federal departments and agencies .

some have called for a merger of the hsc with the larger national security council ( nsc ) , citing a number of responsibilities shared by the two .

it is reported that president obama has called for a comprehensive review of the functions of the nsc .

for public health and medical preparedness and response , the roles and responsibilities of principals in hhs and dhs have shifted in past years .

the 109 th congress provided some clarity , but refinement of these roles and responsibilities is likely to continue for some time to come .

pursuant to the pahpa and the pka , applicable activities in dhs are led by the dhs cmo , and in hhs by the hhs aspr .

the pka provided that the dhs cmo "shall have the primary responsibility within the department for medical issues related to natural disasters , acts of terrorism , and other man - made disasters," while the pahpa provided that the "secretary of [hhs] shall lead all federal public health and medical response to public health emergencies and incidents.... " ( emphasis added. ) .

hence , the secretary of homeland security leads all federal emergency and disaster response activities ; the dhs cmo leads both preparedness and response activities for public health and medical care , but only within dhs ; and the secretary of hhs , through the aspr , leads all federal public health and medical response activities , under the overall leadership of the secretary of homeland security .

the government accountability office ( gao ) noted , in the context of pandemic flu planning , that " ... these leadership roles involve shared responsibilities , and it is not clear how these would work in practice. .

gao recommended that dhs and hhs conduct training and exercises to ensure that federal leadership roles are clearly defined and understood .

in february 2009 , gao reported that although some recommended activities have been undertaken , it is unclear whether these exercises rigorously tested federal leadership roles in a pandemic .

federal incident response activities are coordinated according to the national response framework ( nrf ) , and "all - hazards" blueprint published by dhs .

public health and medical response activities ( under the leadership of hhs ) are laid out in an annex called emergency support function #8 , or esf - 8 .

these activities , at the federal , state , and local levels , are commonly referred to as esf - 8 activities .

the nrf replaced the earlier national response plan , incorporating lessons from the flawed response to hurricane katrina .

nonetheless , some leadership gaps and conflicts remain in esf - 8 .

in addition to the inter - related roles of the hhs aspr and the dhs cmo discussed above , there are concerns about a lack of leadership clarity for responder health and safety ( see " the health and safety of disaster responders " ) ; emergency sheltering ; mass fatality management ; and mental health services , among others .

on january 28 , 2009 , dhs secretary janet napolitano announced an action directive to review the department's plans for the response to a large - scale medical incident .

the directive required specific dhs offices and components , working with state and local partners , to review and assess current plans ( including esf - 8 in the nrf ) , relevant homeland security grant programs , and other matters .

dhs components were to report to the secretary by february 24 , 2009 .

the pahpa requires the hhs secretary to publish a comprehensive , all - hazards national public health and medical response strategy and implementation plan ( the "national health security strategy," or nhss ) , beginning in 2009 , and quadrennially thereafter .

the nhss is to include a process for achieving a number of preparedness goals enumerated in the statute .

in 2007 , the bush administration published a homeland security directive to establish a "national strategy for public health and medical preparedness," including implementation steps .

the directive stated that the principles and actions it contained were to be incorporated into the nhss , and serve as a foundation to address the preparedness goals prescribed by the pahpa .

on september 30 , 2008 , the office of the hhs aspr awarded a delivery order ( a type of contracting mechanism ) to the rand corporation , to provide support in developing the nhss during fy2009 .

the 111 th congress may be interested in monitoring the nhss development process , in particular whether the leadership of the office of the hhs aspr maintains steady progress toward completion during the obama administration , and the extent to which the strategy and its accompanying plans and goals reflect , or are consistent with , any changes in doctrine or priority that may be adopted by the new administration .

the 111 th congress may consider the adequacy of permanent authorities of the hhs secretary for responding to public health threats , including authority to declare a public health emergency and the expanded authorities that flow from it .

members of congress may also consider how hhs funds any of its disaster response activities that are not reimbursable by fema .

although the hhs secretary has authority for a no - year public health emergency fund , congress has not appropriated monies to the fund for many years .

also , it is not clear that a flu pandemic would qualify as a major disaster under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) .

the definition of major disaster in the law does not explicitly include or exclude infectious diseases , and past interpretations of the provision's applicability to bioterrorism and naturally occurring infectious diseases have varied .

if major disaster assistance were applicable in a flu pandemic , substantial fema funds could be available to support hhs response activities .

since 2002 , congress has provided more than $9 billion in grants to states to strengthen public health and hospital preparedness for public health threats .

the pahpa extended the programs , adding authority to withhold funds for failure to meet program requirements , a state matching requirement , and a requirement that the secretary of hhs publish certain information about program activities and performance on a public website .

the cooperative agreement for public health emergency preparedness is administered by the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) .

the hospital preparedness program is administered by the hhs aspr .

the programs have been challenging for federal managers and state awardees alike .

among other things , federal managers have had difficulty developing meaningful and measurable performance goals for the programs .

also , state awardees have had some difficulty staffing their preparedness programs .

some have cited , as explanations , public health workforce shortages , and the challenges of recruiting with annual discretionary or "soft" funding .

in february 2009 , congress passed and the president signed p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) , a package of spending and tax cuts intended to stimulate the nation's flagging economy .

the law provided $50 million for cyber - security improvements at hhs .

earlier versions of the legislation would also have provided ( 1 ) $430 million for the advanced development and procurement of medical countermeasures through the biomedical advanced research and development authority ( barda ) ; and ( 2 ) $420 million for pandemic flu preparedness for facility construction and the development and / or purchase of vaccines , drugs , supplies , and equipment .

the barda and pandemic provisions were removed in conference .

the law did not include enhanced funding for the cdc or hhs / aspr public health or hospital preparedness grants to states , discussed earlier .

policymakers have long been concerned about medical surge capacity , that is , the ability of health systems to manage large increases in caseloads that would result from mass casualty incidents .

the successful response to such incidents requires the coordination of several elements , which are variously based in federal , state or local authority , or in the private sector .

these elements are ( 1 ) patients , who may require rescue or medical evacuation ; ( 2 ) a treatment facility , which may be an existing hospital , or a field tent with cots ; ( 3 ) a competent health care workforce ; ( 4 ) medical equipment and non - perishable medical supplies ; ( 5 ) drugs , vaccines , tests and other perishable medical supplies ; ( 6 ) a system of medical records ; and ( 7 ) a health care financing mechanism .

facing growing cost constraints for several decades , the largely private health care sector has sought to avoid having the unused , reserve capacity ( such as empty beds ) that would be needed in such situations .

since 2001 , the federal government has sought to establish this capacity in the private sector , with mixed success .

for example , the hhs hospital preparedness program ( described above ) makes grants to state governments to work with private health care facilities and systems in assuring regional surge capacity , but the effectiveness of the program has been questioned .

historically , the federal government has helped states with disaster response primarily by providing guidance and funding for preparedness activities , and assisting with the costs of response activities .

during hurricane katrina , the shortcomings of this approach with respect to medical surge capacity were evident .

since then there has been an expansion of the federal role through direct procurement and deployment of medical response assets , providing a stronger backstop for state , local , and private - sector response efforts .

for example , the pahpa authorized hhs to acquire mobile medical assets , such as field medical stations ( fms ) .

hhs assets and personnel were deployed extensively for the evacuation and care of individuals with special needs before and during hurricanes gustav and ike in the fall of 2008 .

the strategic national stockpile ( sns ) of medical supplies and drugs , as well as the national disaster medical system and other programs to provide emergency health workers , have also been expanded since 2005 .

the costs to procure fms and sns assets are borne in annual discretionary appropriations and may be fairly easily tracked .

in contrast , many of the costs to deploy these and other assets in a disaster response , in addition to the staffing costs required to support these deployments , are often reimbursed by fema from the disaster relief fund .

the federal government has not published information about the costs associated with hhs's responses to hurricanes gustav and ike .

the congress may be interested in seeking information about these costs , in order to determine whether they represent an appropriate and sustainable investment of federal effort .

finally , the 111 th congress may examine the performance of the federal crisis counseling assistance and training program ( ccp ) , which is authorized in the stafford act and administered jointly by hhs , fema , and the states to address mental health problems among disaster victims .

the response to hurricane katrina in 2005 prompted a re - examination of the ccp and other federal assistance programs that address disaster mental health .

concerns include the lack of a sound evidence base to identify effective services , the timeliness of services provided , the appropriate scope and duration of these services , and matters of organization , cost , and accountability .

for example , the respective roles and responsibilities of hhs ( which provides technical expertise for state ccp programs through its substance abuse and mental health services administration ) , fema ( which funds the state programs ) , and states and their contractors ( which implement them ) are not always clear .

the hhs health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) manages several health professions programs intended to alleviate shortages and maldistributions of physicians , nurses , and others who provide health care services to individuals .

these programs are not , however , geared toward assuring disaster surge capacity in the health care workforce .

efforts to bolster the ranks of health professionals for disaster response include ensuring civil liability protection for volunteer health professionals , and establishing a national system to verify their licenses and credentials .

while efforts are ongoing among states and on the federal level , a uniform system for protection of volunteer health professionals does not yet exist .

surge capacity in the public health workforce — those workers who assure safe food and water , conduct diseases surveillance , and carry out other public health activities in response to disasters — has received little federal attention until recently .

the pahpa authorized a loan repayment demonstration project for individuals who serve in state or local health departments in defined areas of need , but the authority has not been implemented .

at this time , the national disaster medical system , administered by the hhs aspr , and the medical reserve corps , administered by local governments with the assistance of the hhs office of the surgeon general , provide surge capacity to bolster the local disaster response workforce in both health care and public health .

responsibility for the health and safety of disaster response workers is a matter of concern in the national response framework ( nrf ) .

gao found that the efforts of the occupational safety and health administration ( osha , in the department of labor ) during the response to hurricane katrina were hampered by confusion about osha's role .

gao noted in particular that disagreements between fema and osha regarding osha's role delayed fema's authorization of mission assignments to fund osha's response activities .

some members of congress and others sought to have worker health and safety elevated from a support annex to an emergency support function in the nrf , which would have given osha more autonomy in commencing its response activities .

instead , the nrf contains a revised worker safety and health support annex .

there is no federal assistance program designed purposefully to cover the uncompensated or uninsured costs of individual health care that may be needed as a result of a disaster .

there is not consensus that this should be a federal responsibility .

nonetheless , if faced with a mass casualty incident , hospitals , physicians , and other providers could face considerable pressure to deliver care without a clear source of reimbursement .

congress or the bush administration provided special assistance to address this concern three times in response to recent disasters .

following the september 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks , hhs provided funding to hospitals , clinics , and other health care facilities ( including privately owned facilities ) near the three affected sites ( in ny , pa , and va ) , that either provided unreimbursed health care services to victims , or suffered other economic hardship as a result of road closures or other infrastructure effects .

through intermittent appropriations , congress has funded a program to provide medical screening , monitoring , and treatment services to responders and others who were exposed to hazards at the world trade center site in ny following the 2001 terrorist attack , and who are now experiencing health problems that are believed to have resulted from those exposures .

following hurricane katrina , congress provided $2 billion to cover the state share of medicaid costs associated with evacuees and individuals living in declared disaster areas ( for states with approved federal waivers ) , and to restore access to care in affected areas .

legislative proposals in the 110 th congress would have: authorized the hhs secretary to use a special fund to provide temporary emergency health care coverage for uninsured individuals affected by public health emergencies ( h.r .

6569 / s. 3312 ) ; or addressed the health care needs of responders and others who are ill purportedly as a result of exposures at world trade center ( wtc ) site in ny following the 2001 terrorist attack ( for example , h.r .

1414 / s. 201 , s. 1119 , h.r .

1247 , h.r .

3543 , h.r .

6594 , and h.r .

7174 ) .

none of these proposals was enacted .

h.r .

847 , the james zadroga 9 / 11 health and compensation act of 2009 , has been introduced in the 111 th congress to address wtc - related illnesses .

after the 2001 terrorist attack on the world trade center , some responders developed chronic health problems believed to have resulted from hazardous exposures during the rescue , recovery , and clean - up operations .

efforts to track and address these problems were hampered because , at the outset , no central registry was established to identify all responders and other on - site workers , and no program was established to monitor their health going forward , in order to quickly detect common or unusual illness patterns in the cohort .

following hurricane katrina , the 109 th congress enacted the safe port act ( p.l .

109-347 ) .

one of its provisions authorizes the president , acting through the secretary of hhs and pursuant to a major disaster declaration under the stafford act , to establish medical monitoring programs , if needed , to track the health status of individuals ( not limited to responders ) who may experience hazardous exposures as a result of the disaster .

the authority has not yet been implemented .

according to gao , as of may 2008 , hhs had not articulated a plan for doing so .

federal agency responsibilities and funding mechanisms are not clear without such a plan .

for example , within hhs , at least three components — the aspr , as well as the agency for toxic substances and disease registry and the national institute for occupational safety and health , both in cdc — have relevant authorities and responsibilities that overlap .

also , a major disaster typically triggers federal coordinating mechanisms laid out in the nrf , which places osha in the lead in assuring responder health and safety .

in 2008 gao recommended , for future disasters , that hhs develop plans to register all responders during a disaster , as part of a comprehensive departmental plan to assure responder health during and after disasters .

gao said that such a plan should also include a means to implement medical monitoring programs , or to assist states and localities in doing so .

to meet the intent of the safe port act , such a plan must also address affected individuals who are not responders .

the terrorist attacks of 2001 and the hurricanes of 2005 showed that some people may be at greater risk , or more in need of special services , during and after a disaster .

the pahpa requires the secretary of hhs to consider , in emergency planning , the needs of at - risk individuals , defined as children , pregnant women , senior citizens , and others as determined by the secretary .

the pka required the head of fema to appoint a disability coordinator , charged , among other things , with coordinating emergency management policies and practices for individuals with disabilities .

the 110 th congress authorized and appropriated funds for a national commission on children and disasters , which has been established in the hhs administration for children and families .

the 111 th congress is likely to be interested in the continued evolution of these efforts , in particular , how well these federal efforts address the diversity of special needs that exist in the population , and how well they are coordinated with each other in planning , and during disaster response .

gao has commented , for example , that the office of the fema disability coordinator has generally not coordinated its work with a key federal agency — the national council on disability — as it is required to do by the pka .

to prepare for the threat of a human flu pandemic , the 109 th congress provided $6.1 billion in emergency supplemental funding for fy2006 .

most of it has supported an hhs initiative to expand domestic vaccine production capacity .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has analyzed the uncertainties and financial risks associated with this robust investment in applied research and infrastructure development , noting that the success of the hhs initiative may be affected , among other things , by the outcomes of research efforts to improve vaccine technology , and the extent to which the demand for seasonal flu vaccine can sustain the costs of expanded production capacity and more sophisticated vaccine production technology over the long term .

gao has made a number of recommendations regarding pandemic response planning , coordination , and capacity in recent years , and reported in february 2009 that many of the recommendations had not yet been fully implemented .

given the considerable federal investment in preparing for this threat , the 111 th congress is likely to remain interested in the status of national preparedness efforts .

additional issues of potential interest may include ( 1 ) the priority given by the obama administration to continued planning efforts , including its budget request for fy2010 ; ( 2 ) future federal leadership for planning efforts ( see the earlier discussion of the hsc in the section " executive branch organization " ) ; and ( 3 ) the status of state preparedness efforts .

finally , as mentioned earlier , it is not clear that a flu pandemic would qualify as a major disaster under the stafford act .

if so , substantial fema funds could be made available for hhs response activities .

if not , alternative funding options available to the secretary of hhs are limited .

 ( see the earlier section of this report , " hhs response capability and funding authority ." ) .

the response to communicable disease threats may involve movement restrictions , business and school closures , compulsory treatments , and other constraints .

while state and local governments have the primary authority over these domestic containment measures , a comprehensive response to a public health emergency may involve overlapping governmental authorities and attendant legal and economic issues .

managing employers' and workers' concerns during outbreaks of communicable disease — in particular , a flu pandemic — may be especially difficult .

for example , if workers fear losing their employment or their wages , compliance with public health measures such as isolation or quarantine may suffer .

although public health officials typically recommend , whenever possible , that isolation or quarantine measures be voluntary rather than compulsory , voluntary measures may not provide the same level of job protection for workers who miss work in order to comply with them .

recent incidents have expanded congress's longstanding interest in the security of u.s. borders to include concerns about communicable diseases in travelers , which is a matter of federal jurisdiction .

these incidents have brought into question the divisions of authority and effectiveness of coordination among federal agencies that are responsible for disease control , and for the security of the borders and the transportation infrastructure .

policy makers have noted that if these systems are unable to respond to common and expected infectious disease threats such as tuberculosis , they may also be unable to respond to more serious threats such as pandemic flu or bioterrorism .

effective solutions are elusive , but would ideally address scientific , technical , and economic constraints ; the balance of individual and collective rights ; and the roles of federal , state , and local authorities , and foreign governments .

finally , health emergencies often involve scarcities of resources , including personnel , equipment , drugs , and vaccines .

prioritizing the use of these resources to maximize benefit requires careful study of scientific and medical evidence , and raises complex legal and ethical questions that are best considered before emergencies arise .

since 2001 , hhs , dhs , usda , the department of defense ( dod ) , state governments , and some academic institutions have expanded or are expanding their laboratory capacity to study or test for dangerous biological pathogens and toxins .

these laboratories play a key role in the biodefense effort , offering the hope of better responses to a biological attack and a better understanding of the bioterrorism threat .

however , they could also increase the risk of a biological attack by being a source of materials or training .

in 2008 , the congressionally mandated commission on the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism recommended , among other things , the expansion of government oversight of these laboratories .

the 111 th congress may consider issues associated with domestic biodefense laboratories , such as the effectiveness of current oversight efforts , the appropriate balance between security and the transparency that fosters scientific discovery , and possible effects of domestic regulatory approaches on international collaboration .

legislation introduced in the 111 th congress ( s. 485 / h.r .

1225 ) would require the hhs secretary to review and report to congress regarding , among other things , the adequacy of current and planned laboratory capacity , and information sharing between the biodefense and infectious disease communities .

the secretary would also be required to develop minimal training standards for personnel , and to establish a voluntary reporting system through which laboratory personnel could report accidents and other incidents .

legislation introduced in the 111 th congress ( s. 485 / h.r .

1225 ) would reauthorize the select agent program , which is jointly managed by the cdc and the u.s department of agriculture ( usda ) animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) to regulate certain biological pathogens and toxins that could be used for bioterrorism .

program authority expired at the end of fy2007 .

the bills would require , among other things , a program review , planning for surges in testing capacity , and guidance to improve inventory practices .

they would also authorize hhs and usda to release certain sensitive information about the program to designated state officials if a state's laws are adequate to protect against the further release of such information .

the bills would leave program administration under cdc and aphis , as it is now .

in august 2008 , the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) announced that it believed a dod scientist had been responsible for the 2001 anthrax attacks .

the individual took his own life before charges could be filed , so the case will not reach a legal conclusion .

nonetheless , the incident has heightened concerns about the effectiveness of security risk assessments ( "background checks" ) that fbi conducts on individuals who are registered in the select agent program and granted access to the pathogens .

subsequently , the commission on the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism — which was mandated by congress before the matter involving the anthrax scientist was publicly known — recommended a comprehensive review of the select agent program .

the commission did not recommend that leadership for the select agent program be changed .

however , at a hearing on the commission's report , senators joseph lieberman and susan collins ( the chairman and ranking member , respectively , of the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs ) signaled that they may introduce legislation to put dhs in charge of regulating biological pathogens .

cdc and aphis have the scientific and technical expertise to support the program , but the senators were concerned that they may lack the homeland security and national security expertise that is also required .

however , some members of the biomedical research community were concerned about proposals to move the program into dhs when legislation to establish the new department was under consideration in 2002 .

they argued , successfully at the time , that the program should remain with cdc and aphis .

the 108 th congress launched project bioshield to encourage the development of countermeasures that lack commercial markets .

 ( the program is not limited to procurement of biodefense countermeasures .

products to address radiological , chemical , and other threats are also considered. ) .

dhs and hhs have shared responsibility for the program since its inception , although the process by which procurement decisions are made has changed several times .

at this time , dhs manages a 10-year advance appropriation ( through fy2013 ) to purchase countermeasures , and is responsible for conducting material threat determinations ( mtds ) to assess whether a particular hazard — such as an anthrax or sarin gas attack — poses a threat to national security .

in response to an mtd , hhs evaluates the threat , and the potential need for countermeasures , in a public health context .

funds for development and procurement are drawn from the 10-year appropriation , with the approval of the president , following joint recommendations from the secretaries of hhs and dhs .

the 109 th congress established , in the pahpa , the biomedical advanced research and development authority ( barda ) in hhs to support countermeasure development and facilitate communication between the government and developers .

the pahpa also required the hhs secretary to develop and publish a strategic plan to guide hhs countermeasures research , development , and procurement .

the bioshield program has experienced numerous problems over the years , and many have been resolved .

key issues that remain are ( 1 ) the clarity of the shared roles of dhs and hhs ; and ( 2 ) whether hhs can define contract terms that are perceived by product developers as sufficiently clear and lucrative to be worth their investment .

the first concern appears to have improved over time , partly as a result of successive directives from congress and the bush administration .

given the program's limited history of successful procurements , the second concern may persist and continue to be of interest to the 111 th congress .

finally , intellectual property protections may affect the availability of countermeasures by making them more commercially attractive to developers , or more costly to purchasers , including governments .

in december 2005 , congress passed department of defense emergency supplemental appropriations , 2006 ( p.l .

109-148 ) , including division c , titled the "public readiness and emergency preparedness act" ( prep act ) .

upon a declaration of emergency , the prep act eliminates liability , except in the case of willful misconduct , of manufacturers and others involved in the production , distribution , and use of covered countermeasures .

in october 2008 , hhs secretary leavitt made several such emergency declarations with respect to countermeasures for smallpox , anthrax , botulism , and acute radiation sickness , and amended a prior declaration for pandemic flu countermeasures .

each declaration is in effect through 2016 , unless amended .

the law also establishes , in the u.s. treasury , a "covered countermeasure process fund" to compensate those who may be harmed by a covered countermeasure .

as of fy2009 , the fund has not received an appropriation .

no funding was requested in the annual budget submissions of the bush administration .

the 111 th congress may consider reauthorization of expired preparedness and response programs .

these include authority for hhs health professions programs , which expired in 2002 .

these programs , in title vii of the public health service act , aim to address underserved areas and populations , and have not focused on emergency preparedness and response in the past .

however , the last reauthorization in 1998 preceded heightened concerns regarding this matter since 2001 .

also , although authority for the strategic national stockpile of countermeasures was amended since the terror attacks of 2001 , general program authority expired at the end of fy2006 and has not been extended .

in addition , as discussed earlier , authority for the select agent program to regulate biological pathogens expired at the end of fy2007 .

