during the past two decades , members of congress have demonstrated an interest in u.s. participation in the united nations educational , scientific , and cultural organization ( unesco ) convention concerning the protection of the world cultural and natural heritage ( popularly known as the world heritage convention ) .

under the convention , which entered into force in 1973 , countries agree to protect and preserve natural and cultural sites of exceptional ecological , scientific , or cultural importance through the world heritage list and the list of world heritage in danger ( danger list ) .

each country that ratifies or accedes to the convention agrees to protect listed sites within its borders and refrain from actions that might harm such sites in other countries .

the world heritage list includes 936 natural and cultural sites in 153 countries .

thirty - five sites from 28 countries are on the danger list .

as of july 12 , 2011 , 187 countries are parties to the convention .

the united states led the development of the convention and was the first country to ratify it in 1973 .

currently , 21 u.s. sites are included on the world heritage list , including yellowstone national park , grand canyon national park , and the statue of liberty .

in july 2010 , papahānaumokuākea in hawaii became the most recent u.s. addition to the list .

everglades national park is the only u.s. site on the danger list .

 ( it was on the list from 1993 to 2007 , when it was removed by the bush administration .

in 2009 , the obama administration requested that it again be added to the list. ) .

congressional perspectives on the convention have varied .

some members of congress have supported the convention , while others have expressed concern that unesco designation of world heritage sites in the united states infringes on national sovereignty .

ultimately , however , u.s. participation in the convention does not give the united nations authority over u.s. world heritage sites or related land - management decisions .

moreover , some members have suggested that congress should have a greater role in nominating u.s. sites for inclusion on the list .

this report discusses the unesco world heritage convention and its mechanisms , including the world heritage committee and fund .

it outlines u.s. participation in the convention , in particular the role of u.s. agencies , u.s. financial contributions , and technical assistance to world heritage sites outside of the united states .

it also addresses criteria and procedures for adding and removing sites from the world heritage lists .

the report also addresses issues that the 112 th congress may wish to take into account when considering u.s. participation in and funding of the convention , including the possible impact of the convention on u.s. sovereignty ; the role of congress in nominating u.s. sites ; and the implications of including u.s. sites on the world heritage lists .

the world heritage convention was adopted by the general conference of the united nations educational , scientific , and cultural organization ( unesco ) on november 16 , 1972 .

it established a world heritage list that identifies cultural and natural heritage sites of "outstanding universal value. .

the convention's purpose is to identify and help protect worldwide sites of such exceptional ecological , scientific , or cultural importance that their preservation is a global responsibility .

the convention also created a list of world heritage in danger , which is composed of sites on the world heritage list that face significant natural or man - made risk and dangers .

a site must be on the world heritage list to be considered for inclusion on the danger list .

countries that are party to the convention agree to protect listed sites and monuments within their borders and refrain from actions that might harm such sites in other countries .

the convention recognizes the sovereignty of individual countries , stating that the responsibility for protecting and conserving world heritage sites belongs primarily to the country where the site is located .

states parties to the convention ( hereinafter referred to as "parties" ) agree to help provide such protection through the world heritage committee and fund .

the united states generally supports the world heritage convention .

it led the creation of the convention and ratified it in 1973 .

it has also served multiple terms on the world heritage committee , with its most recent term ending in october 2009 .

twenty - one u.s. sites are included on the world heritage list .

the most recent site , papahānaumokuākea in hawaii , was added in july 2010 .

everglades national park is the only u.s. site included on the danger list .

preparations are currently underway to nominate new u.s. world heritage sites for likely submission to the world heritage committee in late 2012 or early 2013 .

members of the 112 th congress may take the following issues into account when considering current or future u.s. world heritage sites and u.s. participation in and funding of the world heritage convention and its mechanisms .

the procedures for adding and removing sites from the world heritage list and the danger list are outlined in the "operational guidelines for the implementation of the world heritage convention," developed by the world heritage committee .

the guidelines are the main working tool for the committee and are revised periodically to reflect the committee's ongoing experience and evolving situations .

they were last updated in january 2008 .

in order for a site to be added to the world heritage list , parties must complete a nomination document that identifies and describes the site , provides justification for its addition to the list , and highlights conservation and other factors affecting the site .

the convention's advisory bodies evaluate whether a site meets the criteria for the list and make recommendations to the committee .

the recommendations fall into three categories: ( 1 ) properties ( sites ) that are recommended for inscription without reservation , ( 2 ) properties that are not recommended for inscription , and ( 3 ) nominations that are recommended for referral or deferral .

to be selected , sites must meet one or more of a set of criteria demonstrating "outstanding universal value. .

sites meeting such criteria might be a masterpiece of human creative genius ; represent an outstanding example of a type of building , architecture or technological ensemble , or landscape that illustrates significant stages in human history ; or contain superlative natural phenomena or areas of exceptional beauty .

the committee also takes into consideration the integrity and / or authenticity of the site and adequate site protection and management .

 ( see appendix a for the full list of criteria for outstanding universal value. ) .

the committee considers the recommendations of the advisory bodies and decides whether a site should be inscribed on the world heritage list .

the committee may refer a proposed site back to the party for additional information or defer the nomination until additional in - depth study or assessment is completed or the party submits a substantial revision .

the committee may delete a property from the world heritage list if it determines that the property has deteriorated to the extent that it has lost the characteristics that led to its inclusion on the list .

it may also be removed from the list if the committee determines that the party did not take the measures necessary to protect the site from threats and dangers within the agreed - to time frame .

if these conditions apply , the party on whose territory the site is situated is required to inform the world heritage convention secretariat .

other parties may also inform the secretariat if they believe a site should be deleted from the list .

in such cases , the secretariat will verify the source and contents of the information and consult with the concerned party .

once a site has been recommended for deletion by a party , the secretariat will invite the relevant advisory bodies to comment on the information received .

the committee will then consider all the available information , and can vote to remove a site from the list by a two - thirds majority of members present and voting .

a site cannot be removed from the list unless the concerned party has been consulted .

since the convention was established , only two sites have been deleted from the world heritage list .

in 2007 , the arabian oryx sanctuary in oman was delisted after the size of the sanctuary was reduced by 90% .

in june 2009 , the dresden elbe valley in germany was delisted because a four - lane bridge was built in the middle of the site .

both countries concurred with the removals .

sites on the world heritage list that are considered to be seriously endangered may be placed on the danger list .

these are sites that are in particular danger for which "major operations are necessary and ... assistance has been requested.... " two - thirds of committee members present and voting are required to add or remove a site from the danger list , though generally such decisions are made by consensus .

the world heritage committee is responsible for adding and removing sites to the danger list .

the committee may add sites to the danger list when it determines that the property is threatened by serious and specific danger , major operations are necessary for the conservation of the property , and assistance under the convention has been requested for the property .

article 11 ( 4 ) of the convention states that sites "threatened by serious and specific dangers" should be placed on the list .

examples of such dangers include the threat of disappearance caused by accelerated deterioration ; large - scale public or private projects or rapid urban or tourist development projects ; destruction caused by changes in the use or ownership of the land ; major alterations due to unknown causes ; the outbreak or the threat of an armed conflict ; and serious fires , earthquakes , landslides , volcanic eruptions ; and other similar circumstances .

 ( see appendix b for a full list of criteria for inclusion on the danger list. ) .

the criteria for determining whether a site should be placed on the danger list are divided into two types of danger: "ascertained dangers" that are permanent and proven dangers , and "potential dangers" that could have "deleterious effects on its [the site's] inherent characteristics. .

the criteria for cultural sites and natural sites are different .

cultural sites under consideration for the danger list must meet at least one of several ascertained or potential danger criteria , including serious deterioration of materials ; significant loss of historical authenticity ; lack of conservation policy ; outbreak of threat or armed conflict ; and gradual changes due to geological , climatic , or other environmental factors .

natural sites under consideration must meet at least one of ascertained or potential danger criteria , wich include ( 1 ) a serious decline in the population of the species of outstanding universal value for which the property was legally established to protect , ( 2 ) human encroachment on boundaries or in upstream areas which threaten the integrity of the property , or ( 3 ) planned resettlement or development projects within the property or so situated that the impacts threaten the property .

when considering a site for the danger list , the committee should consult with the concerned party to develop a program of corrective measures that includes analysis of the present condition of the site , threats to the property , and the feasibility of implementing corrective measures .

in some instances , the committee will send a group of observers and / or advisors from its advisory bodies to visit the site , evaluate the nature of the threats , and propose recommendations .

upon receiving and considering all relevant information , the committee determines whether the site should be added to the danger list .

once a site is added , the committee will define the program of corrective action to be undertaken .

some parties maintain that the consent of the relevant party must be attained before a site may be placed on the danger list .

in the past , the united states has both supported and opposed this point of view .

generally , sites are removed from the danger list because the world heritage committee feels that the conditions of the site have improved to the point where the site is no longer in imminent danger .

however , the committee may also remove a property from the danger list when it determines ( 1 ) "the property has deteriorated to the extent that it has lost those characteristics which determined its inclusion in the world heritage list" and ( 2 ) "the intrinsic qualities of a world heritage site were already threatened at the time of its nomination by action of man and where the necessary corrective measures as outlined by the party at the time , have not been taken within the time proposed. .

to date , no site has been removed from the danger list for these reasons .

if such a removal were to occur , however , the party on whose property the site is located would inform the convention secretariat if ( 1 ) the site has seriously deteriorated or ( 2 ) the necessary corrective measures have not been taken within the time proposed .

other parties and organizations may also recommend a site be removed from the list .

in these cases , the secretariat will determine the validity and source of the information and consult with the concerned party .

the secretariat forwards all relevant information to the committee advisory bodies , who make recommendations to the committee .

the committee then votes on whether a site should be removed from the danger list .

appendix a .

criteria for outstanding universal value source: "operational guidelines for the implementation of the world heritage convention," january 2008 , pp .

20-21 .

"the [world heritage] committee considers a property as having outstanding universal value if the property meets one or more of the following criteria .

nominated properties shall therefore: i ) represent a masterpiece of human creative genius ; ii ) exhibit an important interchange of human values , over a span of time or within a cultural area of the world , on developments in architecture or technology , monumental arts , town - planning or landscape design ; iii ) bear a unique or at least exceptional testimony to a cultural tradition or toa civilization which is living or which has disappeared ; iv ) be an outstanding example of a type of building , architectural or technological ensemble or landscape which illustrates ( a ) significant stage ( s ) in human history ; v ) be an outstanding example of a traditional human settlement , land - use , or sea - use which is representative of a culture ( or cultures ) , or human interaction with the environment especially when it has become vulnerable under the impact of irreversible change ; vi ) be directly or tangibly associated with events or living traditions , with ideas , or with beliefs , with artistic and literary works of outstanding universal significance .

 ( the committee considers that this criterion should preferably be used in conjunction with other criteria ) ; vii ) to contain superlative natural phenomena or areas of exceptional natural beauty and aesthetic importance ; viii ) to be outstanding examples representing major stages of earth's history , including the record of life , significant on - going geological processes in the development of landforms , or significant geomorphic or physiographic features ; ix ) to be outstanding examples representing significant on - going ecological and biological processes in the evolution and development of terrestrial , fresh water , coastal and marine ecosystems and communities of plants and animals ; and x ) to contain the most important and significant natural habitats for in - situ conservation of biological diversity , including those containing threatened species of outstanding universal value from the point of view of science or conservation. .

appendix b .

criteria for inclusion on the list of world heritage in danger source: "operational guidelines for the implementation of the world heritage convention," january 2008 , pp .

48-49 .

"criteria for cultural sites — list of world heritage in danger ascertained danger: i ) serious deterioration of materials ; ii ) serious deterioration of structure and / or ornamental features ; iii ) serious deterioration of architecture or town - planning coherence ; iv ) serious deterioration of urban or rural space , or the natural environment ; v ) significant loss of historical authenticity ; vi ) important loss of cultural significance ; or potential danger: i ) modification of juridical status of the property diminishing the degree of its protection ; ii ) lack of conservation policy ; iii ) threatening effects of regional planning projects ; iv ) threatening effects of town planning ; v ) outbreak of threat or armed conflict ; vi ) gradual changes due to geological , climatic , or other environmental factors. .

"criteria for natural sites — list of world heritage in danger ascertained danger: i ) a serious decline in the population of the endangered species or the other species of outstanding universal value for which the property was legally established to protect , either by natural factors such as disease or by man - made factors such as poaching ; ii ) severe deterioration of the natural beauty or scientific value of the property , as by human settlement , construction of reservoirs which flood important parts of the property , industrial and agricultural development including use of pesticides and fertilizers , major public works , mining , pollution , logging , firewood collection , etc .

 ; iii ) human encroachment on boundaries or in upstream areas which threaten the integrity of the property ; or potential danger: i ) a modification of the legal protective status of the area ; ii ) planned resettlement or development projects within the property or so situated that the impacts threaten the property ; iii ) outbreak or threat of armed conflict ; iv ) the management plan or management system is lacking or inadequate , or not fully implemented. .

