products liability , which is primarily governed by state law , concerns the civil liability of a manufacturer , seller , or other party along a product's manufacturing or distribution chain for personal or property damages caused by a product to a consumer or third - party user of that product .

in a typical products liability lawsuit , a plaintiff brings a claim for damages against a manufacturer for injuries sustained while using the product .

damages that a plaintiff typically seeks are for the recovery of medical expenses , disability , pain and suffering , lost earnings and earning capacity , property damage , emotional harm , and even punitive damages , which are intended to punish a defendant's particularly outrageous conduct .

to obtain relief from the courts , the plaintiff bears the burden of proving that she used the product in a reasonable or foreseeable manner , and that the product either contained an unnecessary or unreasonable hazard or was improperly marketed , resulting in the harm .

over time , product defects have been generally grouped into three categories — manufacturing defects , design defects , and warning defects , which are described in more detail below .

various causes of action may be relied upon by a plaintiff who seeks to recover against a manufacturer , seller , or other third - party defendant .

the causes of action reviewed in this report include strict liability , negligence , breach of warranty , and tortious misrepresentation .

federal involvement in the products liability area can be traced back to the interagency task force on product liability ( task force ) begun by the ford administration in 1976 .

the task force's final report in 1977 found a dramatic increase in costs of products liability and sparked various working groups that examined the issue of products liability and tort reform throughout the 1970s and 1980s .

as products liability has traditionally been an area governed by state law ( see "overview of state action" text box below ) , federal reform efforts have raised questions on the propriety of federal legislation in the area .

current jurisprudence suggests that products liability legislation would be permissible so long as it falls within congress's power to regulate interstate commerce .

nonetheless , it may be unconstitutional for congress to enact products liability legislation that does not substantially affect interstate commerce .

for a more in - depth analysis of the constitutionality of federal products liability and other tort - reform legislation , see crs report 95-797 , federal tort reform legislation: constitutionality and summaries of selected statutes , by [author name scrubbed] .

federal tort reform bills have generally been limited in scope , many of which have been principally aimed at protecting those who sell particular types of products or commit particular types of negligence .

this trend has been particularly apparent since 1996 , when congress did not override president clinton's veto of broad products liability legislation ( h.r .

956 , 104 th congress ) .

consumer representatives and plaintiffs' attorneys generally oppose measures that would effectively limit an injured party's ability to recover in products liability suits .

they consider the tort system necessary to provide incentives for the manufacture of safe products and to ensure adequate compensation for injured workers and consumers .

conversely , insurance companies and product manufacturers have supported federal products liability reform , hoping to reduce the amounts paid due to products liability lawsuits , and seeking national uniformity in products liability law .

a federal statute could bring about national uniformity with respect to some products liability issues .

for example , past proposals would have included a federal statute of limitations or a federal statute of repose for products liability suits .

the possibility of national uniformity , however , should not be overestimated .

for instance , other past proposals , such as one that would establish a standard of conduct for the award of punitive damages , could likely be subject to varying interpretations by every federal and state court absent a supreme court decision establishing a national interpretation .

even if the supreme court issues such an interpretation , such a provision's application to the facts of particular cases may vary among jurisdictions .

when congress wants to create standards or regulate in the area of products liability , it sometimes will enact laws that bar liability for certain causes of action by having a federal law "preempt" state law .

preemption doctrine has its constitutional basis in the supremacy clause of the u.s. constitution , which establishes that federal statutes enacted in accordance with the constitution "shall be the supreme law of the land. .

the supreme court has long held that , under the supremacy clause , a state law interfering with or running contrary to a federal law is preempted by it and is thus invalid .

the court has further concluded that federal statutes can impose requirements that potentially conflict with state common law , which includes much of product liability law , thus warranting an analysis under the preemption doctrine .

examples of federal laws that have been found by the supreme court to preempt state law include the federal cigarette labeling and advertising act ( fclaa ) and the federal food drug and cosmetics act ( ffdca ) .

under the fclaa , congress provided that "[n]o requirement or prohibition based on smoking and health shall be imposed under state law with respect to the advertising or promotion of any cigarettes the packages of which are labeled in conformity with the provisions of [the] act[.] .

the supreme court held that the fclaa preempted state "failure to warn" and "fraudulent misrepresentation" claims that were based on cigarette advertising or promotion when the product manufacturer complied with the required federal regulations .

similarly , the ffdca forbids states from establishing requirements for medical devices that are "different from , or in addition to" those established by the act and "which relate to the safety or effectiveness of the device or to any other matter included in a requirement applicable to the device under [the] act. .

the supreme court held that the federal regulations for catheters , enacted pursuant to the ffdca , preempted a state law claim alleging that the catheter was "designed , label[ed] and manufactured in a manner that violated ... new york common law. .

while congress enacted a number of products liability laws in the 1980s and 1990s , there has been little legislation in recent years .

the following section provides a brief overview of federal products liability statutes enacted from the 97 th congress through the present .

for specific terms related to tort , see the appendix .

during president reagan's administration , the 97 th congress enacted the product liability risk retention act of 1981 .

this act sought to lower insurance costs by permitting businesses to form self - insurance pools .

subsequently , the 98 th congress enacted the clarification of the product liability risk retention act of 1981 .

this statute was intended to permit "product manufactures , sellers , and distributors to purchase … insurance on a group basis or to self - insure through insurance cooperatives called 'risk retention groups.' .

federal legislation was necessary to accomplish this because many states have laws that would make the formation of such groups impractical on an interstate basis .

the federal statute therefore exempts purchasing groups and risk retention groups from most regulation by states other than ones in which they are chartered .

furthermore , the 99 th congress enacted the risk retention amendments of 1986 , which expanded the scope of product liability risk retention act of 1981 to enable risk retention groups and purchasing groups to provide all types of liability insurance , not only products liability insurance .

it renamed the act the liability risk retention act of 1986 .

the 99 th congress also enacted the national childhood vaccine injury act of 1986 .

as amended , the act requires most persons suffering vaccine - related injuries , prior to filing a tort action , to file a claim in the u.s. court of federal claims for no - fault compensation through the national vaccine injury compensation program established by the act .

under the program , compensation for pain and suffering is limited to $250,000 .

a party not satisfied with the compensation awarded under the program may file a tort action under state law , but subject to some limitations .

although recovery under the program is limited , it was hoped that "the relative certainty and generosity of the system's awards [would] divert a significant number of potential plaintiffs from litigation. .

during president clinton's administration , the 103 rd congress in 1994 enacted the general aviation revitalization act , which established an 18-year statute of repose for planes with fewer than 20 seats that are not used in scheduled service at the time of the incident .

with exceptions , this law prevents civil actions against the manufacturers of such an aircraft or aircraft components to be brought if any of their products are 18 years or older at the time of the accident .

the 104 th congress also enacted the bill emerson good samaritan food donation act , which limits civil liability for a person or gleaner ( "a person who harvests for free distribution to the needy" ) , except in cases of gross negligence or intentional misconduct , who donates apparently wholesome food or an apparently fit grocery product "in good faith to a non - profit organization for ultimate distribution to needy individuals. .

it also limits liability of the nonprofit organization that receives the donation , except in cases of gross negligence or intentional misconduct .

in addition , the 104 th congress passed h.r .

956 , the product liability fairness act of 1995 , but president clinton vetoed it .

during the remainder of clinton's tenure , other laws passed include the biomaterials access assurance act of 1998 during the 105 th congress .

this act limits the products liability under state law of biomaterials suppliers , which it defines as an entity that supplies a component part or raw materials for use in the manufacture of an implant .

in 1999 , the 106 th congress enacted the y2k act , which limits contractual and tort liability under state law in suits , other than those for personal injury or wrongful death , "in which the plaintiff's alleged harm or injury arises from or is related to an actual or potential y2k failure…. .

during president george w. bush's administration , the 107 th congress enacted the homeland security act of 2002 , three sections of which limit the products liability of various defendants .

section 304 immunizes manufacturers and administrators of smallpox vaccine from liability .

section 863 limits the liability of sellers of antiterrorism technology , and sections 1714-1717 limit the liability of manufacturers and administrators of the components and ingredients of vaccines .

sections 1714-1717 of this act were repealed when the 108 th congress enacted the consolidated appropriations resolution , 2003 , division l , section 102 .

in 2005 , the 109 th congress enacted the protection of lawful commerce in arms act ( plcaa ) .

it prohibits "a civil action or proceeding or an administrative proceeding," except in six circumstances , against a manufacturer or seller of a firearm or ammunition , or a trade association , for damages "resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse" of a firearm or ammunition .

section 5 of the plcaa is a separate provision called the child safety lock act of 2005 .

with exceptions , it requires a "secure gun storage or safety device" ( as defined in 18 u.s.c .

§921 ( a ) ( 34 ) ) on handguns , and provides that a person who has lawful possession and control of a handgun , and who uses such a device , is entitled to the same immunity as granted to gun manufacturers , sellers , and trade associations by the plcaa .

the 109 th congress also enacted the public readiness emergency preparedness act ( prep act ) .

division c of the prep act limits liability with respect to pandemic flu and other public health countermeasures upon a declaration by the secretary of health and human services of a public health emergency or the credible risk of such emergency .

in lieu of suing , victims may accept payment under the "covered countermeasure process fund" if congress appropriates money for this fund .

the extent to which each of the following concepts is applicable in particular products liability lawsuits depends upon the relevant state law .

alteration of product .

a possible contributing cause to an injury that may be performed by a plaintiff or a third party , such as a plaintiff's employer ; it may reduce or eliminate a defendant's liability .

assumption of risk .

a form of contributory fault by a plaintiff ; it may reduce or eliminate a defendant's liability .

breach of warranty .

a basis for liability that permits the defendant to raise certain contract law defenses to avoid liability , but does not require the plaintiff to prove that the defendant was negligent .

collateral source .

a source , such as an insurance company or governmental entity , that compensates an injured party for the injury , and may , through subrogation , be entitled to recover such compensation paid out to the injured party .

collateral source rule .

the rule that a plaintiff's damages will not be reduced by amounts she recovered from sources other than the defendant , such as health insurance benefits .

comparative negligence .

the rule that plaintiff's recovery will be reduced in proportion to the degree that her own negligence ( or other fault ) was responsible for his injury .

in its modified form , recovery is barred if the plaintiff's responsibility exceeds a specific degree , such as 50% .

contributory negligence .

negligence ( or other fault ) on the part of the plaintiff that is wholly or partially responsible for his injury .

in a few states , any degree of contributory negligence will totally bar recovery .

design defect .

a defect resulting from a product that , although manufactured as it had been designed , was not designed as safely as it should have been .

economic damages .

out - of - pocket expenses incurred by the plaintiff , such as medical bills or loss of income .

failure to warn .

a defect consisting of the defendant's failure to provide adequate warnings or instructions regarding the use of its product .

government contractor defense .

a rule established by the supreme court in boyle v. united technologies corp. , 487 u.s. 500 ( 1988 ) , that enables a defendant whose product complied with federal government contract specifications to avoid liability in some cases .

government standards defense .

a rule in a few states enabling a defendant whose product complied with government safety standards to avoid liability or to establish a presumption that its product was not defective .

joint and several liability .

the rule that each defendant who contributes to causing a plaintiff's injury may be held individually liable for the total damages .

lawyers' contingent fees .

fees payable only upon recovery of damages , based upon a percentage of the recovery .

manufacturing defect .

a defect resulting from a product's not having been manufactured as it had been designed .

compare with "design defect," supra .

market share liability .

liability for the percentage of a plaintiff's damages equal to the defendant's market share of the injury - causing product ; a few cases have held market share liability applicable where a plaintiff cannot prove that a particular defendant manufactured the injury - causing product .

misuse of product .

a form of contributory fault by a plaintiff ; it may reduce or eliminate a defendant's liability .

negligence .

breach of a duty to exercise duty care ; it is the traditional nonintentional tort standard in cases not based upon strict liability .

no - fault recovery .

recovery permitted in the absence of fault ; it is not the law in any state with respect to products liability .

if adopted in the products liability context , it would permit recovery in the absence not only of negligence ( as strict tort liability does ) , but in the absence of a product defect .

noneconomic damages .

damages payable for items other than out - of - pocket expenses such as pain and suffering or punitive damages .

statutory caps on noneconomic damages , however , are generally distinct from statutory caps on punitive damages .

patent danger rule .

the rule that a manufacturer is not liable for an injury caused by a design defect if the danger should have been obvious to the product user .

periodic payments of future damages .

payments by a defendant for a plaintiff's future expenses on a periodic basis rather than in lump sum .

post - manufacturing improvements .

improvements in a product's design that occur after an injury and which plaintiffs seek to introduce in court as evidence that an injury - causing product was defective .

punitive damages .

damages awarded , in addition to economic damages and other noneconomic damages , to punish a defendant for willful or wanton conduct .

 ( also called "exemplary damages." ) .

restatement ( second ) torts .

a statement of tort law written by legal scholars ; section 402a , which provides for strict tort liability for injuries caused by defective products , has been adopted by most states .

on may 20 , 1997 , the american law institute adopted restatement of the law ( 3d ) , torts: product liability , which is intended to replace section 402a .

state of the art defense .

the defense that permits a defendant to avoid liability in a design defect case if at the time of manufacture there was no feasible safer design available , or in a failure - to - warn case if at the time of manufacture there was no reasonable way that the defendant could have known of the danger he failed to warn against .

statute of limitations .

a statute specifying the number of years after injury occurs , or is discovered , or its cause is discovered , within which suit must be filed .

statute of repose .

a statute specifying the number of years after a product is first sold or distributed within which suit must be filed ; it supplements the statute of limitations .

manufacturers favor statutes of repose because they preclude recovery when products are old ; consumers oppose them because they result in suits being barred before injuries even occur .

strict tort liability .

liability established if a plaintiff proves that a product defect caused an injury ; the plaintiff need not prove that the defendant was negligent .

subrogation .

the right of a collateral source , such as an insurance company or governmental entity , that compensates an injured party to recover the amount paid to injured party by taking over the injured party's right to recover from the person who caused the injury .

useful life limitation .

a period of time set forth by statute after which a product's useful life is deemed over and suit is barred or a presumption that the product was not defective is created ; this is similar to a statute of repose .

workers' compensation .

statutes in every state providing for limited no - fault compensation against employers by workers injured on the job .

receipt of such compensation ordinarily precludes an employee from suing his employer ; it does not preclude him from suing a product manufacturer .

