the war in afghanistan began with a u.s. - led military response to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , designed to remove the taliban - led regime and prevent future terrorist safe havens .

the war , currently in its 10 th year , is now a multi - faceted joint , civil - military , combined campaign , including a nato - led military effort and substantial multi - lateral and bilateral civilian initiatives , broadly aimed at ending the insurgent threat to the afghan government and helping the afghan people lay the foundations for lasting stability .

while the proximate cause of the current war in afghanistan was the set of terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , the war takes place against the backdrop of three decades of tumultuous afghan history including communist rule , the soviet invasion , civil war , and the repressive taliban regime .

the major combat operations phase was regarded as a quick success by its afghan protagonists and their u.s. and other international partners , but the challenges were far from over .

the new afghan leadership faced the profound political challenge of consolidating a fractious , scarred state with very few resources .

the new leaders also faced potential violent challenges , both from resurgent al qaeda and taliban leaders who were defeated but not eliminated , and from afghan local powerbrokers , strengthened by years of battle - hardened autonomy and resistance , who might be displeased by their own loss of influence in the emerging post - taliban order .

"strategy" is commonly understood to include a statement of objectives , or desired ends ; the ways and means designed to achieve those ends , prioritized by importance ; and the roles and responsibilities of key players in executing those ways and means .

strategy - making for afghanistan is particularly complex for two main reasons .

first , the process is complicated by the range of major stake - holders acting in afghanistan to achieve strategic ends .

these include — in addition to the insurgent groups — the afghan government , nato , the u.s. government and other bilateral partners , and key regional leaders and neighboring states including pakistan .

each of these may have its own — or even competing sets of — interests and priorities .

military strategy , in turn , is not easily separable from broader grand strategy for afghanistan , since security is essential for progress in other areas , and since military forces play key supporting roles in non - security activities .

second , the process is complicated by the wide range of activities many stake - holders undertake .

these include not only security but also , for example , civilian capacity - building , the rule of law , and economic development .

those fields , in turn , are closely linked empirically — for example , long - term development requires a relatively stable environment , and successful local law enforcement efforts must be predicated on some form of rule of law .

practitioners and observers suggest that afghanistan faces critical challenges from more than a single insurgency .

the insurgencies themselves are multiple with varying degrees of cohesion , various aims , various links to al qaeda , and various ties across the border into pakistan .

criminal patronage networks — including drug lords , powerbrokers , and some government officials — empower the insurgencies directly through funding and other forms of support , and indirectly by alienating the afghan people .

finally , many of the practices of the international community , over time , have inadvertently empowered malign actors and frustrated the afghan people , further bolstering at least tacit support for the insurgencies .

over time , since the removal of the taliban regime , the complex and multi - faceted international effort in afghanistan has evolved in scope , scale , participation , and focus .

the overall campaign broadly aimed at the stabilization of afghanistan is multi - faceted in both participation and focus .

the campaign is joint , combined , and civil - military , and includes governance , development and security efforts .

it addresses conflict settlement as well as current counter - insurgency and stabilization efforts — including the transition process by which afghans assume lead responsibility for security , and the twin processes of reintegration and reconciliation which may bring former insurgents at all levels back into peaceful afghan society .

in general , the campaign is afghan - led , particularly in the sense of priority - setting .

in theory , orchestrating a complex contingency operation has at least three major facets .

strategy names broad objectives .

plans — working backwards from those objectives — lay out the specific steps , sequenced over time , by which those objectives will be achieved .

and then a well - crafted system of assessments indicates to practitioners and outside audiences whether and to what extent the plans are working and the strategy remains valid .

for the war in afghanistan , congress has pressed the executive branch to assess progress on the ground by means of a clear system of metrics , and to report regularly on those results to the congress .

the obama administration , for its part , has also undertaken unilateral assessments and reviews .

at the outset , announcing the results of his administration's first strategy review for afghanistan and pakistan , president obama stated , "we will set clear metrics to measure progress and hold ourselves accountable. .

he also indicated that the intent would be not merely to mechanically mark progress against fixed indicators , but also to re - examine the validity of the "ways and means" of the strategy itself: "we will review whether we are using the right tools and tactics to make progress towards accomplishing our goals. .

crs report rl33110 , the cost of iraq , afghanistan , and other global war on terror operations since 9 / 11 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32686 , afghanistan: narcotics and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41084 , afghanistan casualties: military forces and civilians , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40991 , private security contractors in iraq and afghanistan: legal issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33834 , defense logistical support contracts in iraq and afghanistan: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21922 , afghanistan: politics , elections , and government performance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41307 , pakistan: key current issues and developments , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40747 , united nations assistance mission in afghanistan: background and policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40835 , the department of defense's use of private security contractors in afghanistan and iraq: background , analysis , and options for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40764 , department of defense contractors in iraq and afghanistan: background and analysis , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40699 , afghanistan: u.s. foreign assistance , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r41484 , afghanistan: u.s. rule of law and justice sector assistance , by liana sun wyler and [author name scrubbed] .

