on february 13 , 2009 , both the house and senate passed the conference version of h.r .

1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) .

subsequently , the arra was signed into law by president obama on february 17 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

the primary purposes of the arra focus on promoting economic recovery , assisting those most affected by the recession , improving economic efficiency by "spurring technological advances in science and health," investing in infrastructure , and stabilizing state and local government budgets .

the house had previously passed its version of h.r .

1 on january 28 , 2009 , while the senate passed s.amdt .

570 , an amendment in the nature of a substitute to h.r .

1 , on february 10 , 2009 .

the arra provides funds to several existing education programs administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , including programs authorized by the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , and the higher education act ( hea ) .

it also provides general state fiscal stabilization grants to support education at the elementary , secondary , and postsecondary levels , as well as "public safety and other government services. .

funds made available through the state fiscal stabilization fund may be used for modernization , renovation , or repair of public school or higher education facilities .

under the house and senate versions of h.r .

1 ( hereafter referred to the house bill and the senate bill , respectively ) , funds also would have been provided to several existing education programs administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) , including programs authorized by the esea , idea , and hea .

the house bill , but not the senate bill , would have created new programs to support school modernization , renovation , and repair at the elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education levels .

both the house bill and the senate bill would have provided general funds for education to support state fiscal stabilization .

this report provides a brief overview of the key provisions related to education programs that are or will be administered by ed that were included in the arra under division a , title viii , department of education and under title xiv , state fiscal stabilization fund .

it also includes a discussion of relevant provisions that were included in the house and senate versions of h.r .

1 .

education - related tax provisions , as well as vocational rehabilitation programs administered by ed , are beyond the scope of this report .

the report begins with a discussion of provisions related to elementary and secondary education .

the next section of the report examines provisions related to higher education , followed by a discussion of provisions related to the institute for education sciences .

the report concludes with an examination of the state fiscal stabilization fund and a discussion of fiscal accountability issues .

the arra provides $96.764 billion in discretionary appropriations for education programs that are or will be administered by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) .

funds provided for education are considered fy2009 appropriations , and generally , all funds are available for obligation until september 30 , 2010 .

appropriations provided under the arra are in addition to funds provided under regular fy2009 appropriations legislation for ed , enacted subsequent to the arra under p.l .

111-8 , the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 .

section 807 of the arra includes a provision allowing the secretary to award fy2009 funds appropriated in title viii of the bill on the basis of state and lea eligibility for fy2008 awards and to require states to make "prompt" allocations to leas .

of these funds , about $43.164 billion were appropriated for existing education programs , including title i - a , education for the disadvantaged , authorized by the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) and the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , part b grants to states .

most of the funds for existing elementary education programs have been appropriated for programs that provide formula grants directly to states or local educational agencies ( leas ) , while most funds at the postsecondary level were appropriated for pell grants , which go directly to students .

for some programs , these appropriations provide a substantial increase over the amount of funding provided through the regular appropriations process in recent years .

for example , the arra provides $10.000 billion for title i - a grants to leas , authorized by the esea , while this program received $13.899 billion in fy2008 and $14.492 billion in regular appropriations for fy2009 .

thus , the total appropriation for this program in fy2009 is $24.492 billion , a 76.2% increase over its fy2008 appropriation level .

similarly , the arra provides $11.300 billion for idea , part b grants to states , while the program received $10.948 billion in fy2008 and $11.505 in fy2009 through the regular appropriations process .

thus , the total appropriation for this program in fy2009 is $22.805 billion , a 108.3% increase over its fy2008 appropriation level .

at the postsecondary level , the arra provides $15.640 billion for pell grants , while the program received $14.215 billion in fy2008 and $17.288 billion in fy2009 .

thus , the total discretionary appropriation for this program in fy2009 is $32.928 billion , a 131.6% increase over its fy2008 appropriation level .

overall , discretionary programs that existed prior to the enactment of the arra received $43.164 billion through the arra .

these programs received $42.746 billion in fy2008 and $47.134 billion in fy2009 .

thus , total fy2009 appropriations for these programs are $90.298 billion , a 111.2% increase over their fy2008 appropriation levels .

the remaining $53.600 billion in discretionary funding provided for education programs was appropriated for the state fiscal stabilization fund .

this is a new program that is being administered by ed .

after making reservations from the appropriation , including a $5 billion reservation for the secretary of education to provide state incentive grants and establish an innovation fund , $48.318 billion will be provided to governors through formula grants to each state that chooses to apply for funding through this program .

table 1 , below , provides appropriations for fy2008 , fy2009 , and the arra for all ed programs that received funding through the arra .

note in particular that table 1 includes vocational rehabilitation programs administered by ed , although these programs are not discussed further in this report .

the arra specifies that the funding provided through the act is considered emergency funding ( section 5 ) .

further , appropriations provided through the arra have no effect on the availability of the amount provided under the continuing appropriations resolution , 2009 ( division a of p.l .

110-329 ) , and the amounts appropriated or made available under the arra are in addition to amounts otherwise appropriated for the fiscal year involved ( section 1601 ) .

on april 1 , 2009 , ed simultaneously released the first round of arra funding and issued guidance for several programs receiving funding under the arra , including title i - a ; idea , part b ; and the state fiscal stabilization fund .

of the $44 billion released , ed provided 50% of the total funds available under title i - a ; idea , part b grants to states ; idea , part b preschool grants ; idea , part c grants to infants and toddlers ; vocational rehabilitation state grants ; independent living ; and services for older individuals who are blind .

the funds were released to states without requiring states to submit applications to receive funds .

remaining funds available under these programs will be released prior to the end of the fy2009 , but , in some cases , may only be released contingent upon receiving additional information from states .

ed also released 67% ( $32.6 billion ) of the total funds available under the state fiscal stabilization funds .

states are required to submit an application ( also made available on april 1 ) to receive these funds .

ed has indicated that it will release funds to states within two weeks of receiving an "approvable application. .

generally , states are eligible to receive 67% of their estimated total allocation , but states may apply for up to 90% of their grants under this program if they demonstrate that the amount of funds they would otherwise receive in phase one is "insufficient to prevent the immediate layoff of personnel by leas , state educational agencies , or public institutions of higher education. .

the remainder of states' sfsf grants will be distributed after july 1 , 2009 , after states submit applications detailing their strategies for meeting performance requirements for the sfsf ( discussed below ) .

on april 10 , 2009 , ed released funding and guidance for the mckinney - vento homeless assistance program and impact aid construction grants .

ed distributed all of the funds for mckinney - vento that were provided under the arra , and distributed $39.6 million of the funds available under impact aid .

the latter funds were used to make 180 grants by formula .

the remaining impact aid funds will be distributed through a competitive grant process later this year .

the arra provides funding for a number of existing education programs , including the two federal education programs that provide the largest amounts of funding for elementary and secondary education — title i - a grants to local educational agencies ( esea ) and idea , part b grants to states .

it also provides funding for school improvement grants ( esea title i - a ) ; education technology ( esea title ii - d ) ; idea , part c ( grants for infants and toddlers ) ; idea , part b ( preschool grants ) ; and the mckinney - vento homeless assistance act .

both the house and senate bills would have provided funds for all of these purposes , except that the house bill would not have provided funding for idea , part b ( preschool grants ) .

the arra includes funding for the fund for the improvement of education ( fie , esea title v - d - 1 ) and impact aid section 8007 ( grants for construction , esea title viii ) .

funds for these programs would have been provided only under the house bill .

the house bill only also would have provided funding for credit enhancement initiatives to assist charter schools ( esea title v - b - 2 ) and a new program to provide school construction funds to leas .

the arra does not provide funds for these specific programs , although funds under the state fiscal stabilization fund ( see subsequent discussion ) could be used for school modernization , renovation , and repair , and possibly construction as well .

provisions applicable to each of these programs are discussed below .

the arra provides supplemental appropriations for several programs authorized under the higher education act ( hea ) .

it provides $16 billion in discretionary appropriations for the federal pell grant program , the federal work - study ( fws ) program , and the teacher quality partnership grant program , and for the administration of federal student aid programs authorized under title iv of the hea .

the arra also provides $1.474 billion in mandatory appropriations for the federal pell grant program .

the house bill would have provided $16.276 billion in discretionary funding for the federal pell grant program , the fws program , and the teacher quality partnership grant program , and for the administration of federal student aid programs .

it would also have provided $1.474 billion in mandatory funding for the federal pell grant program .

the house bill would have amended the federal student loan programs by increasing borrowing limits on stafford loans made to undergraduate students .

in addition , the house bill would have provided $6 billion in discretionary funding for a new program of grants to state higher education agencies ( seas ) for higher education facility modernization , renovation and repair .

the senate bill would have provided $13.980 in discretionary funding for the three hea programs ( the federal pell grant program , the federal perkins loan program , the teacher quality enhancement grant program ) , but would not have provided any funding for higher education modernization , renovation , and repair .

funding for higher education as proposed under the house and senate bills , and as enacted under the arra , is briefly discussed below .

ies is charged with conducting research , evaluation , and dissemination activities in areas of demonstrated national need .

its activities are designed to inform education practice and policy .

only the house bill would have provided $250 million in fy2009 to carry out section 208 of the educational technical assistance act ( etta ; p.l .

107-279 ) .

section 208 authorizes a competitive grant program for seas to support the design , development , and implementation of statewide longitudinal data systems to enable states to use , manage , and analyze individual student data in ways consistent with the esea .

the house bill specified that these statewide data systems could include data systems that contain postsecondary and workforce information .

up to $5 million of the funds could have been used for state data coordinators or for awards to public or private organizations to improve data collection .

both the house and senate bills would have provided supplemental fy2009 appropriations for a state fiscal stabilization fund .

the total amount provided would have been $79 billion under the house bill and $39 billion under the senate bill .

the house bill would have made $39.5 billion available on july 1 , 2009 , and another $39.5 billion available on july 1 , 2010 , while the senate bill would have made $39 billion available in fy2009 .

both the house and senate bills would have made reservations from these funds prior to making grants to states .

under the house bill , from the total annual appropriation , up to 0.5% would have been reserved for the outlying areas .

the secretary could have reserved up to $12.5 million each year for administration and oversight , including program evaluation .

in addition , the secretary would have been required to reserve $7.5 billion annually to provide state incentive grants and establish an innovation fund .

the senate bill would also have reserved up to 0.5% of the total appropriation for the outlying areas .

it also would have allowed the secretary to reserve $25 million for administration and oversight — the same level that the house bill would have allowed over the two - year period during which funds would have been made available .

finally , the senate bill would have required the secretary to reserve $7.5 billion to provide state incentive grants and establish an innovation fund .

after making these reservations , $31.790 billion would have been made available on july 1 , 2009 , and on july 1 , 2010 , under the house bill for grants to states , while $31.280 billion would have remained for grants to states in fy2009 under the senate bill .

under both bills , these funds would have been allocated to states using two population measures: 61% of each state's grant would have been based on the state's relative population of individuals ages 5 to 24 , and 39% of each state's grant would have been based on the state's relative total population .

under the house bill , once funds were received at the state level , the state's governor would have been required to use at least 61% of the state's allocation to support elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education , while under the senate bill all funds would have been used for this purpose as well as for early childhood education programs .

under both bills , the governor would have been required to use these funds to provide the amount of funds , through the state's principal elementary and secondary education funding formula , that was needed to restore state funding for elementary and secondary education to its fy2008 level .

the senate bill also would have allowed funds to be used to pay for state formula increases for fy2009-fy2011 , as well as funding state equity and adequacy adjustments that were enacted before july 1 , 2008 .

in addition , under both bills the governor would have been required to use these funds to provide the amount of funds to public institutions of higher education in the state needed to restore state support for postsecondary education ( not including support for capital projects or for research and development ) to the fy2008 level .

if the amount of funds provided through the state fiscal stabilization fund was insufficient to restore state support for elementary , secondary , and postsecondary education to the fy2008 levels , plus formula increases and equity / adequacy adjustments for elementary and secondary education under the senate bill , the governor would have been required to allocate funds between elementary and secondary education and postsecondary education in proportion to the relative shortfall in state support at each level of education .

if , however , funds remained after restoring funds to the fy2008 level , the governor would have been required to use the remainder of the 61% of the state allocation ( house bill ) or all remaining funds ( senate bill ) to provide grants to leas based on their share of title i - a funding for the most recent year for which data were available .

under the house bill , the governor would have been able to use up to 39% of the state funds for public safety and government services .

these funds , however , could have been used to provide additional assistance for elementary and secondary education and for public institutions of higher education .

as noted earlier , under the senate bill , all funds provided to states under the state fiscal stabilization fund would have been used for education .

in applying for funds from the state fiscal stabilization fund , both bills would have required states to provide four assurances to ed .

it is unclear how many states would have been able to provide all of the required assurances .

both the house and senate bills would have required that the state agree to maintain support for elementary and secondary education at least at the level provided in fy2006 , for fy2009 and fy2010 ; and the state agree to maintain support for public institutions of higher education at least at the fy2006 level , for fy2009 and fy2010 .

they both also would have required that the state establish a longitudinal data system as described in section 6401 ( e ) ( 2 ) ( d ) of the america competes act .

both bills would have required states to provide assurances related to the equitable distribution of teachers between high - and low - poverty schools , but they approached this assurance in different ways .

under the house bill , the state would have been required to take actions to comply with requirements in esea , section 1111 ( b ) ( 8 ) ( c ) related to the provision of highly qualified teachers in schools receiving title i - a funding to eliminate inequities in the distribution of teachers between high - and low - poverty schools and ensure that low - income and minority children are not taught at higher rates than other students by inexperienced , unqualified , or out - of field teachers .

under the senate bill , states would have been required to take action , including implementing activities authorized in esea , section 2113 ( c ) , such as reforming teacher and principal certification and establishing alternative routes for teacher state certification , to increase the number and improve the distribution of "effective" teachers and principals in high - poverty schools and leas .

finally , under both the house and senate bills , the state would have had to agree to enhance the quality of its state assessments used to measure student achievement in reading , mathematics , and science through activities described in esea , section 6112 ( a ) , including collaborating with institutions of higher education or other organizations to improve the quality , validity , and reliability of state assessments .

second , the state would have been required to agree to comply with requirements in the esea and idea related to the inclusion of children with disabilities and limited english proficient students in state assessments , the development of valid and reliable assessments for those students , and the provision of accommodations to facilitate their participation in state assessments .

the senate bill only would have required states to improve state academic content standards and student academic achievement standards consistent with requirements in the america competes act .

the applicable requirements in the america competes act focus on identifying and making changes to a state's secondary school academic content and academic achievement standards in order to align these standards with the knowledge and skills necessary for success in credit - bearing postsecondary education coursework , the 21 st century workforce , and the armed forces without the need for remediation .

further , the senate bill would have required states to ensure compliance with requirements related to schools identified for corrective actions and restructuring under esea title i - a .

as noted earlier , each bill would have required the secretary to reserve $7.5 billion to provide state incentive grants and , at his or her discretion , establish an innovation fund .

state incentive grants would have been awarded by the secretary to states that made significant progress in meeting the requirements described in the preceding paragraph .

at least 50% of each state grant would have been allocated to leas in proportion to their esea title i - a grants for the most recent year .

if the secretary choose to establish an innovation fund , up to $325 million of the funds made available on july 1 , 2009 , and on july 1 , 2010 , ( house bill ) or $650 million for fy2009 ( senate bill ) could have been reserved for discretionary grants to eligible entities ( states , leas or schools under the house bill ; leas or partnerships between nonprofit organizations and leas or schools under the senate bill ) .

grants would have been made by the secretary to eligible grantees demonstrating significant gains in closing academic achievement gaps between pupil groups , and grantees would use these funds to expand their activities and serve as models for best practices .

both the house and senate bills included comparable provisions regarding the authorized uses of funds by educational agencies , schools , and institutions of higher education ( ihes ) under the proposed state fiscal stabilization program .

funds for elementary and secondary education could have been used for any purpose authorized under the esea , idea , or the carl .

d. perkins career and technical education act ( perkins act ) .

together , these acts cover a very wide range of k - 12 educational activities , including the hiring of teachers and paraprofessionals .

funds could not have been used for capital expenditures except those authorized under those acts ( such uses are highly limited ) .

no funds could have been used to provide financial assistance for pupils to attend private schools except ( under the senate bill ) to provide special education and related services to pupils with disabilities as authorized by the idea .

under both the house and senate bills , funds for higher education could have been used by public ihes for educational and general expenditures , including expenditures "to mitigate the need to raise tuition and fees for in - state students. .

funds could not have been used by ihes to raise their endowments or for construction , renovation , or repair of facilities .

in its consideration of education - related provisions in economic stimulus funding proposals , some of the debate in congress has centered on the extent to which states and leas should be given added flexibility with respect to certain fiscal accountability requirements that current statutes place on states and / or leas with respect to the use of federal education funds .

a related issue is whether funds provided under the state fiscal stabilization fund could be treated in some cases as "non - federal" funds in determining whether states and leas meet certain fiscal accountability requirements .

a long - standing principle of federal aid to elementary and secondary education is that federal funding should add to , not substitute for , state and local education funding – i.e. , that federal funds should provide a net increase in financial resources for specific types of educational services ( such as the education of disadvantaged pupils or pupils with disabilities ) , rather than effectively providing general subsidies to state and local governments .

all of the fiscal accountability requirements included in federal elementary and secondary education programs are intended to provide that all federal funds represent a net increase in the level of financial resources available to serve eligible pupils , and that they do not ultimately replace funds that states or leas would provide in the absence of federal aid .

one or more of three types of fiscal accountability requirements are applicable to major federal k - 12 education aid programs .

the first two of these are common to many federal assistance programs , while the third is unique to esea title i - a .

to meet the first requirement , maintenance of effort ( moe ) , recipient leas must provide , from state and local sources , a level of funding ( either aggregate or per pupil ) in the preceding year that is at least a specified percentage of the amount in the second preceding year .

a second fiscal accountability requirement provides that federal funds must be used to supplement , and not supplant ( sns ) , state and local funds that would otherwise be available for the education of pupils eligible to be served under the federal program in question .

sns provisions prohibit states and / or leas from using federal funds: ( 1 ) to provide services that state and / or local funds have provided or purchased in the past , ( 2 ) to provide services that are required to be provided under federal , state , or local law , or ( 3 ) to provide services for some pupils ( eg , those eligible under specific federal programs ) that are provided to other pupils with non - federal funds .

the third , distinctive , fiscal requirement under esea title i - a is comparability — services provided with state and local funds in schools participating in esea title i - a must be comparable to those in non - title i - a schools of the same lea .

 ( if all of an lea's schools participate in title i - a , then services funded from state and local revenues must be "substantially comparable" in each school of the lea. ) .

since the comparability requirement only applies to esea title i - a , and is not currently a subject of debate or proposed waiver authority with respect to the arra , it will not be discussed further in this report .

with respect to current major federal k - 12 education programs , for moe , the requirement is that in order to be eligible to receive esea title i - a grants , leas must spend , from state and local sources , in the preceding year an amount equal to at least 90% of the amount in the second preceding year , on either an aggregate or per pupil basis ( whichever is more beneficial to the lea ) .

the esea provision is based on total state and local funding for public k - 12 education , not funding for specific purposes .

if the requirement is not met , the lea still receives a grant that is reduced by the proportion to which the requirement is not met .

the moe requirement for title i - a and other esea programs may be waived by the secretary in cases of "exceptional or uncontrollable circumstances" or a "precipitous decline in the financial resources" ( esea section 9521 ) .

in the case of idea , moe applies to both seas and leas , and in general is based on 100% , not 90% , of previous spending levels .

however , the idea includes a provision allowing leas , and possibly some states , to reduce funding by an amount of up to 50% of annual increases in idea allocations , if these funds are used for specified purposes .

in addition , the moe provision under idea is based on spending for special education services for pupils with disabilities , not total state and local spending .

as under the esea , if the moe requirement is not met , the sea or lea still receives a grant that is reduced by the proportion to which the requirement is not met .

in addition , the state moe requirement under idea may be waived by the secretary in cases of "exceptional or uncontrollable circumstances such as a natural disaster or a precipitous and unforeseen decline in the financial resources of the state" ( idea , section 612 ( a ) ( 18 ) ( c ) ( i ) ) .

further , the state sns requirements under idea may be waived only if "the state provides clear and convincing evidence that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education" ( fape ) and the secretary of education concurs with this evidence ( idea section 612 ( a ) ( 17 ) ( c ) ) .

beyond this , it might be argued that idea incorporates an effective moe at the level of services to individual pupils , with its requirement that fape be provided to pupils with disabilities in participating states .

in contrast to moe , sns is applied to both seas and leas under title i - a , and there is generally no authority for the secretary of education to waive sns under esea , and only a very restrictive authority to do so under idea , as it contingent upon the requirement in the previous sentence .

authority to waive sns , as well as moe , under esea programs was granted to areas affected by the 2005 gulf coast hurricanes for fy2006 and 2007 .

in particular , the broad waiver authorities included in esea title ix , part d , and the education flexibility partnership act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-25 , as amended ) specifically exempt all three fiscal accountability provisions from authority to be waived ( beyond the specific moe waiver authority noted above ) .

earlier versions of this report included estimated state grants for various education programs .

crs prepared those state grant estimates to support congressional decision - making by providing comparisons of the relative impact of alternative formulas or funding levels on the legislative process .

these estimates were also provided to inform members of congress seeking information on legislation being considered for a vote .

after a measure is enacted , however , it is the responsibility of the executive branch ( eg , u.s. department of education ) to develop allocations and implement the law .

crs estimates produced during legislative consideration of a bill may differ from actual allocations due to differences in data used ( eg , actual allocations calculated by executive branch agencies may be based on data that are not yet available or have recently become available ) or differences in interpretation of statutory language .

once executive branch agencies develop state allocations for formula grants ( eg , title i - a grants to leas ) , the executive branch agencies are the authoritative sources on grant amounts .

crs estimates are no longer included in this report because ed has released estimated state grants under the arra .

the house - passed version of h.r .

1 would have provided about $145.005 billion for education programs that are or would have been administered by ed , while the senate bill would have provided $79.964 billion for such programs .

while funds generally would have been appropriated in fy2009 , the house bill would have made some funding available in fy2009 and some funding available in fy2010 .

the senate bill would have appropriated and made funds available in fy2009 .

table a - 1 provides an overview of the specific funding provided by the arra , and the funding that would have been provided under the house and senate bills .

