it is now generally acknowledged that the economy entered recession in december 2007 , and has since lost 6.9 million jobs .

in august 2009 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) issued its revised economic outlook , forecasting a return to economic growth in the last half of 2009 , but with the unemployment rate continuing to rise through 2010 , topping 10% by mid - 2010 .

this has raised the profile of economic insecurity caused by the recession .

individuals and families who were economically disadvantaged before the recession hit are particularly at - risk of economic insecurity .

this report discusses the potential role that the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant to states may play in mitigating the effects of the recession for poor families with children .

the tanf block grant is best known as a funding source for cash welfare .

however , it also funds a wide range of benefits , services , and activities for disadvantaged families with children , as well as programs to achieve the goals of reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies and promoting two - parent families .

many children were in families that were already poor as the economy entered recession .

the child poverty rate in 2007 , the last full year of an economic expansion that dated back to 2001 , stood at 18.0% — higher than the rate for the elderly ( 9.7% ) or that for non - aged adults ( 10.9% ) .

in the recession year of 2008 , the child poverty rate rose to 19.0% .

high poverty rates among families with children are correlated with certain characteristics .

children in female - headed families are more likely to be poor than those in married couple families .

additionally , those in families with young parents , parents with low levels of educational attainment , and racial and ethnic minority children were more likely to be poor than their counterparts in other groups .

in creating tanf in the 1996 welfare law , congress converted open - ended matching grants ( unlimited funding ) for afdc cash welfare , emergency assistance , and a capped matching grant for employment and training services for cash welfare recipients into a single block grant to help needy families .

the tanf block grant provides states with fixed funding but broad authority to use federal tanf funds ( and associated state funds ) on a wide range of benefits and services to aid needy families and to reduce out - of - wedlock pregnancies and promote two - parent families .

the 1996 welfare reform law set the tanf basic block grant at $16.5 billion , which together with a requirement that states maintain at least $10.4 billion in spending from their own funds , has not changed since tanf's inception .

that basic block grant and the state maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement constitute the bulk of tanf funding to the states .

tanf also includes some additional funding sources , including a limited contingency fund ( discussed in detail below ) and supplemental grants that have totaled $319 million and have been targeted to 17 states .

the fixed nature of tanf funding imposes financial risk on states .

absent additional funding , states bear the risk of an increase in recession - related costs , including increases in the cash welfare caseload .

to pay for increased costs in a recession , states either have to cut other human services funded through tanf or increase spending from their own funds .

tanf funds have been used for a wide range of human services that either seek to address the root cause or ameliorate the effects of economic disadvantage among families with children .

these initiatives — launched in better economic times — are at risk in states that need to reallocate tanf funds toward economic assistance during a recession .

figure 3 shows the use of tanf grants and moe spending for fy2007 .

as shown on the figure , basic cash assistance ( what most people call cash welfare ) accounted for only $9.1 billion ( 30% ) of all tanf and moe funds in that year .

even when also counting expenditures on administration and work activities ( the other categories associated with traditional welfare programs ) , a little less than half of all tanf and moe funds are accounted for .

a second major category of tanf funding is work supports — particularly child care .

child care — either through expenditures or transfers to the child care and development fund — accounts for almost one - fifth ( 19% ) of total tanf and moe spending .

other work supports , such as the refundable portion of state tax credits for low wage workers and transportation aid , account for an additional 6% of all funds spent .

the categories shown on the figure above are based on reports to hhs made by states on their tanf expenditures .

however , the categories poorly capture some benefits , activities , and services provided under tanf .

for example , tanf makes a substantial contribution to programs that deal with child abuse and neglect — but that is not captured in the reporting system .

a survey by the urban institute for state fy2004 reported that tanf contributed at least $3 billion to those programs .

also not captured in the expenditure reports and categories is the breadth of benefits and services funded , particularly in the categories labeled "family formation" and "other. .

tanf is used on a wide range of human services programs that address issues faced by disadvantaged families or children: home visiting programs for new parents ; youth services , such as grants to boys and girls clubs ; pre - kindergarten education programs ; after - school programs for teens ; responsible fatherhood programs , such as employment services and training for noncustodial parents ; and marriage education and counseling .

the 1996 welfare reform law was enacted , in part , out of concern that a part of the population was chronically welfare - dependent .

research published in the mid - 1990s showed that while many families received cash welfare for only a short period of time , a substantial minority received welfare for a long time .

it was estimated that little more than 1 / 3 of those who entered the rolls could be expected to be on the rolls for five years or more .

other research showed that cash welfare provided a disincentive to work , and also affected decisions on whether to marry or have a child out - of - wedlock ( though neither the effect of welfare on work or family formation could explain more than a small share of the trends in work or marriage among families with children ) .

one of the goals of the tanf block grant is to reduce the dependence on government benefits of needy parents .

figure 4 shows the trend in the number of families receiving cash welfare and its relationship to the unemployment rate .

it shows that since the enactment of welfare reform in the mid - 1990s , the welfare rolls have declined sharply .

in the late 1990s , this decline coincided with the drop in the unemployment rate .

since 2000 , welfare rolls continued to decline until very recently , regardless of the trend in the unemployment rate .

thus , as measured by the number of families receiving assistance , welfare dependency is much reduced from the pre - 1996 levels .

critics of the arra provision establishing the temporary emergency contingency fund argue that the extra funding will provide states with the incentive to increase their welfare rolls .

figure 4 provides a long historical view of the welfare caseload , from july 1959 to december 2008 .

over this period , there are periods when the trends in welfare caseloads moved in tandem with the unemployment rate , and there are other periods when the trends in the two data series differed .

most research on the welfare caseloads says that macroeconomic conditions are a factor affecting caseloads , though much of this research focuses on the period before 2000 .

the history of the cash welfare caseload also shows that a return to economic prosperity has not always resulted in lower caseloads , such as the trend seen in the 1980s .

other forces , demographic changes and policy , also affect the caseload .

the regular tanf contingency fund provides states that meet specified criteria of economic need with extra , matching grants .

the 1996 welfare law established the contingency fund with $2 billion , and at the beginning of fy2009 , $1.3 billion remained in the fund .

one issue is whether the $1.3 billion is sufficient to cover contingency fund costs for the duration of the recession .

before the enactment of the arra , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated that the contingency fund would remain solvent through fy2009 , but run out of money in fy2010 .

the availability of the temporary emergency contingency fund might affect these projections .

still , it remains possible that the regular contingency fund could run out of money in the next two years and congress might seek to address that issue .

states that fail tanf work participation standards are subject to a penalty through a reduction in their block grant .

the penalty is reduced based on how far away they were from achieving their standard .

the hhs secretary may also reduce the penalty for a state that failed the work standards if it met the economic need criteria of the tanf contingency fund .

most states currently meet these criteria .

hhs has released work participation data for fy2007 , finding that 12 states and three territories failed to meet the all - family standard and seven states and one territory failed to meet the two - parent standard .

these jurisdictions are thus at - risk of being financially penalized .

 ( states could avoid the penalty by entering into and executing a corrective compliance plan with hhs ) .

further , congress could either eliminate or defer these penalties to avoid tanf funding cuts in the midst of the recession .

 ( this issue is not addressed in the arra. ) .

