the home investment partnerships program was created by the cranston - gonzalez national affordable housing act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-625 ) .

home is a federal block grant program administered by the department of housing and urban development ( hud ) that provides funding for affordable housing activities to states and certain localities through formula grants .

states and localities that receive home grants can choose to fund a wide range of rental and homeownership housing activities that benefit low - income households in order to best meet local affordable housing needs .

this report provides an introduction to the home program , including a brief history , an overview of allowable uses of home funds , and a description of certain program requirements .

it also provides information on funding for the program and how that funding has been used .

in the late 1980s , some members of congress expressed concern about the state of the nation's housing .

this concern stemmed from an increasing awareness of a variety of problems related to housing , including homelessness , families living in sub - standard housing , and decreasing opportunities for homeownership .

the concern over these issues led to a number of efforts to focus attention on housing policy , including the creation of a national housing task force that included housing policy experts and industry leaders .

in march 1988 , the task force produced a report on its findings .

among the housing issues that the task force report identified was a diminishing supply of rental and homeownership housing that was affordable to low - income households .

in a 1988 hearing on the task force report , some members of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs suggested that federal funding for housing programs was inadequate to meet the affordable housing needs identified in the report .

most federal housing assistance distributed to states and localities at the time was restricted to specific uses , such as section 8 vouchers or public housing projects .

furthermore , programs that did give communities flexibility to choose how to use their funds , such as the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program , were primarily meant to fund economic development and community revitalization activities and restricted the ways in which funding could be used for affordable housing ( for example , cdbg funds could be used for some housing rehabilitation but could not generally be used to construct new housing units ) .

concerned that existing programs were not meeting the nation's affordable housing needs , members of the housing task force argued to the committee that the level of federal funding specifically dedicated to affordable housing should be increased in order to fully address affordable housing issues .

at the same time , task force members argued that local jurisdictions should be allowed more control over the ways in which they used any such federal affordable housing funding .

in 1990 , congress passed a major housing bill that responded to some of the issues raised by the housing task force and other experts .

the cranston - gonzalez national affordable housing act ( p.l .

101-625 ) , or naha , stated that the nation's housing policy was not meeting the goal of providing "decent , safe , sanitary , and affordable living environments for all americans" that was first set out in the housing act of 1949 .

the law revised , amended , or repealed several existing housing programs and authorized some new programs , including the home investment partnerships program ( often just referred to as home ) .

home is the largest federal block grant program that provides funding dedicated exclusively to increasing the availability of adequate , affordable housing for low - and very low - income households .

the program places a particular emphasis on giving states and localities flexibility in how they achieve their affordable housing goals , and funds can be used for a variety of activities related to both rental and owner - occupied housing .

home is also designed to expand the capacity of states and localities to meet their long - term affordable housing needs by leveraging federal funding to attract state , local , and private investment in affordable housing and by strengthening the ability of government and nonprofit organizations to meet local housing needs .

home is authorized by title ii of naha .

hud promulgated regulations governing the program in september 1996 .

in july 2013 , hud issued a final rule making significant revisions to certain program requirements , representing the first substantive changes to the regulations since they were first finalized in 1996 .

this section of the report describes the structure of the home program , including the requirements that states and localities must meet in order to receive their own allocations of home funds , eligible uses of program funds , and certain requirements that home - assisted housing must meet .

the following section on " home program funding " describes the funding for the program , including appropriations for home and the funding formula that is used to allocate the funds to states and eligible localities .

this section describes funding for the home program , including its appropriations history , the formula that hud uses to distribute funds to pjs , and the distribution of home funds in fy2014 ( the most recent home funding distributed as of the date of this report ) .

it also discusses the concept of leveraging home funds to attract other sources of funding for affordable housing activities .

hud reports a number of home program performance statistics .

these include statistics on the types of completed units that have been assisted with home funding ( rental units , home buyer units , and homeowner units , ) , the eligible activities funded with home dollars ( rehabilitation , new construction , acquisition , and households that have received tbra ) , and characteristics of households that benefit from home funds .

oversight of the home program involves monitoring both processes and outcomes .

monitoring processes includes ensuring that home funds are committed and expended according to the timelines specified in statute and regulation and that program requirements are followed .

monitoring outcomes includes ensuring that investments of program funds ultimately help to achieve the program's goal , namely , providing housing that is affordable to low - income households .

given home's structure as a block grant program , participating jurisdictions ( pjs ) bear much of the responsibility for ensuring that subrecipients adhere to home program requirements and that specific projects result in their intended outcomes .

nonetheless , hud is ultimately responsible for overseeing pjs' use of home funds to ensure that home funds are spent properly .

in december 2011 , hud published a proposed rule in the federal register revising several aspects of the home program regulations .

the final rule was promulgated in july 2013 and represented the first substantive changes to the home regulations since 1996 .

the stated purposes of the rule are to "address many of the operational challenges facing participating jurisdictions ; improve understanding of home program requirements , update property standards to which housing funded by home funds must adhere , and strengthen participating jurisdictions' accountability for both compliance with program requirements and performance. .

to achieve these aims , the rule makes several changes to the home program .

some aspects of the rule are specifically concerned with oversight and would strengthen existing requirements or impose new requirements to attempt to enhance the accountability of states and localities that receive home funds .

other aspects of the rule would codify existing administrative requirements or best practices as identified by hud .

several major provisions of the 2013 final rule are described here .

some of these provisions are also discussed elsewhere in this report , and the description of program requirements throughout the report reflects relevant changes made in the 2013 rule .

among other things , the final rule does the following: requires pjs to adopt written policies to improve program oversight and monitoring of recipients of home funds , updates the property standards that home - assisted housing must meet , requires pjs to conduct annual examinations of the financial condition of rental projects with at least 10 home - assisted units , requires repayment of home funds used for rental projects that are not rented to eligible tenants within 18 months , and requires home - assisted home buyers to receive housing counseling .

the rule also includes several provisions that are similar to those that were included in the fy2012 and fy2013 hud appropriations laws .

these provisions specify the following: home funds used for projects that are not completed within four years of the date the funds are committed are to be repaid by the pj .

the secretary of hud can extend this deadline by one year if he determines that the delay was caused by circumstances outside of the pj's control .

pjs cannot commit funds without conducting an underwriting review of the proposed project , assessing the developer's capacity and fiscal soundness , and examining market conditions .

home buyer units that are not sold to eligible home buyers within nine months of the project's completion are to be rented to eligible tenants .

in order for chdos to demonstrate that they have the capacity to carry out housing activities , they must have paid staff with experience in the housing role the chdo expects to play .

volunteers and donated staff cannot be used to demonstrate capacity ( although they may assist with chdo activities ) .

furthermore , a chdo cannot rely on consultants to demonstrate capacity to undertake housing development , except in an organization's first year as a chdo if the consultant trains the chdo's staff .

the 2013 rule also included several additional provisions related to chdos .

some of these provisions were described in the " community housing development organizations ( chdos ) " section of this report .

most of the provisions in the final rule became effective on august 23 , 2013 , with some exceptions .

while the provisions in the fy2012 and fy2013 appropriations laws only applied to projects that used home funds appropriated in those years , these provisions now apply to all home funds committed after the effective date , regardless of the year the funds were appropriated .

appendix a .

select programs formerly funded within the home account for several years prior to fy2008 , two major home account set - asides provided funding for the american dream downpayment initiative and hud's housing counseling program .

however , neither of these programs is currently funded through the home account .

housing counseling is now funded through its own account , and congress has not appropriated funding for the american dream downpayment initiative since fy2008 .

each of these programs is described briefly below .

american dream downpayment initiative the american dream downpayment initiative ( addi ) was funded in the home account from fy2003 through fy2008 .

congress has chosen not to fund addi in fy2009 or subsequent years .

addi was created by the american dream downpayment act ( p.l .

108-186 ) , signed into law on december 16 , 2003 .

the program aimed to increase homeownership , especially among low - income and minority populations , by providing formula funding to all 50 states and qualified local jurisdictions for down payment and closing cost assistance for first - time home buyers .

states and localities could use addi funds to provide closing cost and down payment assistance up to $10,000 or 6% of a home's purchase price , whichever was greater .

additionally , up to 20% of addi funds could be used to assist homeowners with rehabilitation costs , as long as the rehabilitation was completed within a year of the home's purchase .

the formula used to award addi funds to states was based on the number of low - income households residing in rental housing in the state relative to the nation as a whole .

for localities , the grant amount was based on the number of low - income households residing in rental housing in the jurisdiction relative to the entire state .

in order for a local jurisdiction to receive its own allocation of addi funds , it had to have a population of at least 150,000 or be eligible for a minimum grant of $50,000 under the addi formula .

while supporters of addi held that the program played an important role in increasing homeownership , critics argued that it was duplicative because states and localities could already choose to use their home funds for down payment assistance .

addi was originally authorized to receive $200 million annually through fy2007 , but the program never received more than $86 million in appropriations .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) appropriated $10 million to addi and extended the program through the end of fy2008 .

president bush's budget requested $50 million for addi in fy2009 ; however , the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) did not include funding for addi , and the program has not been funded in subsequent years .

housing counseling from fy1997 through fy2008 , funding for hud's housing counseling program was appropriated as a set - aside in the home account .

through the housing counseling program , authorized under section 106 of the housing and urban development act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-448 ) , as amended , hud competitively awards funding to hud - approved agencies that provide counseling on a range of housing issues .

for several years in the 2000s , president bush requested that housing counseling be funded through its own account , but until fy2009 congress continued to fund housing counseling as a set - aside in the home account .

in fy2009 , congress appropriated funding for housing counseling in its own account rather than as a set - aside within home , and has continued to do so in subsequent fiscal years .

for more information on the housing counseling program , including information on appropriations , see crs report r41351 , housing counseling: background and federal role , by [author name scrubbed] .

appendix b .

distribution of participating jurisdictions and total home funding by stat .

