escalating drug trafficking - related violence in mexico and the increasing presence of mexican drug traffickers and central american gangs in the united states have focused congressional concern on the pace of implementation of the mérida initiative .

these concerns have been heightened since the march 13 , 2010 , killing of three individuals , including two u.s. citizens , with ties to the u.s. consulate in ciudad juarez , mexico .

in a statement , secretary of state hillary clinton said that "these appalling assaults on members of our own state department family are , sadly , part of a growing tragedy besetting many communities in mexico .

they underscore the imperative of our continued commitment to work closely with the government of president calderón to cripple the influence of trafficking organizations at work in mexico. .

secretary clinton also reaffirmed the obama administration's commitment to supporting the counterdrug and anticrime efforts of central american governments prior to a meeting with leaders from that region in guatemala on march 5 , 2010 .

to date , congress has appropriated some $1.3 billion to support mérida programs in mexico , $248 million for mérida and a new central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) in central america , and $42 million for caribbean countries , including funds for the caribbean basin security initiative ( cbsi ) .

with funding for the original mérida initiative ending with the fy2010 budget cycle , much focus has centered on how the initiative and related programs in central america and the caribbean should move forward .

detailed strategy documents for carsi and cbsi are not yet available .

however , the obama administration included a new four - pillar strategy for u.s. - mexican security cooperation in its fy2011 budget request , which was more clearly defined after secretary of state hillary clinton led a cabinet - level delegation to mexico on march 23 , 2010 .

shortly after this high - level delegation , the u.s. state department released a joint statement from secretary clinton and mexican foreign secretary patricia espinosa expressing both countries' commitment to the continuation of u.s. - mexican security cooperation .

their strategy for the coming years seeks to "ensure continuity of bilateral actions already in place and advance new opportunities and areas of cooperation. .

the four pillars of the new bilateral strategy will focus on ( 1 ) disrupting organized criminal groups ; ( 2 ) institutionalizing the rule of law ; ( 3 ) building a 21 st - century border ; and ( 4 ) building strong and resilient communities while the first two pillars largely build upon efforts that began under the bush administration , pillars three and four broaden the scope of bilateral cooperation to include efforts to facilitate "secure flows" of people and goods through the u.s. - mexico border and to promote social and economic development in violence - prone communities ( see " beyond the mérida initiative " section below ) .

the 111 th congress is likely to continue overseeing how mérida and related funds have been used , any planned adjustments in the uses of funds appropriated during the fy2008-fy2010 budget cycles , and the degree to which the obama administration's new strategies for mexico , central america , and the caribbean complement each other and u.s. domestic counterdrug and border security efforts .

mexico is a major producer and supplier to the u.s. market of heroin , methamphetamine , and marijuana and the major transit country for cocaine sold in the united states .

according to the department of state's 2010 international narcotics control strategy report , as much as 90% of all cocaine entering the united states flows through mexico or its territorial waters , with at least 42% of that cocaine first stopping in central america .

a small number of mexican drug trafficking organizations ( dtos ) , often mistakenly referred to as "drug cartels," control the most significant drug distribution operations along the southwest border .

mexican dtos have expanded their dominance of the u.s. drug market by increasing their transportation and distribution networks , as well as displacing other latin american dtos , primarily colombians .

since taking office in december 2006 , mexican president felipe calderón has made combating the dtos a centerpiece of his domestic policy agenda .

the calderón government has scored some significant victories against the dtos , such as the killing of arturo beltrán leyva and capture of teodoro garcia simental .

however , the government's crackdown , as well as turf wars among rival dtos , has fueled an escalation in violence throughout the country , including states along the u.s. - mexico border .

in 2008 , more than 5,100 people in mexico were killed in drug trafficking - related violence , a 126% increase over 2007 .

in 2009 , conservative estimates indicate that more than 6,500 people , including 35 soldiers and close to 500 police officers , died as a result of drug trafficking - related violence homicides , with the violence largely concentrated in five states .

in many areas of those states , such as ciudad juarez in chihuahua , violence has remained at elevated levels despite the presence of large numbers of federal troops and police .

thus far in 2010 , drug trafficking - related violence has escalated even further , with record levels of violence occurring in new "hot spots" in tamaulipas , nuevo leon , and sonora .

mexican dtos are also expanding their operations into central america , a volatile region where the governments of some countries — particularly guatemala , el salvador , and honduras — are already dealing with some of the highest violent crime rates in the world .

central american law enforcement officials have even less training and equipment to deal with dtos , organized crime , and criminal gangs than their mexican counterparts , making them highly susceptible to drug - related corruption .

in addition , as with mexico , central american countries continue to have problems with impunity and human rights abuses by security forces that have hindered the performance and reputation of their law enforcement and judicial systems .

h.r .

2410 ( berman ) foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 2 010 and 2011 .

introduced may 14 , 2009 ; house committee on foreign affairs held markup and ordered the bill reported .

house approved june 22 , 2009 .

title ix , subtitle a of the bill , as introduced , consists of actions to enhance the mérida initiative , including the designation of a high - level coordinator within the department of state to implement the program ; the addition of caribbean community ( caricom ) countries to the mérida initiative ; the establishment and implementation of a program to assess the effectiveness of assistance provided under the mérida initiative ; within 180 days and not later than december 1 of each year thereafter , a reporting requirement regarding the programs and activities carried out under the mérida initiative .

title ix , subtitle b of the bill would require the president to establish an inter - agency task force on the prevention of illicit small arms trafficking in the western hemisphere ; increase penalties for illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons ; and express congressional support for the ratification by the united states of the inter - american convention against the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms , ammunition , explosives , and other related materials ( cifta ) .

h.r .

3239 ( kirkpatrick ) introduced july 16 , 2009 ; referred to committees on homeland security and foreign affairs .

house committee on homeland security ordered the bill reported march 9 , 2010 .

the bill would require the secretary of homeland security , in consultation with the secretary of state , to submit a report on the effects of the mérida initiative on the border security of the united states .

there has been increasing concern in congress about the slow delivery of mérida assistance .

u.s. officials reportedly attributed early delays in disbursal of fy2008 funds to u.s. government contracting regulations , negotiations with mexico and other countries about what equipment is actually needed , and the difficulty of delivering an aid package that involves so many agencies and offices .

more recent delays in mérida implementation have also occurred because congress did not pass the fy2009 or fy2010 appropriations bills until well into those fiscal years , and as a result of ongoing consultations between the state department and congressional appropriators on the contents of the spending plans and human rights progress reports required by the mérida appropriations legislation .

on december 3 , 2009 , the government accountability office ( gao ) issued a preliminary report for congress on the status of funding for the mérida initiative .

by the end of september 2009 , gao found that $830 million of the $1.3 billion in mérida funds appropriated for mexico and central america had been obligated by the state department , but only $26 million of the funds had actually been spent .

the report attributed delays in mérida implementation to " ( 1 ) statutory conditions on the funds , ( 2 ) challenges in fulfilling administrative procedures [required for obligation and expenditure of the funds] , and ( 3 ) the need to enhance institutional capacity on the part of both recipient countries and the united states to implement the assistance. .

in a written response to the gao report , the state department acknowledged that implementation delays had occurred , but stated that it had devoted significant time to working with partner governments to prepare for the disbursement and coordination of mérida assistance .

the state department criticized the gao's use of "expended funds" as its primary performance measure , since this measure did not account for ongoing training programs or equipment that had been ordered .

as of late november 2009 , the state department reported that approximately $359 million in mérida funding was actively supporting projects in mexico and central america .

state department officials in mexico city have continued to report significant progress in mérida implementation since the gao reporting period ended .

according to a state department equipment report , roughly $113 million worth of equipment had arrived in mexico by march 23 , 2010 , including five bell helicopters valued at $66 million for the mexican army and a $28 million software package for the attorney general's office .

another $151.2 million in equipment is scheduled to be delivered by the end of 2010 , including three uh - 60 helicopters valued at $76.5 million for the ssp .

among mérida - funded training programs , police professionalization programs appear to have advanced the furthest .

approximately 4,300 university - educated police officers have graduated from the basic investigative training course offered at the refurbished federal police institute at san luis potosi .

and , although many judicial training programs are just getting underway , at least 87 judges and prosecutors had completed u.s. - funded courses on administering oral trials by late march 2010 .

as with mérida - mexico , mérida / carsi programs in central america have taken longer to get off the ground than originally anticipated by the administration , but are now showing progress in implementation .

police equipment is beginning to arrive throughout the region , as well as spanish "e - trace" firearms tracking technology provided by the bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) .

a transnational anti - gang ( tag ) unit should begin working in guatemala later this year ; another will then be created in honduras .

a regional legal advisor from the fbi is scheduled to arrive in may to be based in el salvador , while immigration and customs enforcement is supplementing vetted units in honduras , el salvador , guatemala and panama with merida / carsi funding .

usaid has awarded contracts for most of its mérida - related crime prevention and institution - building programs , including funding to support an impact evaluation survey on the effects of its programs on municipal - level crime statistics and citizen perceptions of crime .

u.s. customs and border protection conducted land border port of entry assessments in each of the central american countries and is now determining how to meet the needs identified in those assessments .

similarly , regional firearms assessments have been initiated , and a review of el salvador has been completed .

mérida funding is also being used to support central american officials' participation in courses taught at the international law enforcement academy and the center for hemispheric defense studies .

a broad consensus appears to be shared by the administration , congress and the policy community on the need for the united states to support neighboring governments in mexico and central america that are struggling to address drug trafficking - related violence .

president obama reaffirmed his commitment to supporting mexico's counterdrug efforts during two visits to mexico that took place in april and august 2009 .

he has invited president calderón to washington , dc , for an official visit and state dinner to be held on may 19 , 2010 , during which bilateral security efforts are likely to be discussed .

the 111 th congress has held numerous hearings on the heightened drug trafficking - related violence in mexico and how to combat the dtos .

in early april , a high - level congressional delegation met with president calderón and mexican legislators in mexico city to discuss the future of u.s. assistance to mexico and plans to address drug trafficking - related violence in ciudad juarez .

the 111 th congress is closely monitoring the efficacy of assistance provided through the mérida initiative and compliance with mérida's human rights conditions .

when secretary of state hillary clinton traveled to mexico on march 25-26 , 2009 , she commented on the importance of bilateral cooperation under the initiative .

during her trip , she stated that an "insatiable demand for illegal drugs" in the united states "fuels the drug trade. .

with regard to the united states as a source of the weapons that arm the drug traffickers , clinton also acknowledged that "our inability to prevent weapons from being smuggled across the border to arm these criminals causes the deaths of police , soldiers and civilians. .

secretary clinton made similar comments on march 23 , 2010 , after chairing a cabinet - level meeting in mexico city on the future of the mérida initiative when she asserted that the united states "must and is doing its part" to counteract u.s. drug demand and illegal firearms purchases .

congress is continuing to examine how well the u.s. government is demonstrating its "shared responsibility" to tackle domestic problems contributing to drug trafficking and crime in the region .

this section of the report raises some questions and policy issues that congress is likely to consider at it oversees implementation of the mérida initiative .

with the arrival of u.s .

ambassador carlos pascual in august 2009 and as part of the fy2011 budget preparation process , u.s. and mexican officials began to revise the strategic framework underpinning u.s. - mexican security cooperation .

after several months of consultations , the obama and calderón governments agreed to a new strategy , which has been called "beyond mérida," that broadens the scope of bilateral security efforts and focuses more on institution - building than on technology and equipment transfers .

the obama administration outlined the strategy in its fy2011 budget request , which includes $310 million for merida - related programs in mexico: $292 million in incle funds , $10 million in esf , and $8 million in fmf .

the administration did not formally announce the new strategy until the mérida high - level consultative group meeting in mexico city on march 23 , 2010 .

its four pillars include 1 .

disrupting the operational capacity of organized crime ; 2 .

institutionalizing mexico's capacity to sustain the rule of law ( police and judicial reform ) ; 3 .

creating a 21 st - century border structure ; and , 4 .

building strong and resilient communities .

the calderón government has , until recently , focused most of its efforts on pillar one , dismantling the power of drug trafficking organizations .

to that end , the government has conducted joint police - military operations to arrest dto leaders , investigated and indicted public officials suspected of collusion , and begun to go after dtos' illicit assets .

a significant percentage of u.s. assistance provided during the first phase of the mérida initiative , including at least $421 million in fmf funding , has been used to purchase equipment for those efforts .

the obama administration has asked for just $8 million in fmf for fy2011 .

as the mexican government has increasingly begun to conceptualize the dtos as corporations , its strategy , and u.s. efforts to support it , has begun to focus more attention on disrupting the illicit weapons and funding flowing to the traffickers from the united states .

these efforts , as well as increased intelligence - sharing and cross - border law enforcement operations and investigations ( such as have occurred in areas around nogales , az ) , have been suggested as possible areas for increased cooperation under pillar one .

as the dtos increasingly evolve into poly - criminal organizations , perhaps as a result of drug interdiction efforts cutting into their profits , some analysts have also urged both governments to focus more on combating other types of organized crime , such as human trafficking and alien smuggling .

many security experts also maintain that the mexican government , with u.s. support , needs to focus more on addressing the country's weak law enforcement and judicial institutions than it has in the last three years ( pillar two ) .

federal police reform is well underway , but serious questions remain as to when and how the federal police will take over the anti - drug functions currently being carried out by the mexican military .

it also remains to be seen how federal reform efforts ( and u.s. efforts to support them ) will be expanded to include state and municipal police forces .

some fy2009 mérida funding is likely to be reprogrammed in order to extend u.s. - funded police training and corrections reform efforts to chihuahua and juarez as part of a pilot project .

designed by a binational team , the project has been designed to support the mexican government's plan for juarez through training , equipment , professional exchanges , and targeted information - sharing .

security experts have also identified improving police - community relations , respect for human rights , and the prevention and punishment of street crime as important issues that need to be addressed in juarez and elsewhere in mexico .

with impunity rates hovering around 98% , experts maintain that it is crucial for mexico to implement the judicial reforms passed in the summer of 2008 and focus on fighting corruption at all levels of government .

in order for mexico to transition to an accusatorial system with oral trials by 2016 , some argue that u.s. - funded judicial training programs , some of which are just getting started , may have to be significantly expanded .

they are encouraged that $207 million of the obama administration's fy2011 request for mérida - related programs in mexico are under the "governing justly and democratically" aid category .

pillar three — creating a 21 st - century border — seeks to facilitate "secure flows" of commerce and people across the u.s. - mexico border while curtailing illicit flow of drugs , people , arms , and cash .

it may involve the establishment of a "model port" and the expansion of trusted travel and shipper programs .

it may even involve moving some customs and security checkpoints away from the border , possibly to sites in monterrey or guadalajara , and then using smart seals to ensure that checked goods arrive from those sites to the united states without tampering .

pillar three also seeks to help mexico deploy new technology to better patrol its southern border with guatemala and belize .

pillar four will be a new focus for u.s. - mexican cooperation , and may include targeted efforts to assist at - risk youth and curb unemployment and other social problems in communities plagued by drug trafficking and violence .

experts have lauded the inclusion of social development and crime prevention programs in the new mérida framework , but expressed concern about the limited funds the programs are likely to receive from the united states .

it appears that the funding and implementation of pillar four will primarily be the responsibility of the mexican government , possibly with support from multilateral institutions like the inter - american development bank .

bilateral efforts under pillar four are focusing on pilot projects in ciudad juarez and chihuahua , but may also be expanded to tijuana and the state of baja california .

these efforts involve the continuation and expansion of some existing mérida - funded initiatives , such as school - based "culture of lawfulness" programs and demand reduction and treatment services .

they may also involve usaid or other agencies providing technical expertise in how to re - zone neighborhoods to prevent crime , issue municipal bonds to fund infrastructure projects , and / or launch public - private partnerships .

it is also still possible that the mexican government may request additional u.s. support to carry out president calderón's "we are all juarez" plan , which includes 160 different initiatives that the federal government , in collaboration with state and local officials , will implement in the city .

a number of policy issues have emerged involving the central american portion of the mérida initiative , which , as of fy2010 , has been split away from the mérida initiative into a new central american regional security initiative ( carsi ) .

according to h.rept .

111-187 , addressing drugs and crime in central america requires a longer term commitment than the three - year mérida program .

some analysts specializing in central american security issues hope that by splitting central america away from u.s. - mexican security cooperation programs , the sub - region will receive more focus , funding , and attention from congress and the administration .

others disagree , asserting that it is important to have an integrated approach to counterdrug and anti - crime programs in mexico and central america , as the mérida initiative was initially designed to do .

the obama administration requested $100 million for carsi in its fy2011 budget request: $70 million in western hemisphere regional incle funds and $30 million in western hemisphere regional esf funds .

some policy issues that have emerged during congressional consideration of the central american portion of the mérida initiative include funding: when the mérida initiative was announced , central american leaders and some members of congress expressed concerns about the funding disparity between the mexican and central american portions of the initiative .

lingering questions remain about the adequacy of the funds provided , as well as how much of those funds should be spent on regional programs versus bilateral programs in the seven central american countries .

type of funds provided: in the fy2008 supplemental appropriations act , congress reduced the funds appropriated for law enforcement programs in central america in order to increase funding for institution - building , rule of law , and development programs .

the fy2008 supplemental and fy2009 omnibus appropriations measures included earmarks for those types of programs , but the fy2010 appropriations bill did not .

members have and will likely continue to debate how funding should be balanced between the various program components in carsi , particularly how much funding should support law enforcement programs and drug interdiction efforts versus institution - building and rule of law activities .

pace of implementation: as previously stated , the december 2009 gao report on the status of mérida funding has raised serious concerns among members of congress about the slow pace of implementation .

while the pace of implementation in mexico has quickened , many projects in central america continue to be stalled .

inst ability in particular countries: as a result of the june 2009 ouster of president zelaya , some mérida assistance for honduras was put on hold until february 2010 .

the issue of how to deal with instability in particular countries is likely to arise again during mérida and carsi implementation .

interagency coordination: debates are likely to continue concerning what u.s. agency is best equipped to carry out mérida and carsi programs , including the issue of whether there is a role for dod acting through u.s. southern command , and how u.s. programs should be coordinated with those funded by other donors .

anti - gang policies: there is ongoing disagreement over the level and combination of preventive and suppressive policies that should be used in central america to address the gang problem .

proponents of law enforcement solutions maintain that central american law enforcement officials lack the capacity and resources to target gang leaders effectively , share data , and conduct thorough investigations that lead to successful prosecutions .

human rights groups tend to emphasize the importance of prevention and rehabilitation programs .

u.s. deportation procedures: congress may also maintain an interest in how u.s. deportation procedures for individuals with criminal records might be improved and whether u.s. assistance should be provided to help receiving governments reintegrate deportees .

the obama administration did not include haiti and the dominican republic in its fy2010 request for mérida .

instead , the administration requested $45 million in initial funding for projects that are being developed as part of a new security dialogue with caribbean community ( caricom ) member states and the dominican republic .

when president obama announced the new security cooperation plan , the caribbean basin security initiative ( cbsi ) , at the summit of the americas in april 2009 , he said that it would likely involve increased u.s. assistance to help the region address challenges such as transnational crime , illicit trafficking , and maritime and aviation security .

the cbsi is being developed through a process of dialogue with caribbean nations , which are expected to establish complementary programs with their own funding .

initial u.s. - caribbean meetings were held in suriname , barbados , and the dominican republic in 2009 , and a ministerial meeting is expected to take place in washington in 2010 where a political declaration , action plan , and framework for the caribbean basin security initiative will be adopted .

as discussed with caribbean nations , the initiative will likely have three strategic priorities: ( 1 ) to reduce illicit trafficking substantially ( including measures to reduce drug trafficking , money laundering , trafficking in small arms and light weapons , and human smuggling ) ; ( 2 ) to advance public safety and security ( including measures to deal with crime and violence , border security , trafficking in persons , terrorism threats , criminal gangs , and natural disasters ) ; and ( 3 ) to promote social justice ( including crime prevention , justice sector reform , and anti - corruption measures ) .

congress provided "not less than" $37 million in fy2010 for the cbsi in p.l .

111-117 , of which "not less than" $21 million should be for social justice and education programs .

the administration's fy2011 request for cbsi is for $79 million : $37.5 million in incle , $17 million in esf , $18 million in fmf , and $6.4 million in non - proliferation , antiterrorism .

demining and related programs ( nadr ) funds .

appendix a .

conditions on fy2008 supplemental assistance for mérida mexico the fy2008 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

110-252 ) , which includes the first tranche of funding provided for the mérida initiative , has softer human rights conditions than earlier house and senate versions , in large part because of mexico's objections that some of the conditions would violate its national sovereignty .

the secretary of state , after consultation with mexican authorities , is required to submit a report on procedures in place to implement section 620j of the foreign assistance act ( faa ) of 1961 .

that section of the faa "prohibits assistance to any unit of the security forces of a foreign country if the secretary of state has credible evidence that such unit has committed gross violations of human rights. .

an exception to this prohibition is provided in section 620j if the secretary of state determines and reports to congress that the government of such country is taking effective measures to bring the responsible members of the security forces unit to justice .

in p.l .

110-252 , human rights conditions require that 15% of incle and fmf assistance be withheld until the secretary of state reports in writing that mexico is taking action in four human rights areas: improving transparency and accountability of federal police forces ; establishing a mechanism for regular consultations among relevant mexican government authorities , mexican human rights organizations , and other relevant mexican civil society organizations , to make consultations concerning implementation of the mérida initiative in accordance with mexican and international law ; ensuring that civilian prosecutors and judicial authorities are investigating and prosecuting , in accordance with mexican and international law , members of the federal police and military forces who have been credibly alleged to have committed violations of human rights , and the federal police and military forces are fully cooperating with the investigations ; and enforcing the prohibition , in accordance with mexican and international law , on the use of testimony obtained through torture or other ill - treatment .

central america , haiti and the dominican republic p.l .

110-252 includes similar conditions on assistance provided to central america , haiti and the dominican republic .

as with mexico , the secretary of state is required to submit a report on procedures in place to implement section 620j of the foreign assistance act ( faa ) of 1961 in order for mérida funding to be released .

other human rights conditions require that 15% of incle and fmf assistance be withheld until the secretary of state reports in writing that the governments of the countries in central america , haiti , and the dominican republic are taking action in three areas: establishing police complaints commissions with authority and independence to receive complaints and carry out effective investigations ; implementing reforms to improve the capacity and ensure the independence of the judiciary ; and investigating and prosecuting members of the federal police and military forces who have been credibly alleged to have committed violations of human rights .

