epa regulatory actions to limit greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions using existing clean air act authority have been the major focus of congressional interest in clean air issues in recent months .

members and senators from both sides of the aisle have expressed concern that epa is proceeding with regulations that could have major economic impacts without direct congressional authorization , and / or that epa should delay taking such action until congress specifically authorizes it .

the administration counters that it would prefer for congress to pass new legislation to control greenhouse gas emissions , but the clean air act already requires action: a 2007 supreme court decision interpreting that authority found that epa must weigh whether ghg emissions endanger public health and welfare and , if it concludes that they do , proceed with regulation .

the 111 th congress struggled to produce its own approach to climate change .

on june 26 , 2009 , the house narrowly passed h.r .

2454 , a 1,428-page bill addressing a number of interrelated energy and climate change issues .

among its numerous provisions , the bill would have established cap - and - trade programs for ghg emissions , beginning in 2012 .

the senate did not act ; however , two senate committees reported bills , but the prospect of obtaining 60 votes for either bill appeared slim , and neither came to the floor .

given these prospects , a trio of senators began negotiating a climate bill from scratch , but they also encountered difficulty: the process ultimately lost its republican sponsor and did not produce an introduced bill .

toward the end of the second session , there was talk of a slimmed - down bill focusing on energy and perhaps electric utilities , but even this limited approach did not come to the floor .

besides legislation and potential epa regulation of greenhouse gases , a bipartisan group of senators and epa both considered addressing issues related to sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , nitrogen oxides ( nox ) , and mercury emissions from electric power plants .

regulations addressing these emissions were vacated by the d.c .

circuit court of appeals in 2008 , leaving major potential gaps in epa and state regulations .

epa is developing new regulations to address the court's concerns and proposed regulations addressing so 2 and nox , july 6,2010 , but legislation might provide a more straightforward solution , resolving ambiguities in current law and reducing the likelihood of further delays from litigation .

s. 2995 , a bipartisan bill addressing these issues , was introduced in the senate and hearings were held , but no further action was taken .

the obama administration's epa has also moved to reconsider or modify several bush administration decisions regarding national ambient air quality standards ( naaqs ) .

naaqs represent epa's formal judgment regarding how clean the air must be to protect public health and welfare ; the standards set in motion monitoring and planning requirements , which in turn lead to emission controls .

on january 19 , 2010 , the agency proposed a more stringent naaqs for ozone , having concluded that a 2008 revision to the standard did not satisfy the requirements of the clean air act .

the revision could affect as many as 650 counties — virtually every county that currently has an ozone monitor .

final action on this proposal is expected by the end of december .

on june 22 , 2010 , the agency promulgated revisions to the naaqs for so 2 ; 59 counties would violate the new so 2 standard , based on the most recent monitoring data .

none violated the old standard .

the agency is also reviewing or has recently completed reviews of the naaqs for four other pollutants , notably particulates , which are emitted by a wide range of mobile and stationary sources .

a revised particulate standard is to be proposed by february 2011 .

early indications are that the agency may propose substantially more stringent standards .

this report provides a brief overview of the climate change , power plant , and air quality standard issues .

more detailed information on most of the issues can be found in other crs reports , which are referenced throughout this report .

epa's actions to regulate ghg emissions stem from more than a decade of petitions and litigation .

responding to a 1999 petition that it regulate greenhouse gases from new motor vehicles , the agency in 2003 denied that it had such authority , arguing that ghgs did not fall within the clean air act's definition of "air pollutants. .

the denial was challenged by massachusetts , 11 other states , and various other petitioners in a case that ultimately reached the supreme court .

in an april 2 , 2007 , decision ( massachusetts v. epa ) , the court found by 5-4 that epa does have authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions , since the emissions are clearly air pollutants under the clean air act's definition of that term .

the court's majority concluded that epa must , therefore , decide whether emissions of these pollutants from new motor vehicles contribute to air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

when it makes such an "endangerment finding," the act requires the agency to establish standards for emissions of the pollutants .

on december 15 , 2009 , acting in response to the court's decision , epa finalized an endangerment finding for greenhouse gas emissions from motor vehicles , under section 202 ( a ) of the act .

relying on this finding , epa promulgated ghg emission standards for new cars and light trucks , april 1 , 2010 .

the implementation of these standards will , in turn , trigger permitting requirements and the imposition of best available control technology for new major stationary sources of ghgs beginning in 2011 .

 ( for information on these regulations and permit requirements , see crs report r40506 , cars , trucks , and climate: epa regulation of greenhouse gases from mobile sources , and crs report r41212 , epa regulation of greenhouse gases: congressional responses and options . ) .

the prospect of ghg standards for motor vehicles is not particularly controversial .

on may 19 , 2009 , president obama announced an agreement involving nine u.s. and foreign auto manufacturers ; the federal government ; the governors of california , michigan , and massachusetts ; the united auto workers ; and environmental groups under which epa and the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) would proceed with a joint rulemaking in which ghg emissions from new motor vehicles would be reduced under the clean air act , while nhtsa would set corresponding fuel economy standards under the corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) program .

the objective of the new greenhouse gas standards is to reach reduction levels similar to those adopted by the state of california and 13 other states , who will harmonize their standards with those of epa as part of the agreement .

the california standards required about a 30% reduction in ghg emissions from new vehicles by 2016 .

the auto industry supported the national agreement , in part , to avoid having to meet standards on a state - by - state basis ; thus , it is not interested in seeing epa's motor vehicle ghg standards blocked .

in addition to the motor vehicle ghg standards , epa has received petitions asking the agency to regulate ghgs from a variety of other sources , including coal mines , concentrated animal feeding operations ( cafos ) , aircraft , ocean - going ships , nonroad engines and equipment ( eg , construction equipment , farm equipment , recreational equipment , forklifts , harbor craft , and lawn and garden equipment ) , and fuels .

another petition asks the agency to set national ambient air quality standards for seven specific greenhouse gases .

the agency also faces lawsuits seeking to force it to regulate ghgs from stationary sources , including power plants , petroleum refineries , nonroad vehicles and engines , and the portland cement industry .

the decision to move forward on ghg standards for new motor vehicles is seen by many as a precedent for regulation of these other sources .

even without epa decisions on these petitions or the conclusion of lawsuits , the adoption of ghg standards for motor vehicles will trigger ghg permit requirements for new stationary sources , as a result of language in section 165 of the act that requires such permits to require best available control technology for all pollutants "subject to regulation" under the act .

it is this triggering of standards for stationary sources ( power plants , manufacturing facilities , and others ) that appears to have raised the most concern in congress: legislation has been introduced in both the house and senate aimed at preventing epa from implementing these requirements .

the legislation has taken several forms , including the introduction of resolutions of disapproval for the endangerment finding itself under the congressional review act ( s.j.res .

26 , h.j.res .

66 , h.j.res .

76 , and h.j.res .

77 ) , and five other bills that would either require epa to reevaluate its endangerment finding ( h.res .

974 ) , amend the clean air act to provide that greenhouse gases are not subject to the act ( h.r .

4396 ) , limit epa's ghg authority to motor vehicle emissions ( s. 1622 ) , or suspend epa actions regulating stationary source emissions of ghgs for two years ( s. 3072 , h.r .

4753 ) .

s.j.res .

26 , senator murkowski's resolution of disapproval for the endangerment finding , was defeated 53-47 , on june 10 , 2010 .

meanwhile , epa has itself promulgated regulations and guidance that would delay the applicability of requirements for stationary sources of ghgs until 2011 and focus its initial regulatory efforts on the largest emitters , granting smaller sources at least a six - year reprieve .

although both the resolutions of disapproval and the stand - alone legislation to restrict epa's authority have received a great deal of attention , the path to enactment of either of these forms of legislation would be a steep one .

the obama administration has made the reduction of ghg emissions one of its major goals ; as a result , many conclude that legislation restricting epa's authority to act , if passed by congress , would encounter a presidential veto .

addressing the issue through an amendment to the epa appropriation , by cutting epa's appropriation or by restricting its authority to use funds to take specific ghg regulatory actions , might have more chance of enactment .

the overall appropriation bill to which it would be attached would presumably contain other elements that would make it more difficult to veto .

this approach was discussed at some length in the fall of 2009 , when senator murkowski introduced ( but ultimately did not offer ) s.amdt .

2530 to the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriation act ( h.r .

2996 ) .

in short , there are numerous ways that congress can address epa's greenhouse gas authority , and opponents of epa action may continue to exert pressure to delay or limit the agency's actions , as the agency continues on its planned course .

 ( for a more detailed discussion of epa's regulatory actions and potential congressional responses , see crs report r41212 , epa regulation of greenhouse gases: congressional responses and options , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

on june 26 , 2009 , by a vote of 219-212 , the house passed h.r .

2454 , the american clean energy and security act of 2009 .

the bill , also referred to by its acronym ( aces ) or as the waxman - markey bill , addresses a number of interrelated energy and climate change issues .

the senate energy and natural resources committee and the senate environment and public works committee reported senate counterparts: s. 1462 ( bingaman ) , equivalent to the energy titles , and s. 1733 , the kerry - boxer bill , establishing a cap - and - trade system and other measures to address climate change .

the kerry - boxer bill faced strong opposition , however .

the republican members of the environment and public works committee boycotted the markup .

the bill was reported with no republican support and less than unanimous support among democrats: it was clear that the bill would lack the 60 votes necessary to overcome a filibuster and secure passage on the floor .

as a result , negotiations took place among a trio of senators ( kerry , graham , and lieberman ) for a bipartisan ( or , more accurately , tripartisan ) alternative .

this legislation , without senator graham's sponsorship , circulated extensively in draft form in 2010 , but was not introduced .

controlling greenhouse gas emissions was among the highest priorities of the congressional leadership and the obama administration in the 111 th congress .

it would have been addressed in the aces legislation in a number of ways , many of which would have amended the clean air act .

the remainder of the climate portion of this report discusses the house bill and the issues that arose in the course of its consideration , with occasional references to developments in the senate .

the house bill would have amended the clean air act to establish a cap - and - trade program ( similar to the act's current program for addressing acid rain ) to limit greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions beginning in 2012 .

the emissions cap on covered sources would have gradually declined — from 3% below the 2005 emissions level in 2012 to 83% below in 2050 .

in addition to the cap - and - trade program , the bill would have established renewable energy and energy efficiency requirements , mandated carbon capture and sequestration by new coal - fired electric generating units , and required epa to set ghg emission standards for various sources .

the bill distributed the cap - and - trade program's emission allowances to a wide array of sectors in an effort to address potential impacts on low income households and protect industries that might be subject to import competition from countries with less stringent ghg requirements , and it encouraged the use of "offsets" ( emission reductions in sectors not directly covered by the cap - and - trade program ) .

the cap - and - trade program in s. 1733 was similar .

in addition to climate change , other clean air issues with a shorter time horizon are being addressed by epa .

many of these have to do with emissions from electric power plants .

coal - fired power plants are among the largest sources of air pollution in the united states .

under the clean air act , however , they are not necessarily subject to stringent requirements: emissions and the required control equipment can vary depending on the location of the plant , when it was constructed , whether it has undergone major modifications , the specific type of fuel it burns , and , to some extent , the vagaries of epa enforcement policies .

more than half a dozen separate clean air act programs could potentially be used to control emissions , which makes compliance strategy complicated for utilities and difficult for regulators .

because the cost of the most stringent available controls , for the entire industry , could range into the tens of billions of dollars , utilities have fought hard and rather successfully to limit or delay regulations affecting them , particularly with respect to plants constructed before the clean air act of 1970 was passed .

as a result , emissions from power plants have not been reduced as much as those from some other sources .

many plants built in the 1950s and 1960s ( generally referred to as "grandfathered" plants ) have little emission control equipment .

collectively , power plants are large sources of pollution .

in 2005 , they accounted for 10.2 million tons of sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) emissions ( 70% of the u.s. total ) , 52 tons of mercury emissions ( 46% of the u.s. total ) , and 3.6 million tons of nitrogen oxides ( 19% of the u.s. total ) .

power plants are also considered major sources of fine particles ( pm 2.5 ) , many of which form in the atmosphere from emissions from a wide range of stationary and mobile sources .

in addition , power plants account for about 40% of u.s. anthropogenic emissions of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide .

with new ambient air quality standards for ozone , fine particles , and so 2 taking effect , emissions of nox and so 2 will necessarily have to be reduced to meet standards .

 ( these standards are discussed below under " air quality standards ." ) .

for more than a decade , mercury emissions have also been a focus of concern: 48 states have issued fish consumption advisories due to mercury pollution , covering 14 million acres of lakes , 882,000 river miles , and the coastal waters of 13 entire states .

the continuing controversy over the interpretation of new source review requirements for existing power plants ( also discussed below ) has exerted pressure for a more predictable regulatory structure , as well .

thus , some in industry , environmental groups , congress , and the last two administrations have said that legislation addressing power plant pollution in a comprehensive ( multi - pollutant ) fashion would be desirable .

such legislation would address the major pollutants on a coordinated schedule and would rely , to a large extent , on a system such as the one used in the acid rain program , where national or regional caps on emissions are implemented through a system of tradable allowances .

the key questions have been how stringent the caps should be and whether carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) , the major gas of concern with regard to climate change , would be among the emissions subject to a cap .

air quality has improved substantially since the passage of the clean air act in 1970: annual emissions of the six most widespread ( "criteria" ) air pollutants have declined nearly 180 million tons ( 59% ) , despite major increases in population , motor vehicle miles traveled , and economic activity .

nevertheless , the goal of clean air continues to elude many areas , in part because scientific understanding of the health effects of air pollution has caused epa to tighten standards for most of the criteria pollutants .

the most widespread problems involve ozone and fine particles .

as of september 2010 , 119 million people lived in areas classified "nonattainment" for the ozone national ambient air quality standard ( naaqs ) ; 70 million lived in areas that were nonattainment for the fine particle ( pm 2.5 ) naaqs .

epa attributes at least 33,000 premature deaths and millions of lost work days annually to exceedances of the pm 2.5 standard .

recent research has tied ozone pollution to premature mortality as well .

violations of the ambient air quality standards for the other four criteria pollutants are not as widespread , but epa is engaged in ( or has recently completed ) reviews indicating that health effects of most of these pollutants are more serious than previously thought .

at present , for example , no areas exceed the naaqs for sulfur dioxide ( so 2 ) , but in a recent review , epa determined that between 2,300 and 5,900 premature deaths can be avoided annually by strengthening that standard .

thus , the agency has promulgated a new so 2 standard under which as many as 59 counties could be designated nonattainment , based on the most recent monitoring data .

table 1 summarizes epa's recent efforts to review the naaqs and implement revisions , including the next steps for each of the six criteria pollutants .

revisions for five of the six pollutants ( ozone , pm , lead , no 2 , and so 2 ) have been completed since 2006 , with the standards being made more stringent in each case ( three of the five were subsequently challenged in court and two of these three were remanded to the agency for further revisions ) .

reviews of the naaqs for carbon monoxide and the two remanded standards ( ozone and pm ) are to be completed in 2010 or 2011 .

as the table indicates , court challenges have played a key role in bringing about the naaqs reviews , and in causing further review after the naaqs have been promulgated .

reviews of most of the standards were stimulated at least in part by court cases: epa is statutorily required to review the naaqs every five years , and its failure to do so can be addressed by citizen suits .

at the other end of the process , once the agency's review of a naaqs is completed , the standards are almost invariably challenged in court .

in the case of both particulate matter and ozone , judicial review has led to a remand of the standards that epa promulgated in 2006 and 2008 respectively .

the agency has now agreed to promulgate further revisions to these standards in 2010 and 2011 .

as the table indicates , in at least two cases , epa's revised standards have been remanded at least in part because the agency did not follow the advice of its independent science advisors , the clean air scientific advisory committee ( casac ) .

epa is not required by statute to follow casac's recommendations ; the act requires only that the administrator set forth ( in the federal register notice in which she proposes a naaqs ) any pertinent findings , recommendations , and comments made by casac and , if her proposal differs in an important respect from any of the recommendations , provide an explanation of the reasons for such differences .

but the failure to follow casac recommendations almost inevitably raises the question of whether the administrator's decision will be judged arbitrary and capricious in a judicial review .

in the recent revisions of both the ozone and pm standards , casac made detailed objections to the administrator's final decisions .

the committee's description of the process as having failed to meet statutory and procedural requirements played an important role during judicial review .

this raises the question of whether congress might opt to strengthen casac's statutory role in the review process , or limit the administrator's authority to reject casac's advice .

a feature common to many of the recent naaqs reviews has been epa's finding that the current monitoring network is inadequate to determine whether or not many areas of the country are in attainment of the standards .

in several cases , such as for lead and sulfur dioxide , more extensive monitoring networks had been partly dismantled by the time the standards were reviewed , after years of indicating compliance with older , less stringent standards .

in other cases , such as pm and no 2 , the monitoring network was not designed to measure the kinds of exposure that current research identifies as a cause of concern ( eg , exposure to fine particles near highways ) .

as a result , epa and the states will need to devote resources in the next few years to expanding and refocusing the monitoring networks in order to identify areas where air quality does not meet new standards .

although most of the naaqs standards are likely to have been revised by the end of 2011 — ultimately stimulating billions of dollars in expenditures on pollution control — the impact of the new standards will be gradual .

a naaqs does not directly limit emissions ; rather , a primary naaqs represents the administrator's formal judgment regarding the level of ambient pollution below which public health will be protected with an adequate margin of safety ; a secondary standard reflects her judgment as to the level of ambient pollution necessary to protect public welfare , including protection of the environment , water quality , building materials , etc .

promulgation of a naaqs sets in motion a lengthy process under which states and the epa first identify nonattainment areas .

those areas then undertake a complicated implementation process .

the first step , designation of nonattainment areas , generally takes at least two years after a standard is promulgated , and in many cases longer , if a new monitoring network needs to be established .

after nonattainment areas are formally designated , the states generally have three years to submit state implementation plans ( sips ) that identify the specific regulations and emission control requirements that will bring the area into attainment .

whether more stringent naaqs will lead to stronger federal emission controls for the sources of pollution — in addition to the controls contemplated by individual states or metropolitan areas — is likely to be an important issue .

several of the criteria pollutants have impacts across state lines , far from the source of emissions ; others ( notably ozone ) form in the atmosphere as the result of chemical reactions involving precursors that may have been emitted many miles upwind .

thus , measures taken by individual states and nonattainment areas to control emissions within their borders may be inadequate for the areas to attain a naaqs .

federal standards for cars , trucks , power plants , and other major pollution sources could need strengthening for many areas to be able to attain the naaqs .

congress has given epa the authority to strengthen such emission standards ; but congress may still act to review the implementation of that authority .

