as the debate on reducing greenhouse gases ( ghgs ) has progressed , increasing concern has been raised about how a u.s. reduction program would interact with programs in other countries .

in a global context where currently some countries have legally binding policies to reduce greenhouse gas emission and other countries do not — i.e. , differentiated global carbon policies — the potential exists that countries imposing carbon control policies will find themselves at a competitive disadvantage vis - à - vis countries without comparable policies .

the risks accompanying establishment of carbon control policies , in the absence of similar policies among competing nations , have been central to debates on whether the united states should enact greenhouse gas legislation .

specifically , concerns have been raised that if the united states adopts a carbon control policy , industries that must control their emissions or that find their feedstock or energy bills rising because of costs passed - through by suppliers may be less competitive and may lose global market share ( and jobs ) to competitors in countries lacking comparable carbon policies .

in addition , this potential shift in production could result in some of the u.s. carbon reductions being diluted by increased production in more carbon intensive countries ( commonly known as "carbon leakage" ) .

in response to these concerns , several proposals introduced in congress would attempt to mitigate the effect of carbon policies on affected u.s. industry .

proposed mitigating actions include , for example , providing assistance to greenhouse gas - intensive , trade - exposed industries , or imposing tariffs on certain greenhouse gas - intensive goods imported into the country from countries not implementing comparable carbon policies .

this report examines the dynamics of this issue in three parts: ( 1 ) exploration of the nature of the problem with respect to international climate change policy , potential environmental effects , and potential economic effects ; ( 2 ) identification of a range of possible options to address concerns ; ( 3 ) analysis of issues raised by the proposed mitigating approaches and options ; and ( 4 ) implications of the various approaches .

there are three components of the problem of differentiated global carbon policies with respect to trade: ( 1 ) the lack of an international agreement with binding targets to reduce greenhouse gases ; ( 2 ) the issue of carbon leakage ; and ( 3 ) economic and competitive effects .

each of these is discussed below .

there are three basic approaches to assisting greenhouse - gas - intensive , trade - exposed industries: ( 1 ) assist domestic industry ; ( 2 ) penalize foreign competitors ; and ( 3 ) develop alternative sectoral approaches .

it should be noted that these categories are not mutually exclusive ; all three could be used , either in combination for a given industry , or separately as appropriate to a given industry's characteristics and needs .

this section is divided into two components: ( 1 ) general issues and questions raised by the various approaches ( design , effects , etc .

 ) , and ( 2 ) discussions of specific options .

it is not comprehensive , but illustrative of the range of questions and consequences these initiatives present .

 table 5 summarizes the three general approaches to address trade - related issues with respect to the various objectives of these approaches .

as indicated , each focuses on different objectives .

with respect to achieving the more comprehensive solution to trade issues — promoting an international agreement — the range presented by the three approaches is clear and distinct .

support for domestic industries , the approach most commonly included in legislative proposals , is not focused on this objective ; it is focused on preserving the industry's current competitive position and jobs and may , depending on the details , help transition that industry to the future .

trade measures for foreign competitors , another approach commonly included in legislative proposals , may provide a stick for international negotiation , but the primary focus is on protecting greenhouse gas - intensive , trade - exposed industries from "unfair" competition while the country awaits an international agreement .

finally , the sectoral approach represents a range of options focused on integrating developing countries' industrial bases into a mutually acceptable international framework that provides a level playing field for all participants .

whether any of these approaches would have appreciable effects on carbon leakage is unclear .

as the u.s. debate on climate change proceeds , various proposals for reducing greenhouse gas emissions contain provisions to address the trade - related issues presented here .

two of the most common options are ( 1 ) subsidies for affected industries through allocation of free allowances within cap - and - trade policies ; and ( 2 ) border adjustments through an international reserve allowance program .

in addition to these domestic options , the bali action plan includes sectoral approaches as options for the next phase of the kyoto protocol .

other alternatives are also likely to be debated .

free allocation of allowances to greenhouse - gas intensive , trade - exposed industries is more narrowly focused on assisting domestic industries maintain their current competitiveness in the face of a domestic greenhouse gas reduction program .

it has the virtue of relative simplicity compared with the other approaches and options , but no greater guarantee of success .

companies may choose to accept the assistance and not make the necessary improvements to existing facilities to remain competitive in the increasingly carbon - constrained future .

there are metrics and benchmarks that could be used to allocate free allowances ( carbon intensity , output - based metrics ) that can reduce these problems , but introduce complexity in terms of increased data needs and methodological considerations .

the allocation also comes at the cost of making the program more expensive for the other participants .

the international reserve allowance scheme is a complex system focused on leveling the playing field for domestic producers against competitors whose countries are not implementing comparable greenhouse gas reductions .

the international scope of the option and the complex nature of trade makes design of a program difficult .

terms including "comparable action," "similar products , and "embedded carbon" would have to be defined in a manner that avoids arbitrary and unjustifiable discrimination between exporting countries in order to comply with wto requirements , and methodologies developed to give meaning to them .

annual assessments of countries' actions would have to be made and new baselines set .

then a price per ton of embedded carbon would have to be determined .

the use of allowances , instead of money , removes the transparency of a countervailing duty and makes tracking the impact of the scheme on other parts of the economy difficult to determine .

finally , it is unclear how the affected trading partners would respond , economically , environmentally , or politically .

this might encourage one to move to the sectoral approach as potentially more effective .

it is focused on achieving an international agreement that would make the playing field at least acceptable to all parties .

however , there is no blueprint currently that parties agree is the basis for developing such an approach .

it is possible that the 2009 copenhagen conference will resolve the fundamentals for such an approach , but what sort of contingencies one should consider in the meanwhile , or in the face of failure , is unclear .

finally , it is the details of any of these options that would ultimately determine their effectiveness in achieving the various objectives .

the potential options are almost endless .

for example , if a domestic assistance approach is chosen , allocation options include production output , historic emissions , company profits or revenues , and technology or best practices benchmarks .

duration options for such an approach would include anticipated technology or best practices advancements ( or best currently available ) , consummation of an international agreement , or some criterion related to the economic health of the sector or industry .

options for data collection include publicly available data from the departments of energy and / or commerce , legislatively - mandated requirement for the collection of data from companies wishing to receive assistance , or government estimates based on best available data or modeling .

in any case , the task would be daunting for any of the approaches .

the design of an assistance program — the goals , eligible participants , implementation , and enforcement — would be difficult to define in a manner that satisfies all parties .

there is every incentive for any industry facing a cost increase from carbon policies to claim that its competitive position could be diminished , thereby justifying special consideration by the government .

the government would be in the difficult position of picking winners and losers , sometimes without access to important but proprietary data .

