there has been a great deal of concern over the effect of the current economic downturn on retirement plans .

one company recently reported that at the end of 2008 , the "chaos" in the financial markets led to a $409 billion deficit in defined benefit pension plan funding for the plans of s&p 1500 companies .

the report indicated that this deficit will negatively affect corporate earnings in 2009 .

due in part to the large investment losses in pension plans and other retirement accounts , in december of 2008 , congress unanimously enacted h.r .

7327 , the worker , retiree , and employer recovery act of 2008 ( "wrera" or "the act" ) .

while several provisions of wrera make technical corrections to the pension protection act of 2006 ( "ppa" ) , the act also provides some temporary relief from certain requirements that may be difficult for pension plans to meet due to current economic conditions .

this report provides an overview of some of the key provisions of wrera , in particular , the provisions relating to the funding of single and multiemployer plans , the temporary waiver for required minimum distributions , as well as certain technical corrections and other provisions that affect the two primary types of pension plans , defined benefit and defined contribution plans , as well as individual retirement accounts and annuities ( iras ) .

title ii of wrera contains provisions designed to protect both individuals and retirement plans from the potentially large losses of plan amounts due to the decline of the stock market and the current economic climate .

these provisions include a temporary waiver of the required minimum distributions , and temporary relief from funding rules created by the ppa that apply to single and multi - employer plans .

in essence , these provisions permit a delay in taking required distributions and meeting pension funding obligations , in an effort to give retirement plans and accounts more time for economic conditions to improve and for the losses in investments to be recovered .

wrera made several technical corrections to the pension protection act of 2006 ( ppa ) .

some of the corrections are effective as if they were enacted as part of the ppa , while other provisions are to be applied prospectively .

the technical corrections include the following .

other notable provisions included in wrera are the following .

roth iras , a type of individual retirement arrangement , are a popular retirement savings vehicle .

while contributions to a roth ira are not deductible , qualified distributions from a roth ira are not included in an individual's gross income .

roth iras are subject to certain contribution limitations , however , these limitations do not apply to qualified rollover contributions .

section 125 of the wrera permits a "qualified airline employee" who receives an "airline payment amount" to transfer any portion of this amount to a roth ira as a qualified rollover contribution .

this transfer must occur within 180 days of receipt of the amount ( or , if later , within 180 days of the enactment of wrera ) .

thus , if such amounts are transferred to the former employee's roth ira , the employee may benefit , as qualified distributions from roth iras are tax free .

this section also provides that certain income limitations placed upon roth ira qualified rollover contributions should not apply to this transfer .

in order to determine the minimum required contribution that must be made to a single - employer defined benefit plan , and the extent ( if any ) to which a plan is underfunded , the value of plan assets must be determined .

for purposes of the minimum funding rules , the value of the plan's assets is , in general , the fair market value of the assets .

however , the internal revenue code , as amended by the ppa , permits plans to calculate the value of the assets by averaging fair market values , but only if ( 1 ) the averaging method is permitted under regulations , ( 2 ) the calculation is not over a period of more than 24 months , and ( 3 ) the averaged amount cannot result in a determination that is at any time less than 90 percent or more than 110 percent of fair market value .

this averaging method may be more beneficial for plan sponsors in an economic downturn , as an averaging approach can produce lower asset values when asset values are rising , and higher asset values when asset values are decreasing .

section 121 of wrera provides that plans using the averaging method must adjust such averaging to account not only for the amount of contributions and distributions to the plan , but also for expected investment earnings , subject to a cap .

it has been noted that this provision could result in smaller underfunded amounts and , therefore , smaller required contributions .

the ppa created certain relaxed funding requirements for defined benefit plans maintained by a commercial airline or an airline catering service .

under the ppa , plan sponsors of these plans could elect to amortize unfunded plan liabilities over an extended period of 10 years , or may instead follow special rules that permit these plan sponsors to amortize unfunded liabilities over 17 years .

plan sponsors selecting the17-year amortization period , referred to by the act as an "alternative funding schedule," had to comply with certain benefit accrual requirements , which included freezing some of the benefits offered under the plan and eliminating others .

in determining the minimum required contribution to the plan each year for purposes of these special rules , the ppa provided that the value of plan assets generally is the fair market value of the assets .

section 126 of wrera provides that plans following the alternative funding schedule may determine the value of plan assets in the same manner as other single - employer plans .

thus , plans can use a fair market value determination , or they may use the averaging method as laid out in section 430 ( g ) ( 3 ) of the internal revenue code .

