high levels of oil imports and high crude oil and gasoline prices in recent years have led to increased interest in the u.s. fuel supply .

recent congressional interest has focused on alternatives to petroleum , ways to improve the efficiency of the u.s. transportation sector , and ways to improve the stability and security of the petroleum supply and refining sectors .

from spring 2006 to summer 2008 , high global oil prices ( spurred by high demand ) and refinery constraints in the domestic gasoline supply pushed u.s. gasoline pump prices to historic highs .

in spring 2011 , exports of oil from libya caused a similar spike in oil prices .

historically , a problem in maintaining interest in alternative fuels and vehicles has been the volatility in oil and gasoline prices .

interest tends to rise as prices rise , and decline as prices dip .

arguably , statutory policies can counterbalance dips in public interest in periods of mixed market signals as seen recently .

in fall 2006 and winter 2007 , gasoline prices eased somewhat before rising significantly through summer 2008 ; and after summer 2008 , petroleum and gasoline prices fell dramatically .

they rose steadily through 2009 and 2010 , peaking in spring 2011 before tempering somewhat and remaining relatively stable through 2012 .

along with fuel prices and supply , environmental concerns , especially poor air quality and concerns over the potential effects of climate change , have further raised interest in the development of alternatives to petroleum , as well as ways to use petroleum more efficiently .

key components of federal policies to reduce petroleum consumption include the promotion of alternatives to petroleum fuels and the promotion of more efficient vehicles .

this report provides an overview of current issues surrounding alternative fuels and advanced technology vehicles — issues discussed in further detail in other crs reports referred to in each section .

key tax incentives for the use of biofuels , for the expansion of alternative fuel infrastructure , and for the purchase of certain electric vehicles expired at the end of 2011 , along with an added duty on certain ethanol imports .

some of these incentives were extended through the end of 2013 by the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) although the main tax credit for conventional ethanol — the volumetric ethanol excise tax credit ( veetc ) — was not extended .

while tax incentives for these fuels have expired or are set to expire at the end of 2013 , a mandate to use biofuels in transportation that was expanded by the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) is set to increase yearly through 2022 .

in 2012 , the rfs required the use of 15.2 billion gallons of ethanol and other biofuels in transportation fuel .

within that mandate , the rfs required the use of 2.0 billion gallons of advanced biofuels , including 8.65 million gallons of cellulosic biofuels ( although only about 20,000 gallons of cellulosic fuel were actually registered in the program ) .

for 2013 , the rfs mandate is 16.55 billion gallons , including a proposed 14 million gallons of cellulosic fuel .

at the end of each year , covered entities must submit credits ( called renewable identification numbers , or rins ) equal to their obligations for that year .

cases of fraud in the market for biodiesel rins has led to criminal prosecutions and the development of quality - assurance guidelines from epa .

further , recent volatility in the spot market for ethanol rins has raised additional concerns about implementation of the rfs .

in january 2011 , epa finalized a partial waiver petition from growth energy to allow blends of up to 15% ethanol in gasoline ( e15 ) : before then ethanol content in all gasoline was limited to 10% ( e10 ) .

epa approved the use of e15 in model year 2001 and later passenger cars and light trucks , but prohibited its use in all other applications ( eg , motorcycles , heavy trucks , nonroad engines ) .

allowing higher blends of ethanol under the clean air act removes one component of the "blend wall," which limits the total amount of ethanol that can be blended in gasoline nationwide ; other blend wall components include vehicle and pump certification and warranties , and state and local fire codes and other laws .

because of concerns by some stakeholders over the potential for e15 to damage existing engines and infrastructure , epa's decision has been challenged in federal court , although a major case has been dismissed because the appeals court determined that the plaintiffs did not have standing to challenge the decision .

bills have been introduced in the 112 th and 113 th congresses that would limit epa's authority to implement the e15 waiver .

california energy commission .

abcs of afvs: a guide to alternative fuel vehicles .

sacramento , ca .

november 1999 .

electric drive transportation association .

technology .

washington , dc .

updated april 2013. http: / / www.electricdrive.org / index.php ? ht=d / sp / i / 2446 / tpl / landingpagetechiss / pid / 2446 fuel cells 2000 .

online fuel cell information center .

washington , dc .

updated april 2013. http: / / www.fuelcells.org / fuel cell and hydrogen energy association .

fchea homepage .

washington , dc .

updated april 2013. http: / / www.fchea.org / methanol institute .

methanol institute homepage .

washington , dc .

updated april 2013. http: / / www.methanol.org / national biodiesel board .

biodiesel basics .

jefferson city , mo .

updated april 2013. http: / / www.biodiesel.org / what - is - biodiesel / biodiesel - basics natural gas vehicles for america .

about ngvs .

washington , dc .

updated april 2013. http: / / www.ngvc.org / about_ngv / index.html propane education and research council .

autogas .

washington , dc .

updated april 2013. http: / / www.autogasusa.org / renewable fuels association .

ethanol industry outlook 20 13 .

washington , dc .

february 2013. http: / / ethanolrfa.org / page / - / pdfs / 2013%20rfa%20outlook.pdf ? nocdn=1 u.s. department of energy , office of energy efficiency and renewable energy .

alternative fuels data center .

washington , dc .

updated october 2010. http: / / www.eere.energy.gov / afdc / / u.s. department of energy .

reports to congress / annual progress reports .

washington , dc .

 — — hydrogen and fuel cells program .

http: / / www.hydrogen.energy.gov / congress_reports.html — — vehicle technologies office .

http: / / www1.eere.energy.gov / vehiclesandfuels / resources / fcvt_reports.html u.s. government accountability office ( formerly general accounting office ) .

energy policy act of 1992: limited progress in acquiring alternative fuel vehicles and reaching fuel goals .

washington , dc .

february 2000 .

rced - 00-59 .

 — — advanced technology vehicle loan program implementation is under way , but enhanced technical oversight and performance measures are needed .

washington , dc .

february 2011 .

gao - 11-145 .

