the origin of the trade adjustment assistance for farmers ( taaf ) program can be traced back to a 2000 department of labor report recommending that a separate program be enacted "to assist agricultural producers and workers affected adversely by imports" if the objective is to assist them to remain in their current occupations .

the report described the existing trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) programs that provided ( 1 ) limited technical assistance to help business firms ( including some that produced agricultural and food products ) regain economic competitiveness or to shift into producing other goods , and ( 2 ) training assistance to workers ( including those employed by some agricultural firms ) to facilitate their transition into other occupations .

it noted that the provision of direct financial assistance ( such as income supplements ) to farmers , or efforts to financially enable them to continue producing the commodity adversely affected by imports rather than help them adjust to employment in other sectors , would be inconsistent with the objectives of the then - existing taa programs .

observers stated that farmers and ranchers typically did not qualify for the taa workers program because they were self - employed ( and thus rarely were eligible for unemployment benefits ) and were less likely to want to be retrained for a new occupation ( particularly if earning income from producing other crops or from non - farm sources ) .

others pointed out that agricultural producers who are most likely to be affected by import surges are those producing a commodity that receives little or no price protection and does not receive direct payments under traditional farm subsidy programs .

frequently cited at the time was the impact of increased competition that u.s. fruit and vegetable growers , as well as livestock producers , have encountered due to imports from mexico and canada under the north american free trade agreement .

the trade act of 2002 established a new trade adjustment assistance for farmers program by amending the trade act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-618 ) .

the u.s. department of agriculture's ( usda's ) foreign agricultural service ( fas ) is the lead administrative agency for the taaf program , with responsibility for certifying eligible commodities and producer groups .

usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) has responsibility for processing and approving individual applications for assistance under taaf , and for disbursing cash payments to eligible producers .

a third usda agency , the national institute for food and agriculture ( nifa ) , provides training and technical assistance to producers who are approved for taaf benefits .

as amended by the enacted 2009 economic stimulus package ( p.l .

111-5 , division b , subtitle i ) , the program assists agricultural producers who have been adversely affected by competition from imports of a commodity that they produce .

an "agricultural commodity producer" is defined as a "person that shares in the risk of producing an agricultural commodity and that is entitled to a share of the commodity for marketing , including an operator , a sharecropper , or a person that owns or rents the land on which the commodity is produced," or a person who reports a gain or loss on a federal income tax return from "the trade or business of fishing. .

support is available in the form of enhanced technical assistance and seed money to enable a producer to formulate and implement a business adjustment plan .

producers of raw and natural agricultural commodities ( crops , livestock , farm - raised aquatic products , and wild - caught seafood that competes with aquaculture products ) and of "any class of goods within an agricultural commodity" must follow a two - part process to receive benefits .

first , a producer group must be certified by usda as eligible to apply for program benefits ( see " requirements for a commodity group to be certified " ) .

second , if the group is certified , individual producers in that group must meet certain requirements to be approved to receive technical assistance and cash payments ( see " individual producer eligibility requirements " and " taaf program benefits " ) .

because congress in 2009 significantly revised taaf's statutory provisions from those initially enacted , the text that follows describes how this program operated in the period before , and then in the period after , these changes .

the break between periods reflects the lack of program authority in the january to september 2008 period .

following the enactment of p.l .

114-26 — the law that provides the president with trade promotion authority ( tpa ) — the obama administration concluded negotiations on the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) regional free - trade agreement , which includes the united states and 11 other pacific - facing nations , but to date the agreement has not been ratified by congress or by other tpp countries .

meanwhile , negotiations between the united states and the european union to conclude a transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) agreement are ongoing .

considering the breadth of these two potential regional trade agreements , the economic diversity of the nations involved , and the broad range of u.s. agricultural and fishery products that might potentially be affected if tpp were to be implemented or if t - tip were to be successfully concluded and implemented — or both — it is conceivable that some u.s. agricultural producers and fishermen might qualify for trade adjustment assistance under taaf in the years ahead .

whether taaf will be provided with funding to allow it to resume operations , and at what level , is for congress to determine .

in the event that congress decides to appropriate funds to reactivate taaf , congress could provide oversight of the program in light of recommendations advanced by gao and the usda's office of inspector general .

