bid protests of federal government contracts filed with the government accountability office ( gao ) have received congressional scrutiny due to high - profile protests of awards , including protests filed against a $1.6 billion department of defense ( dod ) contract for cloud services ( protested by amazon , citrix systems , and other companies ) ; a contract to provide security background checks for the department of homeland security ( protested by us investigations services ) , and a nasa contract to develop crew space transportation capability ( protested by sierra nevada corp. ) .

the increasing number of protests and the impact protests can have in delaying contract award or performance have raised concerns regarding the impact of protests on agency operations , especially in dod .

both the house - and senate - passed versions of the fy2016 national defense authorization act seek to require a report on the gao bid protest process .

this report is one of two providing congress with background on the gao bid - protest process .

it analyzes ( 1 ) trends in bid protests filed with gao , ( 2 ) why companies protest , ( 3 ) the impact bid protests have on acquisitions , ( 4 ) the most common grounds for gao to sustain a protest , and ( 5 ) trends in bid protests filed against dod .

its companion report , crs report r40228 , gao bid protests: an overview of time frames and procedures , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] , provides background and an overview of the time frames and procedures in a gao bid protest .

the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) regulates how the federal government acquires goods and services by implementing statutes and codifying uniform policies and procedures for the executive branch .

the intent of the far is to help guide the federal acquisition system to "deliver on a timely basis the best value product or service to the [government] , while maintaining the public's trust and fulfilling public policy objectives. .

one of the guiding principles of the far , as set forth in the competition in contracting act ( p.l .

98-369 ) , is to promote competition for government contracts .

in an effort to protect the integrity of the procurement system , the far and federal law provide mechanisms for contractors to object to ( protest ) contract awards .

generally , any interested party who believes that a contract has been awarded unlawfully can seek relief and contest the award by filing a protest .

gao has been a forum for resolving protests for 90 years and is the only administrative institution with the authority to hear protests across the federal government ; the court of federal claims ( cofc ) is the only judicial forum for hearing such protests .

companies can also file a protest with the agency awarding the contract , and under certain circumstances , with specialized entities , such as the small business administration or the bureau of indian affairs .

gao , however , is the primary location for resolving government contract protests .

gao may generally hear protests alleging illegalities or improprieties in solicitations , cancellations of solicitations , awards , or proposed awards of contracts .

the procedures for bringing and conducting gao protests are designed to ensure "the inexpensive and expeditious resolution of [bid] protests" to "the maximum extent practicable. .

protesters need not file formal briefs or technical pleadings , can represent themselves , and can have protests decided without hearings .

all protests are required to be resolved within 100 calendar days of being filed .

the filing of a gao protest often results in an automatic stay of contract award or performance that can interrupt agencies' procurements for as long as the protest is pending .

gao may dismiss , deny , or sustain a protest .

a dismissal or denial allows the agency to proceed with the challenged procurement .

a sustained decision , in contrast , generally disrupts the procurement because gao will issue recommendations to the agency about the challenged procurement — such as re - competing the contract or amending the existing solicitation .

gao's recommendations are not legally binding upon the agency , but the agency must notify gao if it does not fully implement gao's recommendations .

agencies almost always comply with gao recommendations on protested procurements .

protesters who are disappointed with gao's decision can seek reconsideration or effectively appeal gao's decision by filing a protest with the court of federal claims .

a closer look at the data indicates a significant shift in bid protest trends over the last six years ( see figure 6 ) .

from fy2001-fy2008 , total government procurement spending , adjusted for inflation , increased at a faster rate ( over 100% ) than the number of protests filed ( 35% ) .

this trend reversed itself in fy2008: from fy2008-fy2014 total government spending , adjusted for inflation , decreased 25% while total protests increased 45% .

this data indicates that , when compared to the rate of government spending , bid protests decreased from fy2001-fy2008 , and increased from fy2008-fy2014 .

the rate at which gao sustains protests has also seen a significant shift in recent years .

from fy2001-fy2008 gao sustained protests in 22% of their opinions ; from fy2009-fy2014 that number dropped to 17% ( see figure 7 ) .

in fy2014 , 13% of protests filed were sustained , the lowest rate since before 2001 .

this data seems to indicate that while companies are more likely to file a bid protest , they are somewhat less likely to win a bid protest .

even when gao sustains a protest , the protesting company is not guaranteed to win the contract in question .

according to one analysis , out of some 1,500 procurements protested in fy2010 , gao sustained a protest in 45 procurements ; out of those 45 procurements , in 8 instances the protesting party went on to win the contract .

in other words , of the original 1,500 procurements protested , gao sustained a protest and the protesting party went on to win the contract 0.5% of the time .

however , this figure does not account for cases where the agency took corrective action prior to gao issuing an opinion .

taking into account agency corrective action , one observer estimated that a "protester has a 12% chance of ultimately winning a contract award as a result of its protest. .

even though protests have increased significantly over the last few years , the number of protests filed in fy2014 was not very high by historical standards ( see figure 8 ) .

from fy1986-fy2000 , gao received on average over 2,200 protests annually .

under the competition in contracting act ( cica ) , the mere filing of a bid protest with gao may result in an automatic stay , or postponement , of contract award or performance .

when a protest is filed prior to award , an agency may not award a contract until the protest has been resolved .

similarly , when a protest is filed after award , the agency must withhold authorization of performance under the contract while the protest is pending .

if performance has begun , the agency must "immediately direct the contractor to cease performance under the contract" until the protest is resolved .

congress mandated the stay of award in 1984 to ensure that in cases where gao found that procurement law or regulation was violated there would be sufficient opportunity for agencies to remedy the violation .

as the report of the house committee on government operations stated in 1984 , congress believed a cardinal failing of this bid protest process [is that] gao has no power to stop a contract award or contract performance while a protesting is pending .

as a result , agencies usually proceed with their contracts knowing that they will preclude any possibility of relief simply by delaying the bid protest process .

if an agency believes that delaying a contract will have severe consequences , cica provides grounds for agency overrides of automatic bid - protest stays .

according to cica , agencies may override stays when there are "urgent and compelling circumstances" that impact the interests of the united states and when performing the contract is in "the best interests of the united states. .

to ensure timely resolution of protests , congress required gao to resolve protest within 100 calendar days of the protest being filed .

according to gao officials , gao has never failed to complete its work within the required time period .

in many cases the protest is resolved much earlier , most often as a result of the protesting party withdrawing the case or gao dismissing the protest .

in addition , gao can dismiss protests that do not meet filing guidelines and can issue a summary decision on a protest at any time .

according to gao , in fy2014 , protests were resolved on average within 39 days .

more than half of all protests were resolved before an agency filed a report with gao responding to the protest ( through the case being dismissed or withdrawn by the protester ) .

these cases were resolved on average in 21 days .

this data , however , can be somewhat misleading .

much of the impact a protest can have on a program's schedule occurs outside of the period between when a protest is filed and the case is closed by gao .

agency actions to address the complaint in a protest — either through voluntary action or because a protest was sustained — can delay contract awards for weeks or months , costing millions of dollars and delaying delivery of goods and services .

the next - generation jammer technology development contract was reportedly delayed by six months when gao sustained a protest and recommended that the navy re - evaluate proposals .

the number of bid protest cases against dod has increased from approximately 600 in fy2001 to 1,200 in fy2014 , an increase of 100% ( see figure 9 ) .

most protests against dod were dismissed , withdrawn by the protester , or resolved prior to gao issuing an opinion .

gao issued an opinion on 23% of protests .

in cases where gao issued an opinion , protests were sustained 11% of the time .

from fy2001 to fy2014 , on average 4% of protests filed against dod were sustained by gao ( see table a - 1 for protests filed and sustained , by service ) .

just as the number of protests filed against dod has increased , the number — and value — of contract actions signed by dod has also increased ( see figure 10 ) .

according to the federal procurement data system , between fy2001 and fy2014 , after adjusting for inflation , the value of total dod contract obligations increased 45% compared to an increase of 100% in the number of protests filed in the same period .

in recent years , the percentage of protests sustained against dod has decreased ( see figure 11 ) .

from fy2001-fy2008 , gao sustained on average more than 5% of all protests filed ; from fy2009-fy2014 , gao sustained approximately 2% of all protests filed .

dod procurements are less likely to be protested than those of the rest of government .

from fy2008 to fy2014 , on average , dod accounted for almost 70% of total government contract obligations but about55% of total protests against the federal government ( see figure 12 ) .

protests against dod are also sustained at a lower rate than the rest of government .

from fy2008-fy2014 , 2.5% of all protests against dod were sustained by gao , compared to over 5.0% of all protests against federal civilian agencies .

protests against civilian agencies are also growing at a faster rate than protests against dod .

from fy2001-fy2014 , the number of dod procurements that were protested increased 170% ( from 421 to 1,138 ) compared to an increase of 260% ( from 279-997 ) for civilian agencies ( see table 1 ) .

