u.s. dairy producers are caught in a classic "price - cost squeeze," with farm milk prices declining sharply from record highs while feed costs remain high .

from january through september 2009 , the all - milk price received by farmers was 36% below a year earlier .

 ( the all - milk price is the weighted average farm price of fluid - grade and manufacturing - grade milk produced. ) .

meanwhile feed costs , as measured by alfalfa prices , were down only 20% from a year earlier .

the deteriorating economic picture has prompted calls for policymakers to consider how well current dairy policies are assisting dairy producers and what other options might be available .

the dairy market since 2007 illustrates how an agricultural boom can turn into a bust .

dairy farmers enjoyed excellent returns in 2007 and most of 2008 as strong demand pushed up the price of dairy products and the farm price of milk .

in november 2007 , the all - milk price hit a record $21.90 per hundredweight ( cwt. ) .

in 2008 , milk prices remained high , but feed prices rose rapidly , creating concern for dairy farmers .

the financial danger was a further escalation of feed prices or a price reversal in dairy product prices .

product prices have , in fact , dropped .

feed costs have declined some , but not enough to offset the drop in milk prices .

one simple measure of today's price - cost squeeze affecting dairy farmers is the milk - feed price index , as reported by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the ratio averaged 2.01 in 2008 , the lowest since at least 1985 and down from 2.81 in 2007 , a year with record - high milk prices .

thus far in 2009 ( january - september ) , the ratio has averaged 1.56 , down from the 10-year average of 2.90 .

a ratio near 3 or higher is considered positive for milk production .

the major factors leading to the current economic stress in the dairy industry are continued weak demand relative to milk supplies and relatively high feed costs .

in 2009 , usda expects the all - milk price to average between $12.05 per cwt .

and $12.25 per cwt. , down from $18.29 per cwt .

in 2008 and 17% - 19% below the 10-year average of $14.83 .

u.s. dairy policy has been developed over the last seven decades .

the early policies addressed three main problems: ( 1 ) producers lacked bargaining power with milk buyers ; ( 2 ) producers suffered from volatile or low prices ; and ( 3 ) market participants encountered severe shortages / gluts resulting from marketing a highly perishable commodity ( fluid milk ) .

the policy response resulted in the development of two major government activities that still function today: federal milk marketing orders ( fmmos ) and the dairy product price support program ( dppsp ) .

while both fmmos and the dppsp have their roots in the 1930s and 1940s , the programs have changed modestly over the years as the industry structure and markets changed .

two other components of u.s. dairy policy are relatively new programs .

first , the 1985 farm bill established the dairy export incentive program ( deip ) to counter foreign competitor subsidies .

second , the milk income loss contract ( milc ) program was established in the 2002 farm bill as a government payment for dairy farmers in times of low milk prices .

like u.s. crop programs , the milc program pays dairy producers when prices decline below a specified level .

the following sections describe each of these four components and how they relate to the current market situation .

lower milk and dairy product prices since late 2008 have generated new program activity .

usda began purchasing dairy products last fall under the dppsp ; milc payments were triggered beginning in february .

the reversal of market fortunes for dairy farmers since 2008 has prompted calls from dairy producer groups to address the situation .

the national milk producers federation ( nmpf ) , the largest trade association representing milk producer cooperatives , wrote to the secretary of agriculture on january 8 , 2009 , asking the department to take several steps to assist dairy producers .

subsequently , letters to the secretary were also sent by members of congress .

on january 26 , the international dairy foods association , which represents dairy manufacturers and marketers , wrote to the secretary , focusing only on ways to bolster demand for dairy products .

the recommended industry actions deal also with revisions in the support program to increase dairy product purchases by the government , specifically asking usda to be more flexible with the acceptable types and forms of eligible dairy products .

additional purchases are expected to spur domestic demand and slow the decline in prices .

the request from nmpf also included reactivation of the dairy export incentive program to boost exports and remove excess inventory while helping exporters maintain business relationships developed in recent years .

in early may 2009 , the national milk producers federation reiterated its request that the u.s. government restart the dairy export incentive program to help remove excess dairy products from the market .

subsequently , nmpf asked usda to increase the support prices of both cheese and nonfat dry milk .

another policy proposal is a dairy herd buyout to reduce the milk supply .

a federal buyout has not been included in the nmpf requests , but it had been discussed in the agricultural media earlier in 2009 .

the industry currently operates a voluntary , producer - funded program to remove dairy cows from milk production .

usda operated a federal dairy herd buyout program in the mid - 1980s .

in july 2009 , the subcommittee on livestock , dairy , and poultry of the house agriculture committee held a series of hearings to review economic conditions facing the dairy industry .

the subcommittee heard a range of opinions from the witnesses , with some asking for increased intervention in the form of higher support prices or supply management .

others argued that the industry would benefit if the government did nothing because inaction would more quickly bring supply in line with current demand .

usda has taken several actions in 2009 to support dairy farm income , including increasing dairy product price supports , transferring dairy products to domestic feeding programs , and activating the dairy export incentive program .

usda expects to spend about $1 billion in fiscal 2009 on purchases of dairy products and payments to producers under the milk income loss contract ( milc ) program .

most policy responses that are currently being discussed fall into three categories: ( 1 ) maintain the status quo and allow remaining programs to operate , ( 2 ) implement a new program such as a dairy buyout , and ( 3 ) modify existing programs to enhance dairy farmer income .

each is discussed in sections below .

a change in federal milk marketing orders could also be used for boosting dairy farm returns .

the federal milk marketing improvement act of 2009 ( s. 1645 ; first introduced as s. 889 ) is expected to "help farmers get a fair price for their milk" and provide relief and assistance to dairy farmers by using the cost of milk production as the basis for pricing milk .

while the bill could raise farm milk prices , some are concerned that it could also reduce the competitiveness of the u.s. dairy industry because , they argue , a pricing system based on cost of production potentially rewards inefficiency .

also , some are concerned that provisions in the bill for usda to influence supply may not be sufficient to bring supply and demand into balance .

increasing import barriers is another approach for addressing the issue of low milk prices .

the milk import tariff equity act was introduced in the senate ( s. 1542 ) on july 30 , 2009 , and in the house ( h.r .

3674 ) on september 29 , 2009 , to impose tariff - rate quotas on imports of casein ( the main protein found in milk ) and milk protein concentrates .

similar bills have been introduced in virtually every congress over the last decade , but no action has occurred .

for more information , see crs report r40839 , proposed import restrictions on milk protein concentrates ( mpcs ) .

the current and prospective price environment complicates the policy decision .

given reduced returns , producers are culling herds and reducing milk production , which is expected to lift farm prices .

however , the full effect of the production decisions is expected to take several more months .

recent usda regulatory actions have included a dairy import assessment as part of the 2008 farm bill implementation , as well as proposed changes to federal milk marketing orders .

on may 19 , 2009 , usda published a proposed rule in the federal register to establish a dairy import assessment program as required by the 2002 and 2008 farm bills .

u.s. dairy producers in the 48 contiguous states currently pay a 15-cent per cwt .

assessment on all milk produced to fund a national dairy producer program for generic dairy product promotion , research , and nutrition education .

authorization for the program stems from the dairy producer stabilization act of 1983 ( 7 u.s.c .

4501-4514 ) .

the 2002 farm bill ( section 1505 ) amended the act requiring that the assessment also be collected on all imported dairy products .

after consulting with the office of u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) , the secretary of agriculture determined that a mandatory dairy import assessment was not permissible , since alaska and hawaii are exempt from the domestic assessment .

according to usda , the exemption treats some domestic producers more favorably than importers , thereby violating u.s. trade obligations .

to remedy the situation , section 1507 of the 2008 farm bill extends the domestic assessment to alaska , hawaii , and puerto rico .

the statutory change is designed to make the definition of the united states consistent with the definition used by the ustr and u.s. trading partners , thus allowing the assessment on imported products .

the enacted 2008 farm bill also sets the assessment on imports at 7.5 cents per cwt .

the import assessment is supported by most dairy producer groups because importers "benefit from domestic dairy promotion efforts without contributing to programs aimed at growing the u.s .

market. .

however , milk producers in alaska and hawaii were opposed to any definition change that required them to contribute to the program .

dairy importers and processors are opposed to the import assessment , contending that it is an unfair tax on imported products which they say could be challenged as trade - distorting in the world trade organization , regardless of whether alaska and hawaii are included .

the argument is that because some imported products are subject to quantity limits under tariff rate quotas , importers will not benefit from the assessment in terms of building additional demand for their product .

in may 2009 , usda held a public hearing on proposals to amend federal milk marketing orders ( fmmos ) regarding producer - handler provisions .

producer - handlers are dairy farmers who process milk from their own cows in their own plants and market their packaged fluid milk and other dairy products themselves .

currently , dairy farmers who qualify as producer - handlers under federal milk marketing orders are exempt , as handlers , from the pricing and pooling provisions of the orders .

the provisions require handlers to pay minimum prices to dairy farmers for milk depending on its use ( eg , fluid milk , cheese ) .

the pooling process redistributes revenue among producers from across a marketing area ( 10 regions in total ) so that all producers receive the same "blend" price .

thus , as handlers , the producer - handlers can produce and sell their milk without being required to participate in the pool , and therefore not be subject to paying minimum prices as other handlers must do .

as a result , producer - handlers may have a cost advantage over other handlers .

this possibility helped motivate proposals to eliminate the producer - handler exemption .

the proposed changes would eliminate or modify who is exempt from federal marketing orders .

some of the proposals allow for continued exemptions for producer - handlers based on the size of the operation , ranging from milk production of 450,000 pounds of milk per month ( equivalent to about a 275-cow operation ) to 3 million pounds per month ( about 1,750 cows ) .

nationwide , about 15 producer - handlers fall into that range of production .

three other firms are larger yet .

on october 21 , 2009 , usda issued a recommended decision that would limit exemption from pooling and pricing provisions of federal orders to those producer - handlers with total route disposition of fluid milk products of 3 million pounds or less per month .

after a 60-day comment period , usda will issue a final decision .

a referendum is then conducted among individual producers ( or as represented by cooperatives ) and , if approved by two - thirds of producers , the amendment to the order is made effective by final rule in the federal register .

a negative vote on an amended order would eliminate the order .

