this report provides a brief analysis of selected "general oversight provisions" in the house - and senate - passed versions of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , h.r .

1 , 111 th congress ) .

the analysis is included in a side - by - side discussion of similar provisions in each bill .

for purposes of this report , the term "general oversight provision" means an oversight - related provision that addresses multiple agencies or programs .

therefore , oversight - related provisions that are specific to a single program or appropriation , such as appropriations set - asides , are excluded from the report's scope .

several other topics also are excluded , including the following: provisions addressing the whistleblower protection enhancement act of 2009 , in the house - passed version ( division a , title 1 , part 4 , sec .

1261 et seq .

 ) ; prohibitions on the use of funds for casinos , golf courses , etc .

 ( senate - passed version , division a , title xvi , section 1609 ; house - passed version , division a , title i , section 1109 ) ; provisions related to program - specific program evaluations ( eg , in the house - passed version , division a , title ix , subtitle b , department of health and human services prevention and wellness fund , "annual evaluations of programs ... in order to determine the quality and effectiveness of the programs" ) ; and contract , grant , or cooperative agreement restrictions and prohibitions ( eg , house - passed version , division a , title 1 , section 1241 ; and senate - passed version , division a , title xvi , section 1608 ) .

on january 14 , 2009 , then omb director - designate peter orszag appeared before the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs for a confirmation hearing .

among other things , he was asked about his plans for oversight of the economic stimulus package that was anticipated to be considered at the beginning of the 111 th congress .

director - designate orszag said the incoming administration would favor creating a special oversight board .

composed of relevant inspectors general ( igs ) and chaired by a newly established white house position of chief performance officer ( cpo ) , he said the board "would review problems and ... would conduct regular meetings to examine specific problems that might be identified. .

he also said the administration planned "to create a website that will contain information about the contracts and include [portable document format files] or contracts themselves , and also financial information about the contracts. .

the obama administration subsequently established a rudimentary recovery.gov website in anticipation of enactment of stimulus legislation .

the home page explained the administration's intentions for the website .

check back after the passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act to see how and where your tax dollars are spent .

an oversight board will routinely update this site as part of an unprecedented effort to root out waste , inefficiency , and unnecessary spending in our government .

numerous oversight provisions subsequently were included in economic stimulus legislation considered by the house and senate .

for example , on january 21 , 2009 , after markup of a draft bill by the house committee on appropriations , the committee issued a press release that characterized the stimulus as providing "unprecedented accountability. .

at the same time , concerns have been expressed about the capacity of agencies and "a depleted contracting workforce" to spend funds rapidly "while also improving competition and oversight. .

in addition , the question has been raised whether inspectors general and the government accountability office ( gao ) have sufficient resources to conduct oversight of the stimulus legislation .

the house of representatives passed its version of the bill on january 28 , 2009 .

the senate passed its version on february 10 , 2009 .

as of february 12 , the house and senate were negotiating differences in the two versions of the stimulus legislation .

 table 1 provides a brief analysis of selected general oversight provisions in the house - and senate - passed versions of economic stimulus legislation .

bolded text refers to citations within each bill .

it should be noted that references to "the act" within each bill generally refer to either division a or division b of the bill , not to the entire bill .

