congress has enacted legislation and appropriated funds for homeland security assistance programs since 1996 , a policy initiated in large measure by the bombings of the world trade center on february 26 , 1993 , and the alfred p. murrah building in oklahoma city on april 19 , 1995 .

following the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , congress further increased its attention on homeland security assistance programs by , among other things , establishing the department of homeland security ( dhs ) .

this report focuses on the department's homeland security assistance programs , but not the department as a whole .

the number and purpose of programs , their administration , and funding have evolved over the past 12 years .

these assistance programs are intended to enhance and maintain state , local , and non - federal government entities' homeland security and emergency management capabilities .

since fy2003 , dhs has administered these assistance programs through four different offices or agencies within the department due to both congressional and departmental actions .

with the increase of terrorist threats and attacks against the united states following the end of the cold war and the termination of old civil defense programs , a number of policy questions have arisen regarding homeland security assistance programs .

the majority of these questions have not been completely addressed , even though congress has debated and enacted legislation that provides homeland security assistance to states and localities since 1997 .

some officials such as members of congress , former president bush's administration personnel , and president barack obama have questioned ( 1 ) the purpose and number of assistance programs ; ( 2 ) the use of preparedness funding ; ( 3 ) the determination of eligibility ; ( 4 ) the funding amounts for the assistance programs ; ( 5 ) the programs' funding distribution methodology , and ( 6 ) the use of grant funding for sustainment and maintenance costs associated with previous fiscal year homeland security projects .

these policy questions may continue to be important during the second session of the 111 th congress as members continues to appropriate funding and conduct oversight of these assistance programs .

specifically , the house homeland security committee stated that oversight of dhs grants is one of its priorities for 111 th congress .

discussion of these potential issues may enable congress and the federal government to anticipate possible homeland security crises and establish policies that are not strictly reactionary .

this report provides a brief summary of the development of the federal government's role in providing homeland security assistance , a summary of assistance programs dhs presently provides to states and localities , and a discussion of the policy issues identified above .

the federal government began providing counter - terrorism assistance to states and localities following the bombings of the world trade center in 1993 and the alfred p. murrah federal building in 1995 .

this assistance was separate from any federal disaster assistance these cities may have received due to these terrorist attacks .

federal homeland security assistance evolved and expanded after the terrorist attacks on september 11 th , 2001 , and the establishment of dhs in 2002 with p.l .

107-296 , "homeland security act of 2002. .

a brief discussion on this evolution and expansion follows .

in 1996 , congress enacted the defense against weapons of mass destruction act ( also known as the nunn - lugar - domenici act ) .

this law , among other things , established the nunn - lugar - domenici program ( nld ) that provided financial assistance to over 150 major u.s. cities .

this assistance , with the oklahoma city bombing being the primary catalyst , was focused on helping first responders prepare for , prevent , and respond to terrorist attacks involving weapons of mass destruction .

two years later , the department of justice ( doj ) established the office for domestic preparedness ( odp ) to administer assistance programs that enhanced state and local emergency response capabilities , including terrorist attack response .

at first , nld provided assistance to 120 cities ; it was later expanded to include 157 cities and counties .

at the end of 1998 , 40 of the original 120 cities had received funding and training .

in addition to training , approximately $300,000 was provided by dod to each city for personal protection , decontamination , and detection equipment .

following the transfer of nld to doj , all cities completed the training initiated by dod , and doj based the training and exercises on state assessments .

the program ended in 2001 upon completion of the training .

odp was transferred to dhs with enactment of the homeland security act of 2002 .

initially , odp and its terrorism preparedness programs were administered by the border and transportation security directorate , and all - hazard preparedness programs were in the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) .

odp and all assistance programs were transferred to the office of the secretary in 2004 due to state and local criticism of dhs not having a "one - stop - shop" for grant programs assistance .

after investigations into the problematic response to hurricane katrina , the programs were transferred to the national preparedness directorate .

currently all programs and activities are administered by the grants program directorate ( gpd ) , within fema .

gpd is now the primary dhs and fema entity responsible for managing the majority of dhs assistance to states and localities .

since the establishment of dhs , the department has not only been responsible for preparing for and responding to terrorist attacks , it is also the lead agency for preparing for , responding to , and recovering from any accidental man - made or natural disasters .

the most recent legislative action affecting dhs grants was p.l .

110-53 , implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 , which authorized a number of the dhs grants and mandated some of their allocation methodologies .

this legislation was a result of numerous years of debate on how dhs should allocate homeland security assistance funding to states , the district of columbia ( dc ) , and u.s. insular areas .

in fy2003 , dhs administered eight assistance programs , and expanded the total to 15 programs in fy2010 .

in the fy2011 budget request , the administration requests funding for only eight programs .

the following section summarizes 14 of the 15 programs and activities that are currently administered by dhs .

the department has yet to issue information or guidance on the center for counterterrorism and cyber crime program so there is no summary of this program .

this report uses dhs documents , and congressional reports to summarize the programs .

this report is not intended to provide in - depth information on these grants .

for detailed information on individual grant programs , see the cited sources .

dhs does not identify grant programs as either terrorism preparedness or all - hazards preparedness .

as a result , crs has based its characterization of programs falling primarily into one category or another on an examination of dhs grant guidance documents .

the criteria for placing a grant program in either the terrorism preparedness or all - hazards preparedness categories is based on a review of the program's eligible activities or the dhs's stated goal for the program .

other analysts might categorize the programs differently .

more than eight years after the terrorist attacks on september 11 , 2001 , and seven years since the establishment of dhs , debate continues on policy questions related to homeland security assistance for states and localities .

some of these questions arguably have been addressed in legislation , such as the statute that modified the distribution of funding to states and localities ( p.l .

110-53 ) .

additionally , congressional committees have conducted hearings related to state and local homeland security assistance and preparedness .

some may contend there is a need for the 111 th congress to conduct further oversight hearings ( which the house homeland security stated it intends to do ) and legislate on policy issues related to dhs assistance to states and localities .

these potential issues include ( 1 ) the purpose and number of assistance programs ; ( 2 ) the use of preparedness funding ; ( 3 ) the determination of eligible recipients of assistance ; ( 4 ) the funding for the assistance programs ; and ( 5 ) the programs' distribution methodology .

the following analysis of these policy issues provides background for this policy discussion .

as the 111 th congress begins its second session , members may wish to consider the policy issues identified in this report or other related issues .

the potential issues included in this report are ( 1 ) the purpose and number of assistance programs ; ( 2 ) evaluation of grant funding use ; ( 3 ) determination of eligible grant recipients ; ( 4 ) funding amounts ; and ( 5 ) funding distribution methodologies .

all of these policy issues identify a potential need for congress to continue its debate and consider legislation related to federal homeland security assistance for states and localities and the nation's overall emergency preparedness .

additionally , if homeland security continues to be of national interest , how homeland security assistance is funded , administered , and allocated will be of importance to the 111 th congress .

since congress will continue to conduct oversight and legislate on homeland security assistance to states and localities , as the house homeland security committee has stated it intends to do , members may elect to consider options that anticipate , as well as react to , future catastrophes .

the potential issues identified in this report are not presumed to be the only issues , however , these issues may be of enough significance to merit congress's attention .

