ownership and use of federal lands have stirred controversy for decades .

conflicting public values concerning federal lands raise many questions and issues: how much land the federal government should own , how managers should balance conflicting uses ( eg , grazing , timber , habitat , recreation ) , whether congress should designate specially protected areas , and when and how agencies should collect and distribute fees for land and resource uses .

congress continues to examine these questions — particularly in assessing the various uses that might be made of the federal lands — through legislative proposals , program oversight , and annual appropriations for the four major federal land management agencies — the bureau of land management ( blm ) , national park service , and fish and wildlife service in the department of the interior , and the forest service in the department of agriculture .

financial issues are a persistent concern for federal agencies , including the land management agencies .

however , the sale or lease of the lands and resources being managed provides these agencies with an opportunity to recover some of their operating and capital costs .

this section summarizes the revenues of the four land management agencies and provides a brief overview of annual appropriations , the trust funds and special accounts funded from revenues , and land acquisition funding .

it concludes with a discussion of the programs that compensate state and local governments for the tax - exempt status of federal lands .

the national forest system ( nfs ) is administered by the forest service ( fs ) in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

the nfs is comprised of national forests , national grasslands , and various other designations .

although nfs lands are concentrated in the west ( 87% ) , the fs administers more federal land in the east than all other federal agencies combined .

nfs lands are administered for sustained yields of multiple uses , including outdoor recreation ( camping , hiking , hunting , sightseeing , etc .

 ) , livestock grazing , timber harvesting , watershed protection , and fish and wildlife habitats .

the bureau of land management ( blm ) manages 255.8 million acres of land , approximately 11% of the land in the united states .

most of this land is in the west , with nearly one - third of the total in alaska .

the map in figure 6 identifies blm lands .

these lands include grasslands , forests , high mountains , arctic tundra , and deserts .

they contain diverse resources , including fuels and minerals ; timber ; forage ; wild horses and burros ; fish and wildlife habitat ; recreation sites ; wilderness areas ; cultural sites ; and other natural heritage assets .

on december 16 , 2008 , interior secretary dirk kempthorne issued a secretarial order designating blm lands as the "national system of public lands. .

the secretary stated that this designation was to convey the inter - connectedness of public lands in providing recreation , conservation , wildlife habitat and economic benefits .

the designation is not intended to change the way the lands are managed .

the national wildlife refuge system ( nwrs ) is administered by the fish and wildlife service ( fws ) in the department of the interior .

it is dedicated primarily to the conservation of animals and plants .

other uses — hunting , fishing , recreation , timber harvest , grazing , etc. — are permitted only to the extent that they are compatible with the purposes for which the refuge was created .

in 1997 , congress established compatible wildlife - dependent recreation as a priority for the nwrs .

some have characterized the nwrs as intermediate in protection between the blm and fs lands on the one hand and the nps lands on the other , but this is not entirely accurate .

the nwrs resembles the fs or blm lands in allowing some commercial uses , but in certain cases , uses ( eg , public access ) can be substantially more restrictive than for nps lands .

the category of federal land perhaps best known to the public is the national park system .

the national park service ( nps ) currently manages 391 units , including 58 formally entitled national parks ( often referred to metaphorically as the "crown jewels" of the system ) .

other units include national monuments and memorials , battlefields and military parks , historic sites and parks , lakeshores and seashores , recreation areas , reserves , preserves , rivers and trails , and other designations .

the system has grown to a total of 84.3 million acres — 78.4 million acres of nps federal land , 1.6 million acres of other government land , and 4.3 million acres of private land — in 49 states , the district of columbia , and u.s. territories .

the enactment of the alaska national interest lands conservation act of 1980 roughly doubled the acreage of the park system because of the large size of the new parks in alaska .

the acreage has been relatively stable in recent years , as new authorizations and land acquisitions have been modest .

the nps has the often contradictory mission of facilitating access and serving visitors while protecting and preserving unimpaired for future generations , the natural , historic , and cultural integrity of the lands and resources it manages .

in contrast to many other federal lands systems , the nps typically has specific management guidance enacted in the authorizing language for each unit .

there are currently three special management systems that include lands from more than one federal land management agency: the national wilderness preservation system , the national wild and scenic rivers system , and the national trails system .

these systems were established by congress to protect special features or characteristics on lands managed by the various agencies .

rather than establish new agencies for these systems , congress directed the existing agencies to administer the designated lands within parameters set in statute .

the wilderness act defines wilderness as "undeveloped federal land ... without permanent improvements. .

further , wilderness generally consists of federal land that is primarily affected by the forces of nature , relatively untouched by human activity , and primarily valued for solitude and primitive recreation .

lands eligible for inclusion in the system are areas that generally contain more than 5,000 acres or that can be managed to maintain their pristine character .

the national trails system ( nts ) was created in 1968 by the national trails system act .

this act established the appalachian and pacific crest national scenic trails , and authorized a national system of trails to provide additional outdoor recreational opportunities and to promote the preservation of access to the outdoor areas and historic resources of the nation .

the system includes four types of national trails: national scenic trails provide outdoor recreation and the conservation and enjoyment of significant scenic , historic , natural , or cultural qualities ; national historic trails follow travel routes of national historic significance ; national recreation trails are in , or reasonably accessible to , urban areas on federal , state , or private lands ; and connecting or side trails provide access to or among the other classes of trails .

during the early history of the united states , trails served as routes for commerce and migration .

since the early 20 th century , trails have been constructed to provide access to scenic terrain .

in 1921 , the concept of the first interstate recreational trail , now known as the appalachian national scenic trail , was introduced .

in 1945 , legislation to establish a "national system of foot trails" as an amendment to a highway funding bill , was considered but not reported .

as population expanded in the 1950s , the nation sought better opportunities to enjoy the outdoors .

in 1958 , congress established the outdoor recreation resources review commission ( orrrc ) to make a nationwide study of outdoor national recreation needs .

a 1960 survey conducted for the orrrc indicated that 90% of all americans participated in some form of outdoor recreation and that walking for pleasure ranked second among all recreation activities .

on february 8 , 1965 , in his message to congress on "natural beauty," president lyndon b. johnson called for the nation "to copy the great appalachian trail in all parts of our country , and make full use of rights - of - way and other public paths. .

just three years later , congress heeded the message by enacting the national trail system act .

the national trails system began in 1968 with only two scenic trails .

the appalachian national scenic trail stretches 2,160 miles from mount katahdin , me , to springer mountain , ga .

the pacific crest national scenic trail covers 2,665 miles from canada to mexico along the mountains of washington , oregon , and california .

the system was expanded a decade later when the national parks and recreation act of 1978 designated four historic trails with more than 9,000 miles , and another national scenic trail , along the continental divide , with 3,100 miles .

forty years later , the federal portion of the system consists of 26 national trails ( eight scenic trails and 18 historic trails ) covering 60,000 miles , over 1,000 recreation trails , and two connecting and side trails , in every state , washington , dc , and puerto rico .

in addition , the act has authorized more than 1,100 rails - to - trails conversions ( 16 u.s.c .

§ 1247 ) .

 ( see figure 9 . ) .

each of the 26 national trails is administered by either the secretary of the interior or the secretary of agriculture .

the nps administers 19 of the 26 trails , the fs administers 4 trails , the blm administers 1 trail , and the nps and blm jointly administer 2 historic trails .

the secretaries are to administer the federal lands and to work cooperatively with agencies managing lands not under their jurisdiction .

management responsibilities vary depending on the type of trail .

these trails provide recreation , conservation , and enjoyment of significant scenic , historic , natural , or cultural qualities .

the use of motorized vehicles on these long - distance trails is generally prohibited , except for the continental divide national scenic trail which allows: ( 1 ) access for emergencies ; ( 2 ) reasonable access for adjacent landowners ( including timber rights ) ; and ( 3 ) landowner use on private lands in the right of way , in accordance with regulations established by the administering secretary .

these trails follow travel routes of national historical significance .

to qualify for designation , the proposed trail must meet the following criteria: ( 1 ) the route must have historical significance as a result of its use and documented location ; ( 2 ) there must be evidence of a trail's national significance with respect to american history ; and ( 3 ) the trail must have significant potential for public recreational use or historical interest .

these trails do not have to be continuous , and can include land and water segments , marked highways paralleling the route , and sites that together form a chain or network along the historic route .

examples include the mormon trail and the oregon pioneer trail .

the park service is responsible for the overall administration of the national recreation trails program , including coordination of nonfederal trails , although the fs administers national recreation trails within the national forests .

recreation trails are existing trails in , or reasonably accessible to , urban areas , and are managed by public and private agencies at the local , state , and national levels .

the various recreation trails provide recreation opportunities for the handicapped , hikers , bicyclists , cross country skiers , and horseback riders .

these certified trails provide public access to nationally designated trails or connections between such trails .

in 1990 , the secretary of the interior designated: ( 1 ) the 18-mile timm's hill trail ( wi ) , which connects timm's hill to the ice age national scenic trail , and ( 2 ) the 186-mile anvik connector ( ak ) , which joins the iditarod national historic trail to the village of anvik on the yukon river .

connecting and side trails are administered by the secretary of the interior , except that the secretary of agriculture administers trails on national forest lands .

each agency with management authority over national trails has its own budget or funding for carrying out activities related to trail administration and management .

federal land managing agencies have agreed , within the limits of agency authorities , to coordinate requests for and obligation of funds related to the national trails system to eliminate duplication of effort and increase effectiveness .

since 1992 , the department of transportation through federal transportation programs have provided more than $1 billion for bicycle and pedestrian transportation projects ( including many transportation trails ) .

additional potential sources of funding for trails include challenge cost - share projects , cooperative agreements to trail partner organizations , charitable foundations , corporations , permits and fees , local excise taxes , and dedicated funds .

as defined in the act , national scenic trails and national historic trails are long distance trails designated by acts of congress .

national recreation trails and connecting and side trails may be recognized by the secretaries of the interior and agriculture with the consent of the federal agency , state , or political subdivision with jurisdiction over the lands involved .

the 109 th congress established the captain john smith chesapeake national historic trail ( p.l .

109-418 ) , the nation's first all - water national historic trail .

the secretaries are permitted to acquire lands or interest in lands for the trails system by written cooperative agreements , through donations , by purchase with donated or appropriated funds , by exchange , and , within limits , by condemnation .

the secretaries are directed to cooperate with and encourage states to administer the nonfederal lands through cooperative agreements with landowners and private organizations for the rights - of - way or through states or local governments acquiring such lands or interests .

land acquisition for resource protection has been controversial in some cases .

legislation to give federal land management agencies the authority to purchase land from willing sellers has been considered , but not enacted , beginning in the 106 th congress and continuing in subsequent congresses .

between 1978 and 1986 , congress authorized nine national scenic and historic trails ( the oregon , mormon pioneer , lewis and clark , iditarod , and nez perce national historic trails , and the continental divide , ice age , north country , and potomac heritage national scenic trails ) , but prohibited federal authority for land acquisition .

trails authorized since 1986 typically have included land acquisition authority .

national parks and recreation act of 1978: p.l .

95-625 .

national trails system act: p.l .

90-543 ; 16 u.s.c .

§§ 1241 , et seq .

outdoor recreation act of 1963: p.l .

88-29 ; 16 u.s.c .

§ 4601 .

appendix a .

major acronyms used in this report anilca: alaska national interest lands conservation act anwr: alaska national wildlife refuge blm: bureau of land management dod: department of defense doi: department of the interior esa: endangered species act eis: environmental impact statement flpma: federal land policy and management act of 1976 fs: forest service fws: fish and wildlife service lwcf: land and water conservation fund mbcf: migratory bird conservation fund nepa: national environmental policy act of 1969 nfma: national forest management act of 1976 nfs: national forest system nha: national heritage area nps: national park service nwrs: national wildlife refuge system o&c: oregon and california ( grant lands ) pilt: payments in lieu of taxes ( act and program ) pria: public rangelands improvement act of 1978 rpa: forest and rangeland renewable resources planning act of 1974 usda: united states department of agriculture wcas: wildlife coordination areas wpas: waterfowl production areas appendix b .

definition of selected terms acquired lands : land obtained by the federal government from a state or individual , by exchange , or through purchase ( with or without condemnation ) or gift .

one category of federal lands .

entry : occupation of public land as first step to acquiring title ; can also mean application to acquire title .

federal land : any land owned or managed by the federal government , regardless of its mode of acquisition or managing agency .

homesteading : the process of occupying and improving public lands to obtain title .

almost all homesteading laws were repealed in 1976 ( extended to 1986 in alaska ) .

impoundment : man - made impediment to the free flow of rivers or streams , such as a dam or diversion .

inholdings : state or private land inside the designated boundaries of lands owned by the federal government , such as national forests or national parks .

land and water conservation fund : the primary source of federal funds to acquire new lands for recreation and wildlife purposes to be administered by federal land management agencies .

the fund is derived largely from receipts from the sale of offshore oil and gas ( 16 u.s.c .

§ 460 1 ) , but funds must be appropriated annually .

land withdrawal : an action that restricts the use or disposition of public lands , eg , for mineral leasing .

leaseable minerals : minerals that can be developed under federal leasing systems , including oil , gas , coal , potash , phosphates , and geothermal energy .

lease : contractual authorization of possession and use of public land for a period of time .

mining claim : a mineral entry and appropriation of public land that authorizes possession and the development of the minerals and may lead to title .

multiple use land : federal lands which congress has directed be used for a variety of purposes .

patent : a document that provides evidence of a grant from the government — usually conveying legal title to public lands .

payments in lieu of taxes : a program administered by the doi which provides payments to local governments which have eligible federal lands within their boundaries .

public domain land : one category of federal lands consisting of lands ceded by the original states or obtained from a foreign sovereign , through purchase , treaty , or other means .

by contrast , "acquired lands" are obtained from an individual or state .

public land : various meanings .

traditionally has meant the public domain lands subject to the public land disposal laws .

defined in the federal land policy and management act of 1976 ( flpma ) to refer to the lands and interests in land owned by the united states that are managed by the blm , whether public domain or acquired lands .

also , commonly used to mean all federal , state , and local government - owned land .

rangeland: land with a plant cover primarily of grasses , forbs , grasslike plants , and shrubs .

many federal rangelands managed by the blm and the fs are leased ( or used under permit ) for private grazing use .

release language : congressional direction on the timing and extent of future wilderness considerations , and on the management of roadless areas pending future wilderness reviews , if any .

reservation : public land withdrawn from general access for a specific public purpose or program .

right - of - way : a permit or easement that authorizes the use of lands for specific purposes , such as construction of a forest access road , installation of a pipeline , or placement of a reservoir .

subsurface mineral estate : typically refers to a property interest in mineral resources below ground .

surface estate : typically refers to a property interest in surface lands and the above - ground resources .

sustained yield : a high level of resource outputs maintained in perpetuity , but without impairing the productivity of the land .

water right : right to use or control water .

such rights typically are granted by the states , although the united states may have federal water rights as well .

wetlands: areas predominantly of soils that are situated in water - saturated conditions during part or all of the year , and support water - loving plants , called hydrophytic vegetation .

they are transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems , and are found where the water table generally is at or near the surface .

wilderness : undeveloped federal land , usually 5,000 acres or more and without permanent improvements , managed to protect and preserve natural conditions .

wildlife refuge : land administered by the fws for the conservation and protection of fish and wildlife .

 ( hunting , fishing , and other forms of wildlife - related recreation typically are allowed , consistent with the purposes of the refuge. ) .

withdrawal : an action that restricts the use or disposition of public lands , eg , for mineral leasing .

