u.s. foreign aid is the largest component of the international affairs budget , for decades viewed by many as an essential instrument of u.s. foreign policy .

each year , the foreign aid budget is the subject of congressional debate over the size , composition , and purpose of the program .

the focus of u.s. foreign aid policy has been transformed since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

global development , a major objective of foreign aid , has been cited as a third pillar of u.s. national security , along with defense and diplomacy , in the national security strategies of the george w. bush and barack obama administrations .

although the trump administration's national security strategy does not explicitly address the status of development vis - à - vis diplomacy and defense , it does note the historic importance of aid in achieving foreign policy goals and supporting u.s. national interests .

this report addresses a number of the more frequently asked questions regarding the u.s. foreign aid program ; its objectives , costs , and organization ; the role of congress ; and how it compares to those of other aid donors .

it attempts not only to present a current snapshot of american foreign assistance , but also to illustrate the extent to which this instrument of u.s. foreign policy has evolved over time .

data presented in the report are the most current , consistent , and reliable figures available , generally updated through fy2017 .

dollar amounts come from a variety of sources , including the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) foreign aid explorer database ( explorer ) and annual state , foreign operations , and related programs ( sfops ) appropriations acts .

as new data are obtained or additional issues and questions arise , the report will be revised .

foreign aid abbreviations used in this report are listed in appendix b .

how and in what form assistance reaches an aid recipient can vary widely , depending on the type of aid program , the objective of the assistance , and the agency responsible for providing the aid .

numerous congressional authorizing committees and appropriations subcommittees maintain responsibility for u.s. foreign assistance .

several committees have responsibility for authorizing legislation establishing programs and policy and for conducting oversight of foreign aid programs .

in the senate , the committee on foreign relations , and in the house , the committee on foreign affairs , have primary jurisdiction over bilateral development assistance , political / strategic and other economic security assistance , military assistance , and international organizations .

food aid , primarily the responsibility of the agriculture committees in both bodies , is periodically shared with the foreign affairs committee in the house .

u.s. contributions to multilateral development banks are within the jurisdiction of the senate foreign relations committee and the house financial services committee .

the large nontraditional aid programs funded by dod , such as nunn - lugar cooperative threat reduction programs and the military aid programs in afghanistan and iraq , come under the jurisdiction of the armed services committees .

some global health assistance , such as research and other activities done by the centers for disease control and prevention , may fall under the jurisdiction of the house energy and commerce and senate help committees .

traditionally , most foreign aid appropriations fall under the jurisdiction of the sfops subcommittees , with food assistance appropriated by the agriculture subcommittees .

as noted earlier , however , certain military , global health , and other activities that have been reported as foreign aid have been appropriated through other subcommittees in recent years , including the defense and the labor , health and human services , education and related agencies subcommittees .

 ( for current information on sfops appropriations legislation , see crs report r45168 , department of state , foreign operations and related programs: fy2019 budget and appropriations , by susan b. epstein , marian l. lawson , and cory r .

gill. ) .

the most significant permanent foreign aid authorization laws are the foreign assistance act of 1961 , covering most bilateral economic and security assistance programs ( p.l .

87-195 ; 22 u.s.c .

2151 ) ; the arms export control act ( 1976 ) , authorizing military sales and financing ( p.l .

90-629 ; 22 u.s.c .

2751 ) ; the agricultural trade development and assistance act of 1954 ( p.l .

480 ) , covering food aid ( p.l .

83-480 ; 7 u.s.c .

1691 ) ; and the bretton woods agreement act ( 1945 ) , authorizing u.s. participation in multilateral development banks ( p.l .

79-171 ; 22 u.s.c .

286 ) .

in the past , congress usually scheduled debates every two years on omnibus foreign aid legislation that amended these permanent authorization measures .

congress has not enacted into law a comprehensive foreign assistance authorization measure since 1985 , although foreign aid authorizing bills have passed the house or senate , or both , on numerous occasions .

foreign aid bills have frequently stalled at some point in the debate because of controversial issues , a tight legislative calendar , or executive - legislative foreign policy disputes .

in contrast , dod assistance is authorized in annual national defense authorization legislation .

in lieu of approving a broad state department / usaid authorization bill , congress has on occasion authorized major foreign assistance initiatives for specific regions , countries , or aid sectors in stand - alone legislation or within an appropriation bill .

among these are the seed act of 1989 ( p.l .

101-179 ; 22 u.s.c .

5401 ) ; the freedom support act of 1992 ( p.l .

102-511 ; 22 u.s.c .

5801 ) ; the united states leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-25 ; 22 u.s.c .

7601 ) ; the tom lantos and henry j. hyde united states global leadership against hiv / aids , tuberculosis , and malaria reauthorization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-293 ) ; the millennium challenge act of 2003 ( division d , title vi of p.l .

108-199 ) ; the enhanced partnership with pakistan act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-73 ; 22 u.s.c .

8401 ) ; the global food security act of 2016 ( p.l .

114-195 ; 22 u.s.c .

9306 ) , and the build act ( p.l .

115-254 ) .

in the absence of regular enactment of foreign aid authorization bills , appropriation measures considered annually within the sfops spending bill have assumed greater significance for congress in influencing u.s. foreign aid policy .

not only do appropriations bills set spending levels each year for nearly every foreign assistance account , sfops appropriations also incorporate new policy initiatives that would otherwise be debated and enacted as part of authorizing legislation .

appendix a .

data table appendix b .

common foreign assistance abbreviation .

