the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) plays a central role in shaping and implementing u.s. global health policy .

the agency is one of three agencies tasked with leading the global health initiative ( ghi ) , an initiative created by the obama administration to coordinate ongoing presidential health initiatives and raise investments in other health areas , including maternal and child health , neglected tropical diseases , and family planning and reproductive health ( figure 1 ) .

cdc is also an implementing partner in three presidential initiatives that comprise the bulk of u.s. global health assistance: the president's malaria initiative ( pmi ) and the neglected tropical diseases ( ntd ) program , both of which are coordinated by usaid , and the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) , which is coordinated by the state department .

in addition , cdc manages its own bilateral health programs .

this report highlights the health - related activities conducted by cdc , outlines how much the agency has spent on such efforts from fy2001 to fy2011 , and highlights fy2012 proposed funding levels .

since 1958 , cdc has been engaged in global health efforts .

at first , cdc's global health engagement focused primarily on malaria control .

cdc's global health mandate has grown considerably since then .

in 1962 , cdc played a key role in the international effort that led to smallpox eradication and in 1967 expanded its surveillance efforts overseas to include other diseases , when the foreign quarantine service was transferred to cdc from the u.s. treasury department .

as the mission of cdc has expanded , so have the authorities under which it operates .

today , cdc is a partner in a number of global disease control and prevention efforts , including those related to hiv / aids , influenza ( flu ) , polio , malaria , measles , tuberculosis ( tb ) , and emerging diseases .

in addition , cdc's global health efforts aim to address other global health challenges , such as chronic disease , injury prevention , child and maternal health , and environmental health concerns .

congress appropriates funds to cdc for global health efforts through labor , health and human services , and education ( labor - hhs ) appropriations .

the bulk of funds for cdc's global health programs are provided by congress to the center for global health , historically through five main budget lines: global hiv / aids , global malaria , global disease detection , global immunization , and other global health .

cdc programs are implemented bilaterally and in cooperation with other u.s. agencies , international organizations , foreign governments , foundations , and nonprofit organizations .

the section below explains these programs , and the appendix illustrates funding levels between fy2001 and fy2012 .

in addition to direct congressional appropriations , the cdc center for global health receives funding from other sources in support of its global health initiatives .

for example , cdc receives support transferred from the office of the global aids coordinator ( ogac ) at the u.s. department of state , for the implementation of pepfar programs , and from usaid for its role in pmi and the ntd program , among other programs .

these funds are not included in the appendix .

from fy2001 to fy2011 , congress provided cdc roughly $3.5 billion for global health activities .

over that decade , cdc increased the size and scope of its global health programs .

in fy2001 , for example , cdc spent $224.1 million on three key global health programs ( hiv / aids , immunizations , and malaria ) , with nearly half of those funds aimed at hiv / aids programs ( figure 2 ) .

by fy2011 , cdc's global health budget had grown by nearly 50% , having reached $330.1 million , and had come to support two additional health areas: global disease detection and health system strengthening through "other health programs. .

in the early 2000s , concerns about hiv / aids dominated discussions about u.s. global health engagement and prompted the development of several initiatives , including the life initiative ( clinton administration ) , international mother and child hiv prevention initiative ( bush administration ) , and the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( bush administration ) .

through these efforts , congress provided substantial increases for tackling hiv / aids through ongoing u.s. bilateral efforts , coordinated government - wide programs ( like pepfar ) , and multilateral initiatives like the global fund to fight aids , tuberculosis and malaria .

the bulk of the increases , however , were provided through the state department - coordinated pepfar .

by 2004 , global infectious disease outbreaks prompted greater congressional support for programs that would bolster countries' capacity to respond to infectious disease outbreaks .

in that year , congress began funding gdd and "other health programs. .

the growth in spending on such programs meant that hiv / aids ultimately became a smaller portion of cdc's global health budget ( figure 2 ) .

according to the fy2011 operating plan of cdc , congress made available $340.2 million for cdc's global health programs .

the administration requests that congress provide about $381.2 million for cdc's global health programs in fy2012 , some 10% more than fy2010 ( table 1 ) .

the fy2012 budget request included several programmatic changes .

first , cdc began requesting support for programs aimed at addressing parasitic diseases ( like neglected tropical diseases ) along with requests for global malaria programs .

in the fy2011 operating plan , cdc followed this new budgetary structure to report on fy2010 and fy2011 funding levels for activities related to malaria and parasitic diseases .

for comparability , malaria is a subset of the parasitic diseases and malaria budget category in table 1 .

the fy2012 budget request also renamed the "other global health" program as the "global public health capacity development" program .

the administration requests that this new program combine support for ongoing efforts related to feltp and smdp with activities related to water and sanitation , and maternal and child health .

the agency also requests that two activities currently funded through the hhs office of global health affairs — the afghan health initiative and health diplomacy — be funded through this new budgetary category .

