in response to a deteriorating national economy and recession , in february 2009 the congress passed and president obama signed into law the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

among the purposes identified in the legislation are preservation and creation of jobs and promotion of u.s. economic recovery , and investment in transportation , environmental , and other infrastructure that will provide long - term economic benefits .

this report identifies funding for water infrastructure programs and projects included in the bill .

the legislation directed additional appropriations to a number of existing federal programs that either directly invest in water infrastructure projects or provide assistance to states and localities for such activities .

water infrastructure funding , which was available for obligation through september 30 , 2010 , is summarized in table 1 .

the infrastructure activities discussed here comprise one of many broad categories of infrastructure that received additional funding under the legislation , for construction , repair , and modernization of a range of infrastructure categories both traditional ( eg , highways , airports , passenger rail , and schools ) and less traditional ( eg , broadband and the electric power transmission grid ) .

these provisions of the legislation reflected a concept that had drawn much attention by policymakers as one option for addressing the nation's faltering economic conditions: the concept of countering the effect of the current recession with increased government spending on public works in order to create jobs while also promoting long - term economic growth .

proponents argued that states and localities had hundreds of infrastructure projects that were "ready to go" to construction in 90 or 120 days , except for funding , and thus could contribute quickly to job creation and economic stimulus , especially in the construction sector that has been particularly hard hit by the recession .

during house and senate debate on the legislation , both supporters and critics favored more infrastructure spending , with some critics urging changes to increase short - term , stimulative provisions of the bill , including more targeted infrastructure spending , and less spending on activities with less certain quick stimulative effect .

nevertheless , in the floor debates concerning the overall size and composition of the legislation , only one specific proposal to increase infrastructure funds in the bill was adopted .

the enacted legislation included some additional funds for high - speed rail projects that were not included in the house or senate versions .

the federal government has a long history of involvement in water resource development projects , such as dams , levees , coastal protection , and navigation works , to facilitate navigation , expand irrigated agriculture , and reduce flood losses .

more recently , congress has authorized and funded federal projects and programs to restore aquatic ecosystems , develop water recycling projects , and construct western rural water supply projects .

at the federal level , these activities are principally the responsibility of two agencies .

under its civil works program , the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps , department of defense ) constructs and operates primarily navigation , flood , coastal protection , and aquatic restoration throughout the country .

the bureau of reclamation ( reclamation , department of the interior ) is authorized to construct and manage multi - purpose projects serving irrigation , municipal and industrial water supply , flood control , power production , and recreation purposes in the 17 western states .

congress provides appropriations to support these activities through annual energy and water development appropriations bills .

the economic recovery legislation provided supplemental funding above regular appropriations for the corps , reclamation , and other water resources activities at the department of agriculture's natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) and the department of state's international boundary and water commission ( ibwc ) .

the general provisions of p.l .

111-5 concerning preference for projects that can start quickly , obligation deadlines , and buy american and prevailing wage requirements , described above , also applied to all of these water resources projects and activities .

the infrastructure funding provisions of the recovery act raise some general issues .

funding infrastructure is a long - term investment , not quick - fix spending , that should lead to something durable , useful , and financially productive .

water infrastructure projects often involve complicated planning and construction efforts that span multiple years .

the long - term nature of such investments can be at odds with the stimulus goal of quickly injecting money into the economy .

thus , one question in debating infrastructure spending as part of economic recovery is , what is truly stimulative ? .

critics have contended that the haste to fund "ready to go" projects would likely to result in spending on many projects with marginal value , such as projects with plans that have been backlogged for some time because they lack sufficient merit , but were provided opportunity for funding when arra was enacted .

assessing the economic and environmental benefits of arra projects will take place for some time in the future , particularly because capital projects typically are multi - year investments .

arra includes a number of oversight measures .

these appear to be focused on the important issues of identifying waste , fraud , and abuse , and ensuring compliance with applicable standards and competition requirements in contracts and grants , but not necessarily on evaluating or ensuring the quality of funded projects .

that responsibility resides with officials at all levels of government , including those who are making project funding decisions , and those charged with providing oversight and monitoring of grants and contracts .

federal agencies are likely to face challenges in managing recipients' activities in order to achieve arra's goals and requirements , while ensuring that expenditures begin quickly .

arra provided emergency supplemental appropriations for fy2009 and fy2010 for a number of existing federal programs .

the law was unusual in many respects , including the fact that the fy2009 supplemental funds in the legislation were enacted before resolution of the regular fy2009 appropriations for most agencies , which were contained in a full - year omnibus appropriations bill that the president signed on march 11 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

the regular fy2009 appropriations for water infrastructure programs provided in that legislation were about the same as in fy2008 .

as described in this report , some of the water infrastructure funds included in the recovery act represented a significant increase above recent program funding levels — for some , from three to four times higher than the fy2009 regular appropriation amount .

many infrastructure stakeholder groups then urged congress to sustain similar high levels in regular appropriations in fy2010 and beyond , because infrastructure projects typically involve outlays over multiple years .

they argued that individual project planning and implementation would be disrupted if federal assistance is uneven or unpredictable , very large one year and much lower the next year .

but because the infrastructure funds in p.l .

111-5 are to be available for obligation through fy2010 and will be spent out over several years , some policymakers argued that it would not be necessary to appropriate increased levels for these programs in fy2010 .

still , with administration support in the fy2010 budget request , fy2010 appropriations for the water infrastructure programs discussed in this report , which were enacted later in 2009 , were for the most part slightly higher than regular fy2009 appropriations , but generally not as large as the substantial supplemental amounts that agencies received under arra .

whether it will be possible to sustain high spending levels for these programs in future years , beyond the period covered by p.l .

111-5 , is uncertain because of the significant fiscal challenges that policymakers face .

moreover , changes in congress resulting from the 2010 election are likely to alter the political dynamics and future debates on many issues , possibly including infrastructure .

the 112 th congress is expected to focus extensively on reducing federal spending .

unclear for now is whether such actions will be applied to water infrastructure programs equally with others , or whether infrastructure investments will be perceived as supporting economic activity by increasing the capital stock and raising productivity and thus be protected from major reductions , or even be provided with greater federal resources .

