this report provides background information and issues for congress on the navy's desire to homeport a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier ( cvn ) at mayport , fl .

prior to the submission of the fy2013 budget , navy plans called for having mayport ready to homeport a cvn in 2019 .

the navy's proposed fy2014 budget , like the navy's proposed fy2013 budget , requested no funding for military construction ( milcon ) projects required to homeport a cvn at mayport .

the navy's fy2013 budget deferred the navy's plan to homeport a cvn at mayport , and the navy's fy2013-fy2017 future years defense plan ( fydp ) contained no funding for milcon projects required to homeport a cvn at mayport .

the navy stated in its fy2013 budget submission: "although the fy 2013 budget does not contain a construction project supporting the homeporting of a cvn in mayport , fl , the department [of the navy] is committed to the requirement and policy to strategically disperse cvns on each coast .

this is a deferral at this time due to fiscal constraints. .

the navy's desire to homeport a cvn at mayport is an issue of strong interest to certain members of congress from florida and virginia .

transferring a cvn from norfolk , va , to mayport would shift from norfolk to mayport the local economic activity associated with homeporting a cvn , which some sources estimate as being worth hundreds of millions of dollars per year .

the navy's desire to homeport a cvn at mayport has become an issue of strong interest to certain members of congress from florida and virginia .

certain members of congress from florida have expressed support for the navy's desire to homeport a cvn at mayport , arguing ( as have dod and the navy ) that the benefits in terms of mitigating risks to the navy's atlantic fleet cvns are worth the costs associated with moving a cvn to mayport .

certain members of congress from virginia have expressed skepticism regarding , or opposition to , the navy's desire to homeport a cvn at mayport , arguing that the benefits in terms of mitigating risks to the navy's atlantic fleet cvns are questionable or uncertain , and that the funding needed to implement the proposal could achieve greater benefits if it were spent on other navy priorities .

for examples of member views on the issue , see appendix e .

since a key reason the navy wants to transfer a cvn to mayport is to hedge against the risk of a catastrophic event that could damage the navy's cvn homeporting facilities in the hampton roads area of virginia , potential questions for congress to consider include the following: what is the risk of a catastrophic event damaging atlantic coast cvn homeporting facilities , and how might that risk be altered by homeporting a cvn at mayport ? .

if a catastrophic event were to damage atlantic coast cvn homeporting facilities , what would be the operational impact on the navy , and how quickly could the navy repair the damage and return to normal operations ? .

are the costs associated with homeporting a cvn at mayport worth the benefits in terms of hedging against the risk of a catastrophic event damaging atlantic coast cvn homeporting facilities ? .

in assessing these and other questions relating to the navy's desire to transfer a cvn to mayport , congress may consider several specific issues , including the following: the navy's basing decision process ; the navy's strategic laydown analysis ; the navy's estimated recurring and nonrecurring costs for homeporting a cvn at mayport ; transit times from norfolk and mayport to key destinations ; the vulnerability of norfolk and mayport to natural and man - made catastrophes ; other factors that might differentiate norfolk and mayport ; the final environmental impact statement ( feis ) on mayport homeporting options ; potential options for mayport homeporting other than those studied in the feis ; and potential alternative uses of the funding that would be required for homeporting a cvn at mayport .

each of these specific issues is discussed below .

the navy's proposed fy2014 budget , like the navy's proposed fy2013 budget , requested no funding for milcon projects required specifically to homeport a cvn at mayport .

the navy's fy2013 budget deferred the navy's plan to homeport a cvn at mayport , and the navy's fy2013-fy2017 future years defense plan ( fydp ) contained no funding for milcon projects required to homeport a cvn at mayport .

the navy stated in its fy2013 budget submission: "although the fy 2013 budget does not contain a construction project supporting the homeporting of a cvn in mayport , fl , the department [of the navy] is committed to the requirement and policy to strategically disperse cvns on each coast .

this is a deferral at this time due to fiscal constraints. .

the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

113-102 of june 7 , 2013 ) on the fy2014 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

1960 ) , recommended no funding for milcon projects required specifically to homeport a cvn at mayport ( see the list of navy milcon projects in florida on pages 490-491 , which shows funding only for projects that are for other purposes ) .

the senate armed services committee , in its report ( s.rept .

113-44 of june 20 , 2013 ) on the fy2014 national defense authorization act ( s. 1197 ) , recommended no funding for milcon projects required specifically to homeport a cvn at mayport ( see the list of navy milcon projects in florida on page 399 , which shows funding only for projects that are for other purposes ) .

the final version of the fy2014 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

3304 / p.l .

113-66 of december 26 , 2013 ) recommended no funding for milcon projects required specifically to homeport a cvn at mayport ( see the list of navy milcon projects in florida on pdf page 506 of 532 of the explanatory statement accompanying h.r .

3304 , which shows funding only for projects that are for other purposes ) .

the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

113-90 of may 28 , 2013 ) on the fy2014 military construction and veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act ( h.r .

2216 ) , recommended no funding for milcon projects required specifically to homeport a cvn at mayport ( see the list of navy milcon projects in florida on page 79 , which shows funding only for projects that are for other purposes ) .

the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

113-48 of june 27 , 2013 ) on the fy2014 military construction and veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act ( h.r .

2216 ) , recommended no funding for milcon projects required specifically to homeport a cvn at mayport ( see the list of navy milcon projects in florida on pages 76-77 , which shows funding only for projects that are for other purposes ) .

the final version of the fy2014 military construction and veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations act ( division j of h.r .

3547 / p.l .

113-76 of january 17 , 2014 ) provided no funding for milcon projects required specifically to homeport a cvn at mayport ( see the list of navy milcon projects in florida on pdf page 15 of 228 of the explanatory statement for divisions j , k , and l of h.r .

3547 , which shows funding only for projects that are for other purposes ) .

appendix a. fy2007-fy2012 legislative activity fy2012 fy2012 funding request the navy's proposed fy2012 budget requests $14.998 million in milcon funding for the massey avenue corridor improvements project , a roadway construction project that is part of the navy's plan for establishing a cvn home port at mayport .

in addition , the navy states that of the $84.36 million in funding requested by the navy for fy2012 for milcon planning and design activities , about $2 million is requested for the project to establish a cvn home port at mayport .

fy2012 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

1540 / p.l .

112-81 ) house the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

112-78 of may 17 , 2011 ) on h.r .

1540 , recommends rejecting the navy's fy2012 request for $14.998 million in milcon funding for the massey avenue corridor improvements project ( page 471 ) .

the committee's report also recommends reducing by $15 million the navy's fy2012 request for $84.36 million in milcon funding for planning and design activities ( page 472 ) .

although the navy states that about $2 million of the $84.36 million requested for planning and design activities is for establishing a cvn home port at mayport , the committee's recommended reduction of $15 million appears to reflect a committee view that $15 million of the $84.36 million requested for planning and design activities is for work to facilitate the homeporting of a cvn at mayport .

the committee's report states: the committee recommends reduction or elimination of funding for several projects contained in the budget request for military construction and family housing .

these reductions include: ( 1 ) $14,998,000 for the massey avenue corridor improvements and [2] $15,000,000 in planning and design for construction activities at naval station mayport , florida .

the budget request included $14,998,000 to construct road improvements at naval station mayport , florida , and $15,000,000 to support planning and design efforts to facilitate the homeporting of a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier .

the committee notes that the department of the navy has located a variety of strategic assets at one homeport for many years across the range of navy assets to include aviation , surface , and subsurface combatants .

furthermore , the committee notes that the department of the navy has intentionally rejected the notion of strategic homeporting and has closed multiple locations that were deemed strategic homeports through the base realignment and closure process .

the committee believes that the department of the navy's assertion that strategic homeporting is required to maintain strategic access is inconsistent with previous naval decisions .

as to costs , the onetime construction costs to implement the department of the navy's recommendation exceeds $500.0 million , and the recurring costs include a requirement to temporarily relocate nuclear capable shipyard workers from norfolk , virginia , to mayport , florida , to complete nuclear maintenance requirements .

the committee believes that the overall costs to build a redundant carrier homeport do not appear to be in the government's best interest .

accordingly , the committee recommends no funds , a reduction of $29,998,000 , for this project .

 ( pages 277-278 ) senate ( s. 1867 , as reported ) s. 1867 , an original measure reported by senator levin on november 15 , 2011 , without written report , in effect supersedes s. 1253 ( see below ) .

s. 1867 recommends approving the navy's fy2012 request for $14.998 million in milcon funding for the massey avenue corridor improvements project .

 ( see section 4501 of the bill .

in the printed version of the bill , the relevant table within this section appears on page 667. ) .

the bill recommends reducing by $15 million the navy's fy2012 request for $84.36 million in milcon funding for planning and design activities .

 ( see section 4501 of the bill .

in the printed version of the bill , the relevant table within this section appears on page 668. ) .

senate ( s. 1867 , floor consideration ) on november 30 , 2011 , as part of its consideration of s. 1867 , the senate adopted by unanimous consent s.amdt .

1210 , which requires a navy analysis of the costs and benefits of stationing additional ddg - 51 class destroyers at mayport and a subsequent gao assessment of the navy analysis .

the text of s.amdt .

1210 is as follows: at the end of subtitle c of title x , add the following: sec .

1024 .

assessment of stationing of additional ddg - 51 class destroyers at naval station mayport , florida .

 ( a ) navy assessment required. — ( 1 ) in general. — not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of the navy shall conduct an analysis of the costs and benefits of stationing additional ddg - 51 class destroyers at naval station mayport , florida .

 ( 2 ) elements. — the analysis required by paragraph ( 1 ) shall include , at a minimum , the following: ( a ) consideration of the negative effects on the ship repair industrial base at naval station mayport caused by the retirement of ffg - 7 class frigates and the procurement delays of the littoral combat ship , including , in particular , the increase in costs ( which would be passed on to the taxpayer ) of reconstituting the ship repair industrial base at naval station mayport following the projected drastic decrease in workload .

 ( b ) updated consideration of life extensions of ffg - 7 class frigates in light of continued delays in deliveries of the littoral combat ship deliveries .

 ( c ) consideration of the possibility of bringing additional surface warships to naval station mayport for maintenance with the consequence of spreading the ship repair workload appropriately amongst the various public and private shipyards and ensuring the long - term health of the shipyard in mayport .

 ( b ) comptroller general of the united states assessment. — not later than 120 days after the submittal of the report required by subsection ( a ) , the comptroller general of the united states shall submit to congress an assessment by the comptroller general of the report , including a determination whether or not the report complies with applicable best practices .

senate ( s. 1253 ) s. 1253 has been , in effect , superseded by s. 1867 ( see above ) .

s. 1253 as reported by the senate armed services committee ( s.rept .

112-26 of june 22 , 2011 ) recommends approving the navy's fy2012 request for $14.998 million in milcon funding for the massey avenue corridor improvements project and navy's fy2012 request for $84.36 million in milcon funding for planning and design activities .

 ( see section 4501 of the bill as reported by the committee .

in the printed version of the bill as reported by the committee , the relevant table within this section appears on pages 651-652. ) .

the committee's report states: comptroller general report on aircraft carrier homeporting on the east coast the committee directs the comptroller general to conduct an independent analysis of alternatives on the department of the navy's plan to establish a second east coast homeport for a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier .

the analysis should assess , at a minimum , the strategic , fiscal , and operational risks , requirements , and constraints the navy's plan seeks to address .

the committee directs that this report be provided to the congressional defense committees by february 1 , 2012 .

the report will be submitted in an unclassified format , with the provision for a classified annex if necessary .

 ( page 241 ) conference the conference report ( h.rept .

112-329 of december 12 , 2011 ) on h.r .

1540 / p.l .

112-81 of december 31 , 2011 , recommends approving the navy's fy2012 request for $14.998 million in milcon funding for the massey avenue corridor improvements project ( page 952 ) and reducing by $15 million the navy's fy2012 request for $84.36 million in milcon funding for planning and design activities ( page 953 ) .

the report states: the conferees determined that the massey avenue corridor improvements project had merit to support requirements at the naval station mayport , florida , whether or not a nuclear powered aircraft carrier was home ported there .

 ( page 757 ) section 1017 of the conference report states: sec .

1017 .

assessment of stationing of additional ddg - 51 class destroyers at naval station mayport , florida .

 ( a ) navy assessment required - ( 1 ) in general - not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of the navy shall conduct an analysis of the costs and benefits of stationing additional ddg - 51 class destroyers at naval station mayport , florida .

 ( 2 ) elements - the analysis required by paragraph ( 1 ) shall include , at a minimum , the following: ( a ) consideration of the negative effects on the ship repair industrial base at naval station mayport caused by the retirement of ffg - 7 class frigates and the procurement delays of the littoral combat ship , including , in particular , the increase in costs ( which would be passed on to the taxpayer ) of reconstituting the ship repair industrial base at naval station mayport following the projected drastic decrease in workload .

 ( b ) updated consideration of life extensions of ffg - 7 class frigates in light of continued delays in deliveries of the littoral combat ship deliveries .

 ( c ) consideration of the possibility of bringing additional surface warships to naval station mayport for maintenance with the consequence of spreading the ship repair workload appropriately amongst the various public and private shipyards and ensuring the long - term health of the shipyard in mayport .

 ( b ) comptroller general of the united states assessment - not later than 120 days after the submittal of the report required by subsection ( a ) , the comptroller general of the united states shall submit to congress an assessment by the comptroller general of the report , including a determination whether or not the report complies with applicable best practices .

fy2012 military construction and veterans affairs and related agencies appropriations act ( h.r .

2055 / p.l .

112-74 ) house the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

112-94 of may 31 , 2011 ) on h.r .

2055 , recommends approving the navy's fy2012 request for $14.998 million in milcon funding for the massey avenue corridor improvements project ( page 74 ) and the navy's fy2012 request for $84.36 million in milcon funding for planning and design activities ( page 86 ) .

senate the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

112-29 of june 30 , 2011 ) on h.r .

2055 , recommends approving the navy's fy2012 request for $14.998 million in milcon funding for the massey avenue corridor improvements project ( page 80 ) and the navy's fy2012 request for $84.36 million in milcon funding for planning and design activities ( page 105 ) .

conference in final action , h.r .

2055 became a consolidated appropriations act incorporating nine appropriations bills , including the fy2012 military construction and veterans affairs and related agencies appropriations act itself , which was incorporated as division h. the conference report ( h.rept .

112-331 of december 15 , 2011 ) on h.r .

2055 / p.l .

112-74 of december 23 , 2011 , approves the navy's fy2012 request for $14.998 million in milcon funding for the massey avenue corridor improvements project ( page 1271 ) and the navy's fy2012 request for $84.36 million in milcon funding for planning and design activities ( page 1283 ) .

fy2011 fy2011 funding request of the $120.05 million in funding requested by the navy for fy2011 for milcon planning and design activities , about $2 million is for the project to establish a cvn home port at mayport .

fy2011 dod and full - year continuing appropriations act ( h.r .

1473 ) section 2001 of title x of division b of the fy2011 department of defense and full - year continuing appropriations act ( h.r .

1473 of the 112 th congress , introduced on april 11 , 2011 , and passed by the house and senate on april 14 , 2011 ) provides $3,303.611 million for the military construction , navy and marine corps account , or $575.493 million less than the requested figure of $3,879.104 million .

the text of h.r .

1473 does not provide line - item funding details for the military construction accounts .

fy2011 military construction , veterans affairs , and related agencies appropriations bill ( h.r .

5822 / s. 3615 ) house the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-559 of july 22 , 2010 ) on h.r .

5822 of the 111 th congress , recommends $123.75 million — a $3.7-million increase to the navy's fy2011 request — for milcon planning and design activities ( page 124 ) .

the report does not discuss the issue of homeporting a cvn at mayport .

senate the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

111-226 of july 19 , 2010 ) on s. 3615 , recommends $124.148 million — a $4.098-million increase to the navy's fy2011 request — for milcon planning and design activities ( page 102 ) .

the report does not discuss the issue of homeporting a cvn at mayport .

fy2011 ike skelton national defense authorization act ( h.r .

6523 / p.l .

111-383 ) house ( h.r .

5136 ) section 2201 ( c ) ( 4 ) of the fy2011 defense authorization bill ( h.r .

5136 ) as reported by the house armed services committee ( h.rept .

111-491 of may 21 , 2010 ) states: "none of the funds appropriated pursuant to this authorization of appropriations may be used for architectural and engineering services and construction design of any military construction project necessary to establish a homeport for a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier at naval station mayport , florida. .

h.rept .

111-491 includes report language requiring the navy and gao to submit reports concerning the costs and maintenance impacts of homeporting a cvn at mayport .

h.rept .

111-491 states: east coast homeport cost assessment the committee is concerned that the full costs associated with the planned second east coast homeport for a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier has been underestimated , introducing a measure of budgetary risk and potential shortfalls in future year's defense budget submissions .

the committee directs that , not later than february 15 , 2011 , the government accountability office ( gao ) submit to the congressional defense committees a report containing an independent estimate of the total direct and indirect costs to be incurred by the federal government in homeporting a nuclear carrier at mayport , florida .

 ( page 507 ) the report also states: naval station mayport , florida , homeporting alternatives the committee directs the secretary of the navy to report to the congressional defense committees , not later than december 15 , 2010 , on the implementation and recurring costs of homeporting alternatives including the following homeporting options at naval station mayport: ( 1 ) nuclear - powered aircraft carrier ; ( 2 ) littoral combat ships ; ( 3 ) non - nuclear options considered in the "environmental impact statement for homeporting of additional surface ships at naval station mayport" signed january 14 , 2009 ; and ( 4 ) other options that the secretary considers appropriate .

such a review shall include an assessment of one - time and recurring operation and maintenance requirements and military construction requirements associated with the various alternatives .

this report shall review the benefits to the northeast florida ship maintenance industrial base that could result from the homeporting of non - nuclear vessels at the installation .

the committee notes that the estimates for the costs of homeporting a nuclear aircraft carrier at naval station mayport continue to rise , and may cost as much as $1 billion in military construction and recurring operation and maintenance costs .

the committee believes that a better assessment of these cost estimates of the various alternatives is warranted .

the committee also believes that a complement of non - nuclear - powered surface combatants could be more compatible with the existing support structure at naval station mayport and less expensive than duplicating a nuclear maintenance capability that already exists on the east coast .

the committee also notes that the northeast florida ship maintenance industrial base could be enhanced if the department of the navy were to base non - nuclear - powered ships at naval station mayport .

naval station mayport already has the pier infrastructure necessary to homeport non - nuclear - powered surface combatant ships , and the maintenance requirements of these alternative homeporting solutions appear to be more closely matched to the expertise of the existing local ship repair industrial base .

finally , the committee understands that a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier homeported at naval station mayport could undergo at the installation only two of the four types of scheduled carrier maintenance availabilities: the carrier incremental availability and the planned incremental availability .

these activities would likely provide the local private shipyards with combined yearly revenues of only approximately $20 million .

furthermore , the navy has indicated that the remaining two types of scheduled nuclear maintenance availabilities can be conducted only in the norfolk area , requiring a temporary shift in homeport to norfolk to complete these availabilities .

the committee believes that such a temporary shift in homeport could present an additional requirement on carrier crews and their families that could be avoided if naval station mayport were resourced with non - nuclear - powered ships .

 ( pages 510-511 ) the report also states: use of temporary shipyard workforce for nuclear maintenance according to the final environmental impact statement for the proposed homeporting of additional surface ships at naval station mayport , florida , homeporting of a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier ( cvn ) would result in "temporary surges of maintenance employees associated with the three - year depot - level maintenance cycle for the cvn. .

the committee is concerned about the impact the addition of depot - level workload at mayport would have on the sustainability , efficiency , capabilities , and stability of the fly - away teams from the nuclear propulsion depot maintenance workforce used under the navy's "one nuclear shipyard" concept .

the committee directs the comptroller general of the united states to provide an assessment to the congressional defense committees by february 15 , 2011 , of the readiness and cost impacts of cvn homeporting and maintenance at naval station mayport on the u.s. nuclear power - plant depot maintenance workforce .

 ( page 254 ) the report also states: ship maintenance industrial base support the committee is concerned that the navy's recommendation to homeport a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier ( cvn ) at naval station mayport ( navsta mayport ) , florida , could result in the relocation of a critical warfighting asset to a region that may lack the ship maintenance industrial base necessary to meet the specialized repair , maintenance , and related readiness requirements of a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier .

even though the navy plans to build the necessary facilities at considerable cost , no plan has been presented to address the lack of a trained , highly skilled workforce necessary to staff those facilities and maintain these complex systems .

as a result , the committee understands that implementation of the navy's recommendation would require maintenance teams from other nuclear - powered aircraft carrier homeport locations to be sent to navsta mayport temporarily to support maintenance requirements , potentially at significant additional cost .

additionally , the committee is aware that the existing private ship maintenance assets located in the jacksonville , florida , region has evolved to support the current fleet of non - nuclear - powered ships at navsta mayport .

under current ship retirement plans , these private ship maintenance capabilities will face severe work reductions , placing their continued existence in jeopardy .

the committee does not believe that placing a critical warfighting asset at a location with inadequate maintenance support capabilities , implementing a recommendation that could result in significantly increased ship maintenance costs , or allowing the nation's ship maintenance industrial base to erode are acceptable outcomes .

therefore , the committee directs the secretary of the navy to provide a report to the congressional defense committees by december 15 , 2010 , on the ability of the private ship maintenance industrial base in northeast florida to support nuclear - powered aircraft carrier maintenance requirements , the likely costs to the navy that could result from establishing such maintenance capabilities within the local industrial base , and the impacts on costs and workforce scheduling that could result if the navy must provide the maintenance workforce from another nuclear - powered aircraft carrier homeport location .

in addition , the secretary is directed to submit a copy of the report to the comptroller general of the united states concurrent with submission to the congressional defense committees .

the committee directs the comptroller general to provide an assessment of the report to the congressional defense committees within 90 days after receiving the report by the secretary of the navy .

the assessment should: ( 1 ) review the navy's report for thoroughness and completeness ; ( 2 ) assess the ability of the northeast florida industrial base to develop capabilities to support nuclear - powered aircraft carrier maintenance requirements ; ( 3 ) assess how , over a 10-year budget window , the construction of cvn maintenance facilities at navsta mayport will affect cvn maintenance costs , including recurring and non - recurring costs ; and ( 4 ) assess whether homeporting a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier at navsta mayport would provide sufficient workload to allow the local ship repair industrial base to remain viable in light of current ship retirement plans .

 ( pages 260-261 ) senate ( s. 3454 ) the fy2011 defense authorization bill ( s. 3454 ) as reported by the senate armed services committee ( s.rept .

111-201 of june 4 , 2010 ) does not contain a provision similar to section 2201 ( c ) ( 4 ) of h.r .

5136 as reported by the house armed services committee ( see above ) .

s.rept .

111-201 does not discuss the issue of homeporting a cvn at mayport .

final version ( h.r .

6523 / p.l .

111-383 ) the joint explanatory statement of the house and senate armed services committees on h.r .

6523 / p.l .

111-383 of january 7 , 2011 , stated: the house bill contained a provision ( sec .

2201 ) that would authorize appropriations for the active component military construction and family housing projects of the navy and marine corps for fiscal year 2011 .

this provision would also provide an overall limitation on the cost of the fiscal year 2011 military construction and family housing projects authorized for the active - duty component of the navy and marine corps .

the senate committee - reported bill contained a similar provision ( sec .

2204 ) .

the agreement includes the house provision with an amendment deleting a restriction on architectural and engineering services and design funds .

while the agreement imposes no restrictions on architectural and engineering services and construction design funds , such restrictions may be warranted in the future .

the lack of restriction in this agreement for such funds to establish a homeport for a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier at naval station mayport , florida , should not imply a position either for or against homeporting .

such a position will be determined should military construction projects be included in future budget submissions .

we will review carefully any such projects that may be included in future budget requests , while closely examining evolving military construction cost estimates needed to achieve this capability .

fy2010 fy2010 military construction funding request the navy's proposed fy2010 budget requested $46.303 million in milcon funding for channel dredging at mayport to support the ability of a cvn to enter mayport .

the budget also requested $29.682 million in milcon funding to repair a wharf ( wharf charlie ) at mayport , but this request was not related to mayport's ability to support a cvn — it was related to mayport's current role as a home port to cgs , ddgs , and ffgs .

together , a total of $75.985 million was requested for channel dredging ( cvn - related ) and wharf repair ( not cvn - related ) at mayport .

fy2010 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

2647 / p.l .

111-84 ) house the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-166 of june 18 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2647 , recommended rejecting the administration's fy2010 request for $46.3 million in milcon funding for channel dredging at mayport .

 ( page 496 ) the committee's report stated: the budget request included $46,303,000 to support construction dredging of the naval station mayport turning basin , inner channel , and outer channel .

the committee is concerned that a decision to complete the construction dredging of naval station mayport would predispose a quadrennial defense review's determination as to an east coast nuclear aircraft carrier basing .

accordingly , the committee recommends $0 , a reduction of $46,303,000 , to support this project .

 ( page 516 ) .

the committee's report also stated: comptroller general assessment of military basing decision process the committee directs the comptroller general of the united states to submit a report to the congressional defense committees by may 1 , 2010 , on the military services' decision process used in making basing determinations , such as the decision to establish a second homeport for a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier on the east coast of the united states .

the committee believes this decision raises significant strategic , cost , and risk questions .

it is not clear to the committee how the navy has been determining its basing decisions .

for example , the navy's consideration of whether to homeport additional surface ships at naval station mayport ( navsta mayport ) , florida , appears to lack strategic depth .

the committee notes that homeporting a nuclear aircraft carrier at navsta mayport would cost at least $560.0 million in military construction , require the dredging and disposal of approximately 5.2 million cubic yards of dredge material , and increase long - term operation and maintenance costs .

the navy does not appear to have carried out a comprehensive process to determine the need for such expenditures with consideration for strategic rationale , fiscal realities , environmental impacts , and personnel impacts associated with the decision .

in light of the substantial costs and the strategic and community impacts that result from basing decisions , the committee directs the comptroller general to conduct a study on the manner in which the military services consider and utilize the following in making basing decisions: changes to military force structure , strategic imperative and risk assessment , input from combatant commanders , cost , and environmental and socio - economic impacts .

specifically , the review should address the following: ( 1 ) military force structure considerations: when rebasing military assets from one installation to another , the processes the military services use to assess the impact associated with the current and future home stations or homeports .

 ( 2 ) strategic imperative and risk assessment: the extent to which the military services consider strategic shifts in force posture , such as the shift of naval assets from the atlantic ocean to the pacific ocean , in basing decisions .

when making basing decisions related to strategic dispersal of military assets , the process used by the services to conduct and consider risk assessments .

in making the nuclear aircraft carrier homeporting decision , how the navy weighed the comparative risk between the different needs of the navy .

for example , the consideration the navy gave to building an additional nuclear aircraft carrier homeport at naval station mayport versus failing to meet ship maintenance and repair shortfalls , or the need for a 313 – ship navy .

 ( 3 ) cost: the extent to which the military services use a cost - benefit analysis in making basing decisions and the extent to which the budgetary requirements of the entire military service and department of defense are considered ; the consideration given in the decision - making process to shortfalls in other service budgets and other internal budget accounts ; and how the services' analyses compare the strategic benefits of expending funds for one purpose ( such as the construction of additional infrastructure ) to the use of funds for other purposes ( such as meeting unfunded procurement requirements ) in determining whether to proceed with a decision .

 ( pages 537-538 ) senate section 2201 of the fy2010 defense authorization bill ( s. 1390 ) as reported by the senate armed services committee ( s.rept .

111-35 of july 2 , 2009 ) recommended approving the administration's fy2010 request for a total of $75.985 million for milcon projects ( including the channel dredging project ) at mayport .

 ( see page 753 of the printed bill. ) .

the committee's report did not contain any narrative language directly discussing the issue of carrier homeporting at mayport .

section 114 of s. 1390 would require the navy to submit a report to the congressional defense committees on a potential service life extension program ( slep ) for the navy's oliver hazard perry ( ffg - 7 ) class frigates .

ffg - 7s account for several of the surface combatants currently homeported at mayport , and the ffg - 7s homeported at mayport are currently scheduled to be retired from navy service by 2014 .

the text of section 114 is as follows: sec .

114 .

report on a service life extension program for oliver hazard perry class frigates .

not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of the navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report setting forth the following: ( 1 ) a detailed analysis of a service life extension program ( slep ) for the oliver hazard perry class frigates ( ffgs ) , including — ( a ) the cost of the program ; ( b ) a schedule for the program ; and ( c ) the shipyards available to carry out the work under the program .

 ( 2 ) a detailed plan of the navy for achieving a 313-ship fleet as contemplated by the 2006 quadrennial defense review , including a comparison for purposes of that plan of decommissioning oliver hazard perry class frigates as scheduled with extending the service life of such frigates under the service life extension program .

 ( 3 ) the strategic plan of the navy for the manner in which the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) will fulfill the roles and missions currently performed by the oliver hazard perry class frigates as they are decommissioned .

 ( 4 ) the strategic plan of the navy for the littoral combat ship if the extension of the service life of the oliver hazard perry class frigates alleviates demand arising under the current capabilities gap in the littoral combat ship .

 ( 5 ) a description of the manner in which the navy has met the needs of the united states southern command over time , including the assets and vessels the navy has deployed for military - to - military engagements , unitas exercises , and counterdrug operations in support of the commander of the united states southern command during the five - year period ending on the date of the report .

section 112 of s. 1390 would require the navy to submit a report to the congressional defense committees on the navy's plans for homeporting littoral combat ships ( lcss ) .

under current navy plans , lcss are to replace oliver hazard perry ( ffg - 7 ) class frigates in the navy's force structure .

the text of section 112 is as follows: sec .

112 .

report on strategic plan for homeporting the littoral combat ship .

 ( a ) report required - not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of the navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report setting forth the strategic plan of the navy for homeporting the littoral combat ship ( lcs ) on the east coast and west coast of the united states .

 ( b ) elements - the report required by subsection ( a ) shall include the following: ( 1 ) the requirements for homeporting of the littoral combat ship of the commanders of the combatant commands , set forth by geographic area of responsibility ( aor ) .

 ( 2 ) a description of the manner in which the navy will meet the requirements identified under paragraph ( 1 ) .

 ( 3 ) an assessment of the effect of each type of littoral combat ship on each port in which such ship could be homeported .

 ( 4 ) a map , based on the current plan of 55 littoral combat ships , identifying where each ship will homeport and how such ports will accommodate both types of littoral combat ships , based on the current program and a 313-ship navy .

 ( 5 ) an estimate of the costs of infrastructure required for littoral combat ships at each homeport , including — ( a ) existing infrastructure ; and ( b ) such upgraded infrastructure as may be required .

conference the conference report ( h.rept .

111-288 of october 7 , 2009 ) on h.r .

2647 / p.l .

111-84 of october 28 , 2009 , authorized the administration's fy2010 request for $46.3 million in milcon funding for channel dredging at mayport .

 ( page 633 ) the report states: the conference agreement includes authorization for $46.3 million for channel and turning basin dredging at naval station ( ns ) mayport , florida .

the navy requested this project in order to allow a nuclear aircraft carrier to enter naval station mayport on a temporary basis with an embarked air wing , full stores , and under any tidal conditions .

the conferees authorize funding for this project based on the secretary of the navy and chief of naval operations' assurances that the dredging is needed for current operational considerations to permit the use of mayport as a transient dock and is ''required irrespective of the final decision on aircraft carrier homeporting at mayport.' .

the conferees emphasize that the inclusion of an authorization for dredging at ns mayport is not an indication of conferee support for the establishment of an additional homeport for nuclear aircraft carriers on the east coast , or intended to influence the ongoing quadrennial defense review , which may include a recommendation on the establishment of a second east coast homeport for nuclear aircraft carriers .

furthermore , the conferees note that this funding is provided solely to permit use of mayport as a transient port , and that any potential designation of mayport as a nuclear carrier homeport will require future authorizations from the committees on armed services of the senate and the house of representatives .

 ( page 870 ) section 127 required the navy to submit a report to the congressional defense committees on a potential service life extension program ( slep ) for the navy's oliver hazard perry ( ffg - 7 ) class frigates .

ffg - 7s account for several of the surface combatants currently homeported at mayport , and the ffg - 7s homeported at mayport are currently scheduled to be retired from navy service by 2014 .

the text of section 127 is as follows: sec .

127 .

report on a service life extension program for oliver hazard perry class frigates .

not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this act , the secretary of the navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report setting forth the following: ( 1 ) a detailed analysis of a service life extension program for the oliver hazard perry class frigates , including — ( a ) the cost of the program ; ( b ) a notional schedule for the program ; and ( c ) the shipyards available to carry out the work under the program .

 ( 2 ) the strategic plan of the navy for — ( a ) the manner in which the littoral combat ship will fulfill the roles and missions currently performed by the oliver hazard perry class frigates as such frigates are decommissioned ; and ( b ) the year - by - year planned commissioning of littoral combat ships and planned decommissioning of oliver hazard perry class frigates through the projected service life of the oliver hazard perry class frigates .

 ( 3 ) an analysis of the necessary procurement rates of littoral combat ships if the extension of the service life of the oliver hazard perry class frigates alleviates capability gaps caused by a delay in the procurement rates of littoral combat ships .

 ( 4 ) a description of the manner in which the navy has met the requirements of the united states southern command over time , including the assets and vessels the navy has deployed for military - to - military engagements , unitas exercises , and counterdrug operations in support of the commander of the united states southern command during the five - year period ending on the date of the report .

section 123 of the bill required the navy to submit a report to the congressional defense committees on the navy's plans for homeporting littoral combat ships ( lcss ) .

under current navy plans , lcss are to replace oliver hazard perry ( ffg - 7 ) class frigates in the navy's force structure .

the text of section 123 is as follows: sec .

123 .

report on strategic plan for homeporting the littoral combat ship .

 ( a ) report required. — at the same time that the budget is submitted under section 1105 ( a ) of title 31 , united states code , for fiscal year 2011 , the secretary of the navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report setting forth the strategic plan of the navy for homeporting the littoral combat ship on the east coast and west coast of the united states .

 ( b ) elements. — the report required by subsection ( a ) shall include the following: ( 1 ) an analysis of how the homeporting plan would support the requirements of the commanders of the combatant commands , by geographic area of responsibility , for the capabilities delivered by littoral combat ships , including the notional transit times to the various geographic areas of responsibility .

 ( 2 ) an assessment of the effect that each type of littoral combat ship would have on each port in which such ship could be homeported , including an identification of the infrastructure required to support each such ship with respect to — ( a ) the availability of pier space with supporting ship services infrastructure , taking into account the largest fleet size envisioned by the long - term plan for the construction of naval vessels submitted for fiscal year 2011 ; ( b ) the logistical and maintenance support services required in any port chosen for the littoral combat ships ; and ( c ) any investment in naval station infrastructure required for homeporting littoral combat ships ( including a plan for such investment ) .

 ( 3 ) with respect to the projected force structure size of the navy in fiscal year 2020 , a graphical depiction of the total planned ships berthing in the pier areas of any naval facility chosen to homeport littoral combat ships , including the identification of the ships berthing plan for the maximum number of ships expected in - port at any one time .

the report required by section 123 was submitted to congress in february 2010 .

fy2010 military construction and veterans affairs appropriations act ( h.r .

3082 / h.r .

3288 / p.l .

111-117 ) house the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

111-188 of june 26 , 2009 ) on h.r .

3082 , recommended approving the administration's fy2010 request for $46.3 million in milcon funding for channel dredging at mayport .

 ( page 107 ) senate the senate appropriations committee , in its report ( s.rept .

111-40 of july 7 , 2009 ) on the fy2010 military construction and veterans affairs appropriations bill ( s. 1407 ) , recommended approving the administration's fy2010 request for $46.3 million in milcon funding for channel dredging at mayport .

 ( page 88 ) conference h.r .

3082 was incorporated as division e of h.r .

3288 / p.l .

111-117 of december 16 , 2009 , a bill that became a consolidated appropriations act .

the conference report ( h.rept .

111-366 of december 8 , 2009 ) on h.r .

3288 / p.l .

111-117 approved the administration's fy2010 request for $46.3 million in milcon funding for channel dredging at mayport .

 ( page 1410 ) fy2009 fy2009 duncan hunter national defense authorization act ( s. 3001 / p.l .

110-417 ) section 2207 of the fy2009 defense authorization bill as passed by the house ( h.r .

5658 ; h.rept .

110-652 of may 16 , 2008 ) stated: sec .

2207 .

report on impacts of surface ship homeporting alternatives .

 ( a ) report required - the secretary of the navy shall not issue a record of decision for the proposed action of homeporting additional surface ships at naval station mayport , florida , until at least 30 days after the date on which the secretary submits to congress a report containing an analysis of the socio - economic impacts and an economic justification on each location from which a vessel is proposed to be removed for homeporting at naval station mayport under the preferred alternative identified in the final environmental impact statement for the proposed action .

 ( b ) additional reporting requirement - if the final environmental impact statement does not contain a preferred alternative or if the secretary intends to select an alternative other than the preferred alternative in the record of decision , then the secretary shall submit to congress a report ( in the case where no preferred alternative is identified ) or an additional report ( in the case where the preferred alternative is not selected ) containing an analysis of the socio - economic impacts and an economic justification on each location from which a vessel is proposed to be removed for homeporting at naval station mayport .

the fy2009 defense authorization bill as passed by the senate ( s. 3001 ; s.rept .

110-335 of may 12 , 2008 ) did not contain a provision similar to section 2207 of h.r .

5658 .

in lieu of a conference report , there was compromise version of s. 3001 that was accompanied by a joint explanatory statement .

the compromise version of s. 3001 , which was signed into law as p.l .

110-417 of october 14 , 2008 , did not contain a provision similar to section 2207 of h.r .

5658 .

fy2008 fy2008 national defense authorization act ( h.r .

4986 / p.l .

110-181 ) the house armed services committee , in its report ( h.rept .

110-146 of may 11 , 2007 ) on the fy2008 defense authorization bill ( h.r .

1585 ) , stated: carrier basing the committee understands that the navy has unused capacity at naval station mayport , florida , and is conducting an environmental impact statement on the feasibility of stationing additional surface ships , including a nuclear aircraft carrier , at naval station mayport .

the committee believes that naval station mayport is an important defense asset that should be fully utilized .

the committee is concerned that naval station mayport has not previously served as homeport for a nuclear carrier and does not contain the considerable specialized infrastructure necessary to sustain and maintain such a vessel .

therefore , before the secretary of the navy recommends the stationing of a nuclear carrier at naval station mayport , the committee directs the secretary to determine the full range of costs associated with the construction of nuclear infrastructure and port improvements at naval station mayport necessary to support a nuclear carrier , including a detailed assessment of alternative sites , and submit the results of this analysis to the congressional defense committees by october 1 , 2007 .

 ( page 518 ) fy2008 military construction , veteran affairs , and related agencies appropriations act ( h.r .

2764 / p.l .

110-161 ) the house appropriations committee , in its report ( h.rept .

110-186 of june 11 , 2007 ) on h.r .

2642 , which at that point was the fy2008 military construction , veteran affairs , and related agencies appropriations bill , stated: carrier homeporting . — the committee understands that it is the navy's publicly stated policy to maintain two nuclear carrier - capable homeports on the east coast .

the committee further understands that the navy is in the process of drafting an environmental impact statement ( eis ) that includes the evaluation of the necessary infrastructure and dredging required to make naval station mayport the second such homeport in addition to naval station norfolk , and that a draft eis will be released in early 2008 .

the committee directs the navy to provide a report to the committee identifying the military construction requirements and an estimated timetable for completion for making mayport a nuclear carrier - capable homeport no later than 30 days after release of the draft eis .

 ( page 17 ) h.r .

2642 later became the fy2008 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

110-252 of june 30 , 2008 ) .

the fy2008 military construction , veteran affairs , and related agencies appropriations bill was eventually enacted as part of the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r .

2764 / p.l .

110-161 of december 26 , 2007 ) .

fy2007 fy2007 john warner national defense authorization act ( h.r .

5122 / p.l .

109-364 ) the senate armed services committee , in its report ( s.rept .

109-254 of may 9 , 2006 ) on the fy2007 defense authorization bill ( s. 2766 ) , stated: the committee maintains its concern , expressed in the senate report accompanying s. 1042 ( s.rept .

109-69 ) of the national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2006 , regarding the declining size of the naval force and the reduction to the number of aircraft carriers .

the committee agrees , however , with the navy's determination that it is not feasible to maintain 12 operational aircraft carriers by restoring the uss john f. kennedy ( cv – 67 ) to a deployable , fully mission - capable platform .

the committee believes that it is vital to the national security of the united states that a fleet of at least 11 aircraft carriers be maintained to support the national military strategy , and has taken extraordinary action to support the cno's force structure plan by authorizing increased procurement for shipbuilding and , specific to aircraft carriers , by authorizing additional advance procurement and incremental funding for the construction of the first 3 cvn – 21 class aircraft carriers .

further , recognizing the increased need for timeliness of surge operations that today's smaller force structure places on the fleet response plan , the committee reaffirms the judgment that the chief of naval operations , admiral clark , provided in testimony before the committee on armed services in february 2005 , that the atlantic fleet should continue to be dispersed in two homeports .

 ( page 380 ) s.rept .

109-254 also presented additional views of senator bill nelson relating to the homeporting of aircraft carriers on the atlantic coast .

 ( see pages 528-529 ) the conference report ( h.rept .

109-702 of september 29 , 2006 ) on the fy2007 defense authorization bill ( h.r .

5122 ) stated: the conferees agree with the cno statement in his letter dated august 14 , 2006 , to the ranking member of the committee on armed services of the senate , that ''naval station mayport and the many resources of the jacksonville area remain vitally important to navy readiness,'' and support the cno commitment ''to maintaining the infrastructure necessary to support the strategic dispersal of the atlantic fleet at this key east coast port.' .

 ( page 805 ) appendix b .

additional background information from may 2010 gao report this appendix reprints appendix ii from a may 2010 gao report on the navy's basing decision process .

appendix c. excerpts from january 2009 navy record of decision ( rod ) this appendix presents excerpts from the january 2009 navy record of decision ( rod ) document announcing the navy's desire to transfer a cvn to mayport .

the document stated in part: summary: the department of the navy ( don ) , after carefully weighing the strategic , operational , and environmental consequences of the proposed action , announces its decision to homeport one nuclear - powered aircraft carrier ( cvn ) at naval station ( navsta ) mayport .

today's decision does not relocate a specific cvn to navsta mayport .

it does initiate a multiyear process for developing operational , maintenance , and support facilities at navsta mayport to support homeporting of one cvn .

this multiyear process includes implementing projects for dredging and dredged material disposal , construction of cvn nuclear propulsion plant maintenance facilities , wharf improvements , transportation improvements , and construction of a parking structure to replace existing parking that would be displaced by development of the cvn nuclear propulsion plant maintenance facilities .

the projects necessary to create the capacity to support cvn homeporting could be completed as early as 2014 .

no cvn homeport change will occur before operational , maintenance , and support facility projects are completed .

selection of the cvn to be homeported at navsta mayport would not occur until approximately one year prior to the ship's transfer to navsta mayport .

selection of a specific cvn for homeporting at navsta mayport will be based upon then current operational needs , strategic considerations , and maintenance cycles .

the don decision to utilize the capacity at navsta mayport to homeport a cvn is the culmination of a two and a half year process involving environmental analysis under the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) , identification of the recurring and nonrecurring costs associated with homeporting surface ships at navsta mayport , and an assessment of strategic concerns .

the don environmental analysis included extensive studies regarding impacts associated with dredging , facility construction , and homeport operations .

the environmental analysis undertaken by the don included lengthy and detailed consultations with regulatory agencies , such as the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( usfws ) and the national marine fisheries service ( nmfs ) , regarding impacts to endangered and threatened species , and the u.s. army corps of engineers ( usace ) and the environmental protection agency ( epa ) regarding dredging operations and the in - water disposal of dredged materials .

public awareness and participation were integral components of the environmental impact statement ( eis ) process .

the don ensured that members of the public , state agencies , and federal agencies had the opportunity to help define the scope of the don's analysis as well as examine and consider the studies undertaken by the don .

public review and comment on the don's interpretation of those studies and the conclusions drawn from the don's interpretation of associated data were robust .

the decision reached by the don , as further explained later in this record of decision , is based upon the don's environmental , operational , and strategic expertise and represents the best military judgment of the don's leadership .

the need to develop a hedge against the potentially crippling results of a catastrophic event was ultimately the determining factor in this decision - making process .

the consolidation of cvn capabilities in the hampton roads area on the east coast presents a unique set of risks .

cvns assigned to the west coast are spread among three homeports .

maintenance and repair infrastructure exists at three locations as well .

as a result , there are strategic options available to pacific fleet cvns should a catastrophic event occur .

by contrast , navsta norfolk is homeport to all five of the cvns assigned to the atlantic fleet and the hampton roads area is the only east coast location where cvn maintenance and repair infrastructure exists .

it is the only location in the u.s. capable of cvn construction and refueling .

the hampton roads area also houses all atlantic fleet cvn trained crews and associated community support infrastructure .

there are no strategic options available outside the hampton roads area for atlantic fleet cvns should a catastrophic event occur... .

alternatives considered: the draft and final eis assessed the impacts of 12 action alternatives and the no action alternative .

consistent with the purpose and need for the proposed action , the alternatives addressed only options for utilizing capacities at navsta mayport for homeporting additional surface ships .

examination of homeporting options at other geographic locations was not relevant to the established purpose and need , so no such alternatives were considered .

the 12 action alternatives evaluated a broad range of options for homeporting surface ships at navsta mayport .

the alternatives included ship types currently homeported at navsta mayport: destroyers ( ddgs ) , and frigates ( ffgs ) , as well as additional types of ships identified by the chief of naval operations ( cno ) , including amphibious assault ships ( lhds ) , amphibious transport dock ships ( lpds ) , dock landing ships ( lsds ) , and a cvn .

in the final eis , the don identified alternative 4 , as the preferred alternative .

alternative 4 involves homeporting one cvn at navsta mayport and included dredging , infrastructure and wharf improvements , on - station road and parking improvements , and construction of cvn nuclear propulsion plant maintenance facilities at navsta mayport .

factors that influenced selection of alternative 4 as the preferred alternative included impact analyses in the eis , estimated costs of implementation , including military construction and other operation and sustainment costs , and strategic considerations .

regulations implementing nepa require the identification of the environmentally preferred alternative .

the environmentally preferred alternative for this eis is alternative 2 , homeporting two lhds at navsta mayport .

lhd homeporting would require no dredging or other major construction activities compared to dredging and construction activities required to implement the preferred alternative to homeport a single cvn .

as such , the preferred alternative ( alternative 4 ) would have greater environmental impact than the environmentally preferred alternative ( alternative 2 ) on earth resources , water resources , air quality , noise , biological resources , and utilities .

while the environmentally preferred alternative would have less environmental impact than the preferred alternative , it does not address strategic concerns or reduce risks to critical atlantic fleet assets and infrastructure .

environmental impacts: the eis analyzed environmental impacts and the potential magnitude of those impacts relative to the following categories of environmental resources: earth resources , land and offshore use , water resources , air quality , noise , biological resources , cultural resources , traffic , socioeconomics , general services , utilities , and environmental health and safety .

analysis of these categories also included the radiological aspects of cvn homeporting .

only environmental impacts to navsta mayport and the project area were evaluated .

there were no environmental impacts to the human environment outside of navsta mayport and the project area that were interrelated to the natural or physical environmental effects of the proposed action .

the environmental impact of implementing each alternative was evaluated against the 2006 baseline .

the baseline year 2006 best represents recent and historical operations at navsta mayport , and 2014 represents the end - state year by which all alternatives evaluated in the eis could be implemented .

many impacts were found to be common among the alternatives.... decision: after considering the environmental impacts analyzed in the eis , the recurring and nonrecurring costs associated with homeporting additional surface ships at navsta mayport , and strategic implications of a second cvn homeport on the east coast to support the atlantic fleet , the don elected to implement alternative 4 , the preferred alternative .

that alternative provides for homeporting one cvn at naval station ( navsta ) mayport .

the don decision does not immediately relocate a specific cvn to navsta mayport .

it does initiate a multiyear process for developing operational , maintenance , and support facilities at navsta mayport to support homeporting of one cvn .

this multiyear process includes implementing projects for dredging and dredged material disposal , construction of cvn nuclear propulsion plant maintenance facilities , wharf improvements , transportation improvements , and construction of a parking structure to replace existing parking that would be displaced by development of the cvn nuclear propulsion plant maintenance facilities .

the projects necessary to create the capacity to support cvn homeporting could be completed as early as 2014 .

no cvn homeport change will occur before operational , maintenance , and support facility projects are completed .

selection of the cvn to be homeported at navsta mayport would not occur until approximately one year prior to the ship's transfer to navsta mayport .

selection of a specific cvn for homeporting at navsta mayport will be based upon then current operational needs , strategic considerations , and maintenance cycles .

the most critical considerations in the don's decision - making process were the environmental impacts associated with the action , recurring and nonrecurring costs associated with changes in surface ship homeporting options , and strategic dispersal considerations .

the need to develop a hedge against the potentially crippling results of a catastrophic event was ultimately the determining factor in this decision - making process .

the consolidation of cvn capabilities in the hampton roads area on the east coast presents a unique set of risks .

cvns assigned to the west coast are spread among three homeports .

maintenance and repair infrastructure exists at three locations as well .

as a result , there are strategic options available to pacific fleet cvns if a catastrophic event occurred .

by contrast , navsta norfolk is homeport to all five of the cvns assigned to the atlantic fleet and the hampton roads area is the only east coast location where cvn maintenance and repair infrastructure exists .

it is the only location in the u.s. capable of cvn construction and refueling .

the hampton roads area also houses all atlantic fleet cvn trained crews and associated community support infrastructure .

there are no strategic options available outside the hampton roads area for atlantic fleet cvns if a catastrophic event occurred .

environmental impacts: environmental impacts were identified through studies and data collection efforts .

the information culled from the studies and collected data was assessed and conclusions were drawn regarding the significance of environmental impacts .

these conclusions , along with the underlying studies and data , were the subject of discussions and consultations with federal / state regulators over the course of the eis process .

this interagency process led to identification of mitigation measures , where appropriate , to address environmental impacts .

based on these consultations with regulators and their subject matter experts , the don has committed to implementation of specific mitigation measures as outlined earlier in this record of decision .

there are no environmental impacts associated with homeporting a cvn at navsta mayport that cannot be appropriately addressed or mitigated , including impacts to endangered species such as the narw , florida manatee , and sea turtles .

recurring and nonrecurring costs: the don's analysis and assessment of socioeconomic impacts in the eis associated with the range of alternatives addressed short - term and long - term local economic impacts in the mayport area .

in addition to the socioeconomic impacts considered in the eis , recurring and onetime costs associated with changes to surface ship homeporting were projected and considered in the don's decisionmaking process .

recurring and nonrecurring costs for the preferred alternative are less than 10% of the cost of a single cvn and less than 1% of the cost of the don's cvn assets .

that investment in homeport capacity at navsta mayport provides additional security for cvn assets and enhances the don's ability to maintain its effectiveness at a time when the ability to address contingencies and respond to the unexpected is essential .

in terms of risk mitigation , don gains a dispersal capability and its benefits at a fraction of the cost of an aircraft carrier .

recurring costs included costs associated with sustainment , restoration , and modernization ( srm ) , base operations support ( bos ) , training , air wing transportation , nuclear maintenance labor , and basic allowance for housing ( bah ) for sailors and their families .

sustainment costs are for activities necessary to keep facilities in good condition and therefore enable them to achieve their intended useful life .

restoration and modernization costs are life - cycle investments required to provide for recapitalized facilities that support new missions , return facilities to good condition , and improve facilities beyond original conditions or capabilities .

bos costs included facilities operations costs such as utilities , facility services , facility management , and fire and emergency services .

onetime costs included costs associated with milcon projects ( construction and planning and design ) , onetime maintenance costs for management and industrial plant equipment ( ipe ) costs , and permanent change of station ( pcs ) associated with the initial cvn homeport assignment at navsta mayport .

pcs costs are those costs associated with moving the ship's crew and dependents to navsta mayport .

pcs costs were estimated costs because the location from which crews and their families would be moved remains undetermined .

strategic dispersal: the strategic dispersal of surface ships , especially vital strategic assets such as cvns that serve our national interests in both peace and war , was assessed through examination of potential vulnerabilities .

these potential vulnerabilities were examined in the context of operational , training and maintenance requirements of east coast assets .

strategic dispersal factors considered included: transit times to various deployment and training areas ; shipping traffic volumes and associated risk of a maritime accident ; port force protection postures and risk mitigation measures ; integrated vulnerability and threat assessments ; historic aircraft carrier loading ; physical pier capacity ; nuclear maintenance capability ; homeporting options in response to a catastrophic event ; geographic location of the aircraft carrier aircraft squadrons ; transit times from port to the open sea ; historic sortie rates due to hurricanes or other natural phenomena ; and the risk to the ships , infrastructure and personnel who man , service and repair aircraft carriers associated with natural or man - made catastrophic events .

in terms of these factors , the analysis concluded that the strategic value of navsta norfolk and navsta mayport as cvn homeports essentially was equal .

the don's strategic analysis , however , also demonstrated the value of having both navsta norfolk and navsta mayport as cvn homeports .

establishing cvn homeport capacity at navsta mayport can be accomplished without any adverse impacts on operations while at the same time providing the added strategic value of a second cvn homeport on the east coast .

the most significant strategic advantage offered by development of an additional east coast cvn homeport is a hedge against a catastrophic event that may impact navsta norfolk , the only existing cvn homeport for atlantic fleet cvns .

it is difficult to quantify the likelihood of a catastrophic event , whether natural or man - made .

nonetheless , there is a need to plan and prepare for any such event .

that planning and preparation must address cvn maintenance and repair infrastructure as well as operational considerations .

the fact that quantifying the likelihood of a catastrophic event is so difficult underscores the need to ensure that our planning and preparation efforts do not underestimate or overlook the long - term effects of such event .

hurricane katrina is a clear and recent example .

the level of devastation in new orleans in the aftermath of hurricane katrina was so extensive and so pervasive that more than three years after katrina hit , the new orleans industrial infrastructure , work force , and community support functions have not fully recovered .

the potential impact of similar man - made or natural catastrophic events in the hampton roads area requires the don to plan and prepare .

a failure to do so presents an unacceptable risk .

the aircraft carriers of the united states don are vital strategic assets that serve our national interests in both peace and war .

the president calls upon them for their unique ability to provide both deterrence and combat support in times of crisis .

of the 11 aircraft carriers currently in service , five are assigned to the atlantic fleet .

navsta norfolk is homeport to all five of the cvns assigned to the atlantic fleet and the hampton roads area is the only east coast location where cvn maintenance and repair infrastructure exists .

it is the only location in the u.s. capable of cvn construction and refueling .

the hampton roads area also houses all atlantic fleet cvn trained crews and associated community support infrastructure .

a second cvn homeport on the east coast will provide additional cvn maintenance infrastructure , thereby providing added strategic value and allowing the don to extract the added operational value of two cvn homeports in meeting its national defense obligations .

homeporting a cvn at navsta mayport would provide strategic options in case of a catastrophic event in the hampton roads area , and enhance distribution of cvn assets , thereby reducing the risks to aircraft carriers and associated maintenance and repair infrastructure supporting those crucial assets... .

conclusion: the decision to create the capacity to homeport a cvn at navsta mayport represents the best military judgment of the don's leadership regarding strategic considerations .

in reaching that decision , the don considered the environmental impacts analyzed in the eis , comments from regulatory agencies as well as those received from members of the public , mitigation measures that would lessen the extent and severity of environmental impacts , recurring and nonrecurring costs , and the strategic implications of developing a second cvn homeport on the east coast to support atlantic fleet operational , training and maintenance needs .

there will be no significant adverse environmental impacts associated with the cvn homeporting .

that conclusion is based on the data collected and analyzed in the eis , on interagency consultations , and on the mitigation measures developed as part of that consultation process .

the cost of developing a cvn homeport at navsta mayport was balanced against the strategic need to create a hedge against a catastrophic event in the hampton roads area .

the cost of developing a cvn homeport at navsta mayport is more than offset by the added security for cvn assets and enhanced operational effectiveness provided by the ability to operate out of two homeports .

ultimately , the need to develop a hedge against the potentially crippling results of a catastrophic event was the driver behind the decision to homeport a cvn at navsta mayport .

developing a second cvn homeport on the east coast not only reduces potential risk to cvn assets through dispersal of those critical assets , it provides some maintenance and repair infrastructure and ensures access to that infrastructure by cvns deployed at the time a catastrophic event in hampton roads occurred .

mayport allows don to obtain the advantages of fleet dispersal and survivability without impacting operational availability .

on the west coast don has accepted reduced operational availability in the interest of dispersal .

by homeporting cvns in the northwestern u.s. , don loses operational availability during the additional transit time required to reach operational and training areas .

by establishing a second cvn homeport on the east coast , don can gain the dispersal advantage without the increased transit time .

the proximity to training areas and transit time to operating areas is about equal from norfolk and mayport .

west coast cvn homeports and maintenance facilities are not viable options in planning for atlantic fleet cvn assets in the event a catastrophic event occurs in the hampton roads area .

the nuclear powered aircraft carriers are too large to transit the panama canal , requiring a 12,700 nautical mile voyage around south america to reach the closest cvn homeport on the west coast at [ ]san diego .

neither the don , nor the nation , nor its citizens can wait for a catastrophic event to occur before recognizing the potential impacts of such an event and appropriately planning and preparing for continuity of operations .

this lesson was learned all too well in the aftermath of recent catastrophic events such as hurricane katrina .

the don looked at the possible crippling effects - immediate and long - term - of a catastrophic event in the hampton roads area and recognized its responsibility to develop a hedge against such an event .

that hedge is homeporting a cvn at navsta mayport and developing the requisite operational , training , maintenance and support facilities .

homeporting one cvn at navsta mayport best serves the interests of the don and the nation , and can be accomplished in a manner that keeps environmental impacts at a less than significant level .

appendix d. navy data on hurricane risk this appendix presents information that the navy has provided regarding the risk of hurricanes at norfolk and mayport .

navy briefing slide figure d - 1 is a navy briefing slide on relative hurricane risk for the port of norfolk and the port of jacksonville , which is near mayport .

excerpt from dod information paper in response to questions and requests for information from congressional offices , the navy in december 2008 provided , among other things , supplementary historical data regarding hurricanes in the hampton roads area and mayport and their effect on navy facilities and ship operations .

the questions / requests for information regarding hurricanes , and the navy's responses , are reproduced below .

question / request: how much collateral damage did norfolk and mayport sustain from hurricanes that did not make a direct hit over the analyzed time period of 1851-2006 ? .

response: a. mayport: since 1995 , 8 named storms — of which 1 was a hurricane — have had a cpa of 75 nm or closer to navsta mayport from 1851-2008 , there were 51 tropical cyclones that were classified as hurricanes at some point in their life that passed within 180 nm of mayport .

of these , 22 came within 50 nm .

collateral damage ( back to 2004 ) : $6.1m b. norfolk: since 1995 , 15 named storms — of which 4 were hurricanes — came within 75 nm or closer to navsta norfolk from 1851-2008 , there were 54 tropical cyclones that were classified as hurricanes at some point in their life that passed within 180 nm of norfolk .

of these , 14 came within 50 nm .

collateral damage ( all hurricanes , direct hit and near miss back to 1999 ) : $11.8m c. some ships undergoing maintenance must occasionally remain in port during hurricanes .

a review of records since the 2004 hurricane season indicated no resulting ship damage for those ships remaining inport .

question / request: how much hurricane damage has navsta norfolk and navsta mayport sustained over the time period analyzed ? .

response: historical hurricane damage costs available include: mayport: fy04: $1.2m fy05: $4.1m fy08: $0.8m norfolk fy99: $1.0m fy03: $10.8m question / request: how many evacuation orders ( sorties ) have been issued to navy ships at norfolk and mayport because of inclement weather ? .

provide historical data to the maximum extent possible .

response: since 1995 , ships at mayport have sortied 6 times and ships at norfolk have sortied 5 times: a. mayport: i. bertha ( 1996 ) ii .

bonnie ( 1998 ) iii .

floyd ( 1999 ) iv .

charley ( 2004 ) v. ophelia ( 2005 ) vi .

fay ( 2008 ) b. norfolk: i. felix ( 1995 ) ii .

bertha ( 1996 ) iii .

bonnie ( 1998 ) iv .

floyd ( 1999 ) v. isabel ( 2003 ) carrier sorties due to hurricanes notes: data prior to 1992 is incomplete for tracking of hurricane sorties .

question / request: have any navy ships remained pierside during past hurricane evacuation orders ? .

if so , what happened ? .

response: no records exist that indicate any aircraft carriers were unable to sortie .

note: shipyards are designated "safe havens," therefore cvns in the shipyards are not required to sortie .

recent examples of non - aircraft carriers remaining inport during hurricanes include: a .

in august 2005 , the following ships were pierside at northrop grumman shipbuilding — ingalls operations and ngsb avondale operations during hurricane katrina: i. ddg 98 ( forrest sherman ) ii .

ddg 100 ( kidd ) iii .

lpd 17 ( san antonio ) iv .

lpd 19 ( mesa verde ) v. lpd 18 ( new orleans ) lpd 17 and ddg 98 sustained minor damage during the storm and ddg 100 sustained more extensive hull damage .

the cost of repairs is classified as "business sensitive. .

b .

during hurricanes gustav and ike in 2008 , the following ships were pierside at ngsb avondale and ngsb ingalls and did not sustain any damage: i. lpd 20 ( green bay ) ii .

ddg 103 ( truxtun ) iii .

ddg 105 ( dewey ) question / request: historically , how have hurricanes negatively affected cvn operations on the east coast ? .

response: hurricanes can and have affected aircraft carrier operations during all phases of the carrier schedule .

cvns inport will sortie when directed by the fleet commander and conduct hurricane avoidance .

cvns underway for training will suspend or cancel training evolutions and maneuver to avoid the hurricane's predicted track .

question / request: compare the amount of time required to sortie ships from norfolk and mayport .

response: following issuance of the sortie order , ships in mayport require approximately 1 hour to reach the open sea and ships in norfolk require between 4 to 4.5 hours to reach open sea .

question / request: when , if ever , has the navy not been able to sortie ships ? .

response: ships in maintenance at norfolk naval shipyard and northrop grumman newport news shipbuilding do not sortie since the shipyards are considered safe havens for ships during hurricanes .

no records exist that indicate any aircraft carriers not in safe havens were unable to sortie .

appendix e. examples of views from members this appendix presents examples of views from members regarding the navy's desire to homeport a cvn at mayport .

these views are presented as examples only .

views of members from florida an october 23 , 2009 , press release from the office of representative ander crenshaw states: washington , dc — united states senators george lemieux ( r - fl ) and bill nelson ( d - fl ) and representatives ander crenshaw ( r - jacksonville ) and corrine brown ( d - jacksonville ) signed and mailed the following letter to president obama in advance of his trip to north florida on october 26 .

the letter ( 10 / 22 ) underscores the importance of having two east coast aircraft carrier homeports and calls on president obama to reaffirm his commitment to strategic dispersal of critical assets such as aircraft carriers .

the full text of the document reads: dear president obama: we are happy to hear you are traveling to the great state of florida soon .

while in the state , we hope you are able to see the many military strategic strengths florida provides this nation .

we are home to the largest air force base , eglin , and naval station mayport , the third largest naval port in the continental united states .

early this year , the department of the navy concluded an exhaustive two and a half year study weighing the strategic , operational and environmental consequences of upgrading naval station mayport to homeport a nuclear carrier , and the upgrades must be done since consolidating all nuclear carrier homeporting and maintenance in one east coast location greatly hampers the navy's strategic options .

prior to 2007 , the navy had operational flexibility on the east coast with carriers stationed both at naval station norfolk and naval station mayport .

however , the navy lost the flexibility with the decommissioning of the last east coast conventional carrier in 2007 .

in order to reduce risk to the atlantic fleet carrier force and restore the proper balance to the navy , naval station carriers and maintenance facilities are spread among three homeports .

in fact , in a december 2008 letter to senator jim webb , secretary gates reinforced the concept of strategic dispersal stating , "having a single cvn homeport has not been considered acceptable on the west coast should not be considered acceptable on the east coast. .

the norfolk area is the only east coast port in which nuclear aircraft carriers are repaired , built and housed .

if tragedy , man - made or nature - related , intentional or accidental , rendered norfolk out of reach the navy would be forced to journey around the tip of south america to reach another nuclear aircraft carrier maintenance facility in san diego , ca .

while some would like to believe this is an acceptable back - up plan , common sense demands otherwise .

time and time again , aircraft carriers have proven to be key to the execution of our national security strategy .

we believe as access to overseas land bases continues to decrease , the navy's aircraft carriers will be more and more important .

the navy has alternate homeporting and maintenance options for all ships on the east coast except aircraft carriers , its most valuable assets .

the total cost for permanently homeporting a nuclear aircraft carrier at mayport is less that 1% of the cost of the nuclear carrier fleet .

while the cost is not inconsequential , when weighed against the possible risks to our carrier fleet , upgrading mayport to homeport a nuclear carrier is a sound national security expense .

the department must make this investment in naval station mayport to provide flexibility to the combatant commanders and protection to some of the nation's most valuable assets .

while you are in jacksonville , we encourage you to reaffirm the county's commitment to the protection and the flexibility that strategic dispersal affords .

we look forward to continuing to provide the best homeport in the navy .

views of members from virginia the website of the office representative glenn nye presents a march 9 , 2010 , letter to secretary of the navy ray mabus and then - chief of naval operations admiral gary roughead on the desire to homeport a cvn at mayport .

the letter is signed by senators jim webb and mark r. warner , representatives glenn c nye iii , j. randy forbes , robert c. "bobby" scott , and robert j. wittman , and 27 other persons who are not members of congress .

the text of the letter states: dear secretary mabus and admiral roughead: we are the hampton roads military affairs commission , a newly formed group from virginia's hampton roads area , one of the largest military areas in the world .

our more than 30 members are experts and leaders in their respective fields , including elected officials , retired military officers and business leaders .

in today's fiscal environment , we recognize that you encounter difficult tradeoffs as you seek to balance competing priorities and ensure necessary funding for aircraft procurement , building and maintaining our naval fleet , military construction , and taking care of our sailors .

like you , we fully support the navy's goal to build a fleet of no fewer than 313 ships .

we care deeply about national security and the future of our navy .

for this reason , we write today regarding the quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) and its recommendation to construct facilities to support homeporting a nuclear - powered aircraft carrier ( cvn ) at naval station ( navsta ) mayport .

we respectfully request that you provide us with a business - case analysis that objectively addresses the financial and operational tradeoffs of this proposal , as well as the threat assessment that warrants such an undertaking .

we believe a more comprehensive public accounting is necessary before any change in east coast homeporting is considered .

we hope you will provide answers to our questions in the following areas: creating a cvn homeport at navsta mayport is estimated to cost between $600 million and $1 billion when all one - time and recurring annual costs are calculated .

in the current economic climate and with today's high operating tempo , the navy has numerous unfunded priorities .

if the cost of homeporting is $600 million to $1 billion , what specific elements of current year and out - year projects will be decremented from the budget to provide the money ? .

there is a pressing need for a more comprehensive strategic - risk assessment .

the dod has extensive capabilities to quantify risk and empirically evaluate the trade - offs and cost - benefit factors associated with any major investment .

with respect to the proposed carrier homeport at navsta mayport , we have yet to learn of a strategic assessment or rigorous risk - based analysis that would identify the specific reasons for executing what is potentially a $1 billion decision .

to date , in seeking to justify this project , the navy has said that the risk that a catastrophic event could close hampton roads is "low. .

the phrase "strategic dispersal" has been used by many as an intuitive argument to justify the creation of an additional east coast homeport for a cvn .

however , we are concerned this argument also creates a slippery slope akin to a "reverse brac" .

under secretary for policy michelle flournoy , testifying before the house armed services committee , recently said that the logic of strategic dispersal also applies to other singularly based assets and infrastructure , to include fleet ballistic missile submarines .

the immense cost and time of carrying out this additional dispersal would be extraordinary .

what specific guidance has the navy received , if any , to provide for strategic dispersal of any high value assets and infrastructure ( carriers , subs , facilities ) ? .

would this dispersal philosophy apply to other critical infrastructure such as the pentagon or the u.s. capitol ? .

even with one less cvn , navsta norfolk would remain the world's largest naval station and should be protected as such .

hundreds of millions of dollars have already been spent since 9 / 11 to improve port and base security in the hampton roads region .

what security improvements are required in mayport to accommodate a cvn and at what cost ? .

secondly , the navy has cited the concern over possible blockage ( either by natural or manmade causes ) of the norfolk channel .

if harbor blockage of current cvn ports is considered a risk , are there any plans to mitigate the risk ? .

significant increases in personnel , both military and federal employees , will be required to accommodate a new cvn homeport .

have the corresponding billets been identified for funding ? .

what is the manning increase required for 2013 and 2014 when the cvn is scheduled to be home ported at mayport ? .

what is the overall manning plan for the cvn move ? .

specifically , is there a plan detailing the station manning and the requirement for temporary additional duty ( tad ) sailors ? .

what is this recurring cost ? .

what is the impact of such temporary assignments on the ability to support remaining cvn activities at norfolk and what will the quality of life impact be on sailors and shipyard workers who will be away from home for additional periods of time if a cvn is homeported at navsta mayport ? .

when the uss kennedy ( cv 67 ) left navsta mayport in 2007 , much of the existing carrier - support infrastructure was decommissioned .

if creating a new cvn homeport is of strategic importance , as some have indicated , why would the navy decommission existing support infrastructure at mayport only to rebuild much of it a few years later ? .

what specific capabilities must be re - established and at what cost ? .

precisely what cvn maintenance will be supported at navsta mayport after all facilities have been constructed ? .

how often and for how long will the navy need to return the cvn to norfolk for maintenance availabilities that are beyond the capability of fly - away teams ? .

the navy's final environmental impact statement ( feis ) proposes building nuclear propulsion repair facilities , but there is no mention of conventional requirements such as catapult and arresting gear maintenance .

what conventional maintenance will be done by the maintenance personnel at navsta mayport ? .

while the feis addressed possible local economic impacts at mayport , why did the feis neglect a corresponding socio - economic evaluation of norfolk ? .

with the decommissioning of uss enterprise ( cvn 65 ) and a follow - on change in homeport for another norfolk - based carrier to mayport , why didn't the feis evaluate the negative impact on norfolk's local housing market , schools , jobs , and small businesses ? .

thank you for taking the time to look into these queries .

we commend you for your leadership .

as this process evolves , we look forward to developing a better dialogue to ensure the concerns and issues we have identified are addressed in a timely , responsive way .

the commission's point of contact is john panneton , military liaison for congressman glenn nye , who can be reached at 757-326-6201 , or 4772 euclid road , suite e , virginia beach , va 23462 .

