federal investments in early childhood care and education come in many forms .

these investments stretch across multiple federal agencies and congressional committee jurisdictions .

they vary from targeted to flexible funding streams , from grant programs to tax provisions .

some programs primarily or exclusively provide early childhood services ( eg , head start ) , while others are broad - based , flexible funding streams for which early childhood services are among many allowable uses ( eg , temporary assistance for needy families ) .

these federal programs often have differing policy goals , target populations , program services , and administrative rules .

for instance , some programs target a particular service ( eg , child care , home visiting ) , while others target a particular population ( eg , special needs children , working parents ) .

in many cases , federal programs target low - income families , but certain programs and child care - related tax provisions benefit middle - and upper - income families as well .

in recent years , both congress and the obama administration have demonstrated interest in early childhood issues .

the president has proposed the creation of new early childhood programs ( eg , preschool for all ) , as well as reforms to existing programs .

in some cases , these or other early childhood proposals have been taken up by congress .

for instance , the every student succeeds act of 2015 ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) , which was signed into law in december 2015 , authorized a new preschool development grants program to be administered by hhs , jointly with ed .

this legislation builds on a predecessor program of the same name that has been funded ( at ed , but administered jointly with hhs ) in annual appropriations acts since fy2014 under broad authorities and without a standalone authorization .

of note , several early childhood care and education programs are due for possible reauthorization in the 114 th congress , including head start , mandatory child care funding authorized in section 418 of the social security act , and the idea part c early intervention program for infants and toddlers .

in addition , congress may also take an interest in the administration's implementation of recent reauthorizations , including the december 2015 ( p.l .

114-95 ) reauthorization of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) and the november 2014 ( p.l .

113-186 ) reauthorization of the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) .

these laws mark the first comprehensive reauthorizations of the esea and the ccdbg since 2002 and 1996 , respectively .

this report begins with information on current and historical funding levels for a selection of early childhood care and education programs and tax provisions .

table 1 presents information on the fy2017 obama administration's budget request for such programs , while table 2 provides a seven - year funding history ( fy2010-fy2016 ) for these early childhood care and education programs and tax provisions .

the funding section is followed by a series of program summaries ( see table 3 for a comparison of basic characteristics for selected programs ) .

the program summaries have been organized into three categories: ( 1 ) targeted programs that exclusively or primarily provide early childhood services , ( 2 ) tax provisions that support the child care expenses of working families , and ( 3 ) certain broad - based and flexible programs that may be used to support early childhood care and education .

appendix a of this report provides some additional information on early childhood programs that do not currently receive federal funding .

appendix b presents a list of abbreviations and acronyms used throughout the report .

readers should note that program summaries in this report are not meant to be comprehensive .

in many cases , other congressional research service ( crs ) reports are referenced as sources for more detailed information about individual programs .

this section presents brief descriptions of a selection of early childhood and related programs and tax provisions currently receiving federal funding .

 ( appendix a presents similar summaries of early childhood programs that were funded in the recent past , but do not currently receive federal funding. ) .

the programs are divided into three sections: the " targeted programs " section describes programs that exclusively or primarily provide early childhood care and education services .

the " tax provisions " section describes two provisions in the tax code that largely support child care expenses of working families .

the " related programs " section describes several programs that are more broad - based and flexible in nature , but that may be used to support early care and education .

to allow for easier comparison across programs , table 3 presents some basic program data for the targeted programs and tax provisions described in this section .

this table highlights how even these targeted programs experience wide variations in funding , federal eligibility rules , and participation .

head start has provided comprehensive early childhood education and development services to low - income children since 1965 .

the program seeks to promote school readiness by enhancing the social and cognitive development of children through the provision of educational , health , nutritional , social , and other services .

in general , children are eligible for head start if their family's income does not exceed the official poverty level or the family is receiving public assistance .

most children served in head start programs are three - and four - year - olds , but in 1994 head start was expanded to include an early head start program , which serves children from birth to three years of age .

in addition , since fy2014 annual head start appropriations have reserved a portion of funds for early head start - child care partnerships .

through these partnerships , early head start providers partner with center - based and family child care providers who agree to meet head start program performance standards .

at the federal level , head start is administered by hhs , which awards head start funds directly to local grantees rather than through states .

programs are locally designed and are administered by a network of roughly 1,600 public and private nonprofit and for - profit agencies .

head start agencies are required to comply with detailed federal performance standards .

head start was last reauthorized by the improving head start for school readiness act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-134 ) .

this law authorized the program through the end of fy2012 ( september 30 , 2012 ) , meaning that head start is currently due for possible reauthorization .

for more information on head start , see crs report rl30952 , head start: background and funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

the ccdbg is the primary source of federal grant funding dedicated to child care subsidies for low - income working families .

the ccdbg has two funding streams: discretionary funding is authorized by the ccdbg act of 1990 , which was reauthorized through 2020 by the ccdbg act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-186 ) .

there are no state maintenance - of - effort ( moe ) or matching requirements associated with these discretionary ccdbg funds .

mandatory funding is authorized by section 418 of the social security act , which is due for possible reauthorization .

mandatory ( or "entitlement" ) child care funds are generally appropriated directly by authorizing statute , meaning that these funds are not typically part of the annual appropriations process .

states must meet moe and matching requirements to receive their full allotments .

at the federal level , these child care funding streams are jointly administered by hhs — and are commonly referred to as the child care and development fund ( ccdf ) .

the funds are allocated to states , according to separate formulas , and are used to subsidize the child care expenses of low - income working families with children under age 13 ( and sometimes older children in special circumstances ) .

federal law stipulates that eligible families are those with a family income below 85% of the state median income , but in practice most states set income eligibility levels below the federal threshold .

child care services are provided to families on a sliding fee scale basis and parents may choose to receive assistance through vouchers or certificates , which can be used with a provider of the parents' choice , including religious providers and relatives .

in addition to supporting direct services for children , states must use a portion of their ccdbg funds ( both mandatory and discretionary ) to improve the quality and availability of child care ( eg , by supporting training and professional development ) .

for more information , see crs report rl30785 , the child care and development block grant: background and funding , by [author name scrubbed .

the miechv program supports home visiting services for families with young children who reside in communities that have concentrations of poor child health and other risk indicators .

home visits are conducted by nurses , mental health clinicians , social workers , or paraprofessionals with specialized training .

generally , they visit the homes of eligible families on a regular basis ( eg , weekly or monthly ) over an extended period ( eg , six months or longer ) to provide support to caregivers and children , such as guidance on creating a positive home environment and referrals to community resources .

families participate on a voluntary basis .

at the federal level , the program is jointly administered by the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) and the administration for children and families ( acf ) at hhs .

miechv funding is provided primarily to states and territories to administer home visiting programs , and funds are awarded on both a formula and a competitive basis .

the majority of funding ( a minimum of 75% ) must be used to support home visiting models that have shown sufficient evidence of effectiveness .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 ) established the miechv program under title v of the social security act .

the program receives mandatory appropriations directly from its authorizing statute .

mandatory miechv funding was extended through fy2017 by the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-10 ) .

for more information , see crs report r43930 , maternal and infant early childhood home visiting ( miechv ) program: background and funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

starting in fy2014 , annual appropriations acts have funded a pdg program that is intended to expand access to high - quality preschool for low - and moderate - income four - year - olds .

funding for this pdg program has been provided under broad authorities and without a standalone authorization .

however , the every student succeeds act of 2015 ( p.l .

114-95 ) included a standalone authorization for a new preschool development grants program .

there are a number of differences between the initial pdg program that has been funded from fy2014 to fy2016 and the newly authorized pdg program that is slated to begin operations in fy2017 .

federal administration: the initial pdg program ( fy2014-fy2016 ) has been based at ed but administered jointly with hhs .

starting in fy2017 , the new program will be based at hhs but administered jointly with ed .

purposes: the initial pdg program did not have a standalone authorization with explicit purpose language , but annual appropriations acts stipulated that these funds were intended to build state capacity to develop , enhance , or expand high - quality preschool programs , including comprehensive services and family engagement , for preschool - aged children from families at or below 200% of the federal poverty line .

the purposes of the new pdg program are more broad - based and focus on improving coordination , collaboration , and alignment of existing federal , state , local , and non - governmental early childhood programs , while maximizing parental choice in a mixed - delivery system .

grants: the initial pdg program has been divided into two grant components: ( 1 ) development grants help states with limited or no state - funded preschool to build the necessary capacity to establish high - quality preschool programs in high - need communities , and ( 2 ) expansion grants support states with existing capacity in expanding access to high - quality programs in high - need communities .

the new pdg program will also have two grant components: ( 1 ) planning grants will support statewide needs assessments , strategic plans for coordination and partnership - building , family involvement and knowledge of options , sharing of best practices , and quality improvement activities , while ( 2 ) renewal grants will focus on improving overall program quality and expanding access to programs in a mixed - delivery system , including access for children who are eligible for , but not currently served by , existing early childhood programs .

notably , the term "high - quality preschool program" was explicitly defined in the federal r egister for purposes of the initial pdg program .

this federal definition addresses staff qualifications and professional development , child - to - staff instructional ratios , class size , length of day , inclusive classrooms , evidence - based curricula aligned with early learning standards , individualized accommodations , adequacy of staff salaries , ongoing program evaluation , on - site access to comprehensive services , and evidence - based health and safety standards .

however , the every student succeeds act explicitly prohibits hhs and ed from defining the term "high - quality" as it relates to "early learning , development , or care" in the context of the newly authorized pdg program .

for more information , see crs report r44008 , preschool development grants and race to the top - early learning challenge grants: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

idea is the main federal statute governing special education for children from birth through age 21 .

the majority of idea funding goes to school - age children via grants to states .

however , idea also authorizes two state grant programs for young children: idea part c serves infants and toddlers with disabilities ; and idea part b section 619 serves preschool - aged children with disabilities .

the part c infants and families program serves disabled children from birth through two years of age .

to receive a part c grant , states must create and maintain a "statewide , comprehensive , coordinated , multidisciplinary , interagency system that provides early intervention services for infants and toddlers with disabilities and their families. .

part c services focus on children experiencing developmental delay with respect to physical , mental , or other capacities , as well as the families of such children .

part c early intervention services are designed to ensure that all infants and toddlers with developmental delays are identified and evaluated .

at this point , an individualized family services plan is tailored to the unique needs of the child and the child's family .

early intervention services are to be provided , to the maximum extent feasible , in "natural environments," including the child's home , and with other infants and toddlers who are not disabled .

for more information , see crs report r43631 , the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , part c: early intervention for infants and toddlers with disabilities , by [author name scrubbed] .

idea part b authorizes services to school - aged children with disabilities as young as age three .

states receiving idea part b state grants are also eligible for additional section 619 preschool grants if they offer free appropriate public education to all disabled children ages three to five within the state .

 ( that is to say , section 619 is not so much a separate program as it is a supplemental funding stream for children in the preschool age group. ) .

in recent years , all states have qualified for and received preschool grants under this section .

in general , the provisions , requirements , and guarantees under the part b state grants program for school - age children also apply to section 619 preschool - aged children .

for more information , see crs report r41833 , the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , part b: key statutory and regulatory provisions , by [author name scrubbed] .

ccampis is authorized by section 419n of the higher education act .

the program is designed to support the participation of low - income parents in postsecondary education through campus - based child care services .

discretionary grants of up to four years in duration are awarded competitively to institutions of higher education , to either supplement existing child care services , or to start a new program .

the bureau of indian education ( bie ) at the u.s. department of the interior administers an early childhood development program , commonly called face .

the face program provides grants to tribes and tribal organizations for services to indian children under the age of six and their parents .

face programs may serve children and families in home - and center - based settings .

activities may include parenting skills - building , adult education , home visiting , and preschool services .

face grants are distributed by formula among applicant tribes and tribal organizations with 500 or more members .

the cacfp provides federal funds ( and in some cases commodity foods ) for meals and snacks served in licensed child care centers , family and group day care homes , afterschool programs , and head start centers .

children under age 12 , children under 18 in eligible afterschool programs , migrant children under age 15 , and children with disabilities of any age may participate , although most participants are preschoolers .

subsidies provided to day care centers , including head start centers , vary according to the child's family income .

subsidies provided to family and group day care homes vary according to the care provider's income or the average income of the community in which the home is located .

the cacfp is an annually appropriated open - ended entitlement , administered by the department of agriculture .

for more information on cacfp , see crs report r43783 , school meals programs and other usda child nutrition programs: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] .

see also crs in focus if10266 , an introduction to child nutrition reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] .

the cdctc , which is authorized by section 21 of the internal revenue code , is a non - refundable tax credit for employment - related expenses incurred for the care of a dependent child under age 13 or a disabled dependent or spouse .

as a tax credit , the cdctc directly reduces the amount of income tax owed .

however , non - refundable tax credits cannot be greater than the taxpayer's income tax liability , meaning that low - income taxpayers with little or no income tax liability generally receive little or no benefit from the credit .

under current law , the maximum credit rate equals 35% of expenses up to $3,000 for one child ( for a credit of $1,050 ) and up to $6,000 for two or more children ( for a credit of $2,100 ) .

the maximum credit rate applies to taxpayers with adjusted gross incomes of $15,000 or less .

the credit rate decreases by one percentage point for each additional $2,000 increment ( or portion thereof ) in income until the rate reaches the floor of 20% for taxpayers with incomes over $43,000 .

for more information , see crs report rs21466 , dependent care: current tax benefits and legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

under section 129 of the internal revenue code , taxpayers can exclude from their income up to $5,000 of dependent care expenses associated with an employer - provided dependent care assistance program ( dcap ) .

as with the cdctc , expenses must be employment - related and for the care of a dependent child under age 13 or a disabled dependent or spouse .

payments may be made directly by employers , may be reimbursable to employees , or may be made through salary reduction agreements .

under a salary reduction agreement , the employee agrees that a specified amount be set aside for the employer's dcap .

the exclusion from income for employer - provided dcaps does not directly reduce tax liability but instead reduces a taxpayer's taxable income , thereby reducing both income taxes and payroll taxes .

the reduction in tax liability equals the qualifying expenses multiplied by the taxpayer's marginal tax rate .

for example , if a taxpayer's marginal tax rate ( the highest tax rate that applied to taxable income ) was 25% and $1,000 of qualifying expenses were excluded from taxable income , the tax liability would be reduced by $250 .

for more information , see crs report rs21466 , dependent care: current tax benefits and legislative issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

tanf was created by the 1996 welfare reform law , the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-193 ) as a broad - based block grant to states .

at the federal level , the program is administered by hhs .

tanf funds are intended to help states address the root causes and effects of childhood economic disadvantage .

states use these funds to provide a wide range of benefits and services .

the program is most commonly associated with basic cash assistance for needy families with children .

 ( such benefits are generally subject to time limits and work requirements. ) .

in addition , states use tanf funds for a number of other activities , including child care , preschool , and child welfare - related services .

since its inception , mandatory federal funding for the basic tanf block grant has totaled $16.5 billion annually .

tanf spending on child care is tracked separately from other tanf expenditures ( this is not true for tanf spending on preschool ) .

in fy2014 , the most recent year for which data are available , hhs reported that states spent about $1.2 billion in federal funds and $2.5 billion in state maintenance - of - effort or related funds to support child care directly within tanf programs .

in addition , the law gives states the authority to transfer up to 30% of their tanf allotments to the ccdbg .

such transfers must be spent according to ccdbg act rules ( as opposed to tanf rules ) .

in fy2014 , states transferred nearly $1.4 billion in federal tanf funds to the ccdbg , representing about 8% of the fy2013 tanf allotment .

for more background information , see crs report r40946 , the temporary assistance for needy families block grant: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

see also , crs report rl32760 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: responses to frequently asked questions , by [author name scrubbed] .

for more information on states' use of tanf funds , see crs report rl32748 , the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) block grant: a primer on tanf financing and federal requirements , by [author name scrubbed] .

the ssbg is an annually appropriated entitlement to states , with allocations based on population size .

the ssbg is administered by hhs and is permanently authorized by title xx , subtitle a , of the social security act .

the ssbg is a flexible source of funding that states use to support a wide variety of social services activities .

states have broad discretion over the use of these funds .

in general , there are no federal income eligibility requirements , targeting provisions , service mandates , or match requirements .

since fy2002 , annual appropriations laws have funded the ssbg at $1.7 billion , though this amount has been reduced by sequestration in fy2013-fy2016 .

in fy2014 , the most recent year for which ssbg expenditure data are available , the largest expenditures for services under the ssbg were for child welfare - related services ( eg , adoption , foster care , protective services , special services for at - risk youth ) , child care services , prevention and intervention services , and special services for the disabled .

approximately 11% of total ssbg expenditures ( $300 million ) went toward child care services in that year .

for more information , see crs report 94-953 , social services block grant: background and funding , by [author name scrubbed] .

title i , part a , of the esea is the largest federal education program serving disadvantaged children .

most local educational agencies ( leas ) in the nation receive title i - a grants , which may be used to provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other students attending schools with relatively high concentrations of students from low - income families .

title i - a primarily serves school - age children , but leas may choose to use some of their title i - a funds for preschool services .

reliable data on title i - a preschool expenditures are not available because spending on preschool services is not tracked separately from spending on other program activities .

however , ed has previously estimated that spending on preschool instruction accounted for roughly 2% of title i - a spending .

as a point of reference , 2% of the fy2016 title i - a appropriation ( $14.9 billion ) would be $298 million .

data from consolidated state performance reports suggest that preschoolers account for less than 3% of the children served by title i - a annually .

title i - a was reauthorized by the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) on december 10 , 2015 .

for more background on esea title i - a , see crs report r44297 , reauthorization of the elementary and secondary education act: highlights of the every student succeeds act , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

see also crs report r44486 , fy2016 state grants under title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , by [author name scrubbed] .

historically , the striving readers program has provided competitive grants to eligible entities to improve literacy instruction in high - need schools .

the program has been administered by ed and — through fy2016 — has been funded under broad authorities within title i - e of the esea ( §1502 , as it existed prior to the december 2015 reauthorization ) .

the first appropriation for this program was provided in fy2005 ( $25 million ) and explicitly targeted literacy skills of middle school and high school students .

starting in fy2010 , annual appropriations laws expanded the program to support comprehensive literacy development , including pre - literacy skills , for students from birth through grade 12 .

in addition , annual appropriations acts since fy2010 have required state educational agencies that receive striving readers grants to ensure that at least 15% of funds be reserved for children from birth through age five .

in fy2016 , the striving readers program received a total of $190 million .

the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) authorized a new comprehensive literacy development grant program in title ii - b of the esea ( §2222 ) , which is expected to replace striving readers starting in fy2017 .

as authorized by essa , this program will consist largely of competitive grants to state educational agencies .

of total amounts received by a state , at least 15% must go toward early literacy services for children from birth through age five .

most of the remaining funds are to be evenly divided ( 40% apiece ) between programs serving students in kindergarten through grade five and programs serving students in grades six through twelve .

states may reserve up to 5% of their funds for additional activities ( eg , provision of technical assistance , dissemination of best practices ) .

the promise neighborhoods program provides competitive grants to support communities in developing and implementing comprehensive neighborhood plans to combat poverty and improve educational and life outcomes for children .

these neighborhood plans may support a continuum of services from early learning to college and career .

they may cover a range of issues , from improving a neighborhood's health , safety , and stability to expanding access to learning technology and internet connectivity and boosting family engagement in student learning .

at present , it is not entirely clear how much of the funding for promise neighborhoods has been directed toward early childhood care and education activities .

the promise neighborhoods program is administered by ed and has been funded since fy2010 under broad authorities within title v of the esea .

however , the every student succeeds act ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) , which reauthorized the esea in december 2015 , included a new explicit authorization for the promise neighborhoods program under title iv , part f , subpart 2 of the esea .

in fy2016 , promise neighborhoods received a total of $73 million .

appendix a .

programs not currently funded race to the top - early learning challenge ( rtt - elc ) race to the top ( rtt ) was first authorized in fy2009 under the state fiscal stabilization fund in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

initially , the rtt program was designed to provide competitive grants to states implementing certain specified k - 12 education reforms .

the fy2009 law did not explicitly authorize or designate rtt funding for early childhood activities .

however , the fy2011 appropriations law ( p.l .

112-10 ) subsequently amended the initial rtt program , authorizing ed to reserve a portion of rtt funds for competitive grants to states for the improvement of early childhood care and education .

the appropriations law specified that ed should jointly administer this new program with hhs .

under this new authority , ed established the race to the top - early learning challenge ( rtt - elc ) grant program to support states in ( 1 ) establishing statewide data systems ; ( 2 ) aligning high - quality standards across programs ; ( 3 ) implementing statewide early learning standards ; ( 4 ) improving the early childhood workforce ; and ( 5 ) measuring children's outcomes and progress across developmental domains .

in each of fy2011-fy2013 , ed reserved a portion of its total rtt funds for rtt - elc grants , including $500 million in fy2011 , $133 million in fy2012 , and $370 million in fy2013 .

over the course of this three - year period , 20 states received one or more rtt - elc grant .

no new funding has been provided for the rtt - elc since fy2013 .

for more information , see crs report r44008 , preschool development grants and race to the top - early learning challenge grants: a primer , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

the william f. goodling even start family literacy programs ( even start ) the 2015 esea reauthorization law ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) eliminated the authorization for even start programs , which had previously been authorized under esea title i , part b , subpart 3 .

the even start programs were intended to integrate early childhood education , adult basic education , and parenting skills education into a unified family literacy program .

when funded , these programs provided grants to states , which then distributed the funds to eligible entities ( consisting of a local education agency ( lea ) in collaboration with a community based organization ) .

even start generally served children ages 0-7 and their parents .

even start services were required to include adult literacy instruction , early childhood education , instruction to help parents support their child's education , participant recruitment , screening of parents , staff training , and home - based instruction .

even start was first authorized in 1989 and grew rapidly in its early years .

however , evaluations suggested the program had not been effective in improving child and adult learning outcomes .

even start funding subsequently declined from a high of $250 million in fy2002 to $66 million in fy2010 , the last year in which the program received annual appropriations .

for more information , see crs report rl30448 , even start family literacy programs: an overview , by [author name scrubbed] .

early reading first the 2015 esea reauthorization law ( essa ; p.l .

114-95 ) eliminated the authorization for the early reading first program , which had previously been authorized by esea title i , part b , subpart 2 .

the early reading first program supported local efforts to enhance the school readiness of young children — particularly those from low - income families — through scientific research - based strategies and professional development designed to enhance the verbal skills , phonological awareness , letter knowledge , and pre - reading skills of preschool age children .

when funded , this program authorized ed to award competitive grants for up to six years at a time to eligible leas or to public or private organizations located within eligible leas .

the early reading first program received $113 million from the fy2009 omnibus ( p.l .

111-8 ) , which is the last time the program was funded .

president obama's fy2010 budget requested $163 million for the program , an increase of $50 million over fy2009 funding .

however , the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

111-117 ) provided no funding for early reading first .

instead , congress expanded the mission of the striving readers program from focusing solely on improving adolescent literacy , to improving the literacy and pre - literacy skills of students from preschool through high school .

the fy2010 consolidated appropriation increased funding for striving readers to $250 million ( an increase of about $215 million from fy2009 ) and reserved about 15% ( or $37.5 million ) for children ages 0-5 .

no funding has been requested for early reading first since the fy2010 president's budget , and no funding has been appropriated for this program since fy2009 .

early childhood educator professional development the department of education has provided competitive grants to partnerships to improve the knowledge and skills of early childhood educators who work in communities that have high concentrations of children living in poverty .

funding in fy2006 and fy2007 remained stable at approximately $14.5 million , but fy2007 was the last year in which funds were appropriated .

early learning fund / early learning opportunities act program this hhs program ( referred to by both names ) , authorized by the fy2001 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

106-554 ) , was last funded in fy2005 at $36 million .

when funded , the program provided grants to communities to enhance school readiness for children under five , specifically supporting efforts to improve children's cognitive , physical , social , and emotional development .

although authorized at $600 million , fy2003 funding for the program was set at $25 million ; fy2004 funding was set at $34 million ( despite president bush's fy2003 budget proposal to eliminate the program ) ; and in fy2005 , p.l .

108-199 included $36 million for the early learning fund .

fy2005 was the last year in which this program received funding .

appendix b .

acronyms used in this repor .

