the federal housing administration ( fha ) has been insuring lenders against loss on home loans since 1934 .

from 1934 through the end of fy2007 , fha has insured about 34.6 million home loans at a mortgage volume of about $2 trillion .

though fha is a mortgage insurer rather than a lender , in earlier years , fha was often the innovator in testing new mortgage products or processes: in 1959 , fha was authorized to acquire mortgages from lenders in order to avoid foreclosure , instead of taking title to the property after the foreclosure .

in 1961 , fha was authorized to insure loans on condominiums .

in 1968 , the special risk insurance fund was created in fha , and through that fund fha was authorized to insure home loans to low - and moderate - income individuals who , because of credit problems , irregular incomes , or other factors , did not meet the general fha credit requirements , but who appeared able to achieve homeownership through homeownership counseling .

in 1974 , fha was authorized to insure loans involving "experimental financing" under which the payments of the borrowers would increase along with expected increases in borrower income .

in 1988 , fha was authorized to insure reverse mortgages ( referred to as home equity conversion mortgages ) , and fha - insured reverse mortgages became the first reverse mortgages that were available on a nearly nationwide basis .

by 1995 , some argued that the fha mortgage insurance program was no longer needed because the private market had matured to the point where it could offer a variety of programs to serve the needs of borrowers who previously had been using the fha program .

until the recent turmoil in the mortgage market , that argument appeared to have some validity .

for example , while fha generally required downpayments of about 3% of the purchase price , the private market offered 100% financing through such products as so - called "piggyback" loans .

one popular piggyback loan was known as the "80 - 20 loan" under which a borrower obtained a first trust for 80% of the price of the home and a 20% second mortgage for the balance of the purchase price .

the private market is able to vary the percentage of mortgage insurance premiums required from borrowers according to the risk that the borrowers would default on the loans , so that more risky borrowers would pay higher insurance premiums .

fha requires the same amount of mortgage insurance from borrowers regardless of the risk that the borrowers might default .

this prevented fha from providing loans to more risky borrowers , so such borrowers were lost to the private market .

in addition , fha lost loans to the private market simply because the homes in some communities were priced higher than the statutory fha loan limits , so fha was not a viable option .

according to data made available by the home mortgage disclosure act , the fha share of the market had fallen from 16% in 2000 to less than 3% in 2005 and 2006 .

the past several congresses have debated various fha reform measures designed to modernize the program and permit fha to offer products to risky borrowers at less cost to borrowers than many of the products offered on the private market .

fha reform , however , proved controversial and these efforts stalled .

in 2008 , the general decreases in home values , the increases in home foreclosures , and the meltdown in the mortgage market brought increased interest in fha as an instrument to add some stability to the mortgage market .

several fha reform proposals were introduced in the 110 th congress , and provisions from some of the bills were included in h.r .

3221 , the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera ) , which was enacted on july 30 , 2008 , as p.l .

110-289 .

hera is omnibus legislation which contains three divisions — division a addresses housing finance reform , division b addresses foreclosure prevention , and division c addresses tax - related provisions .

title i of division b of hera is cited as the fha modernization act of 2008 .

it amends the national housing act in an attempt to make fha more competitive with products available on the private market .

it does not , however , attempt to compete with zero downpayment loans .

hera takes the opposite approach and increases the downpayment requirements for fha - insured home loans .

given turmoil in the mortgage market , however , it is doubtful that the private market is presently offering any zero downpayment loans .

the fha modernization act of 2008 ( the act ) contains two subtitles .

subtitle a , the building american homeownership act of 2008 , makes several amendments to the fha program that insures loans on single family homes under title ii of the national housing act .

subtitle b , the fha manufactured housing loan modernization act of 2008 , makes several amendments to the fha program that insures loans on manufactured housing loan program under title i of the national housing .

the remainder of this report discusses these two subtitles .

the purposes of this part of the act are ( 1 ) to provide adequate funding for fha - insured manufactured housing loans for low - and moderate - income homebuyers during all economic cycles in the manufactured housing industry ; ( 2 ) to modernize the fha title i insurance program for manufactured housing loans to enhance participation by ginnie mae and the private lending markets ; and ( 3 ) to adjust the loan limits for title i manufactured home loan insurance to reflect the increase in costs since such limits were last increased and to index the limits to inflation .

 ( sec .

2142 ) .

prior law provided that the volume of fha - insured home loans held by a lending institution could not exceed 10% of the dollar volume of all home loans held by the institution .

the act amends the national housing act to provide that , except for manufactured home loans , the volume of fha - insured home loans held by a lending institution may not exceed 10% of the dollar volume of all home loans held by the institution .

the intent of the legislation is to encourage lenders to make manufactured home loans .

 ( sec .

2143 ) .

the loan limits for fha - insured loans on manufactured homes had not been changed since 1992 .

the act increases the loan limits for manufactured homes as follows: ( 1 ) a loan to finance the improvement , alteration , or repair of an existing manufactured home is increased from $17,500 to $25,090 ; ( 2 ) a loan to finance the purchase of a manufactured home is increased from $48,600 to $69,678 ; ( 3 ) a loan to finance the purchase of a manufactured home and lot is increased from $64,800 to $92,904 ; ( 4 ) a loan to finance the purchase of a lot by an owner of a manufactured home is increased from $16,200 to $23,226 .

the act provides that these loan limits will be adjusted annually by hud from an index to be developed based on manufactured housing price data collected by the census bureau .

 ( sec .

2145 ) .

under prior law , fha was authorized to charge borrowers an annual insurance premium of up to 1% of the loan amount .

the act requires borrowers to pay an upfront insurance premium of up to 2.25% of the loan amount and annual insurance premiums of up to 1% of the loan balance .

the act directs hud to adjust the insurance premiums as required to maintain a negative credit subsidy for the program .

 ( sec .

2146 ) .

prior law was silent regarding hud authority to handle manufactured housing when the borrowers defaulted .

the act provides hud with general authority to handle and dispose of manufactured housing properties in the case of loan default by the borrower , which is similar to authority hud now has with regard to fha single family home loans .

 ( sec .

2147 ) .

the act directs hud is to establish underwriting criteria that will ensure the financial soundness of the manufactured housing program .

 ( sec .

2148 ) .

the real estate settlement procedures act of 1974 ( respa ) prohibits the paying or receiving of kickbacks and unearned fees for the referral of real estate business .

the act applies the provisions of respa to each sale of a manufactured home financed with an fha - insured loan or extension of credit and related services .

the act gives hud the authority to grant exceptions to the provisions of respa when deemed necessary .

the act requires hud to prohibit acts or practices that hud finds to be unfair , deceptive , or not in the interests of the borrower .

 ( sec .

2149 ) .

some manufactured homes are placed on lots that are leased from the owner ( usually a manufactured home community ) .

from a lender's perspective , loans for manufactured homes on leased lots carry the risk that the borrower may default if the lease is lost and the homeowner cannot find another place to move the home .

prior law was silent regarding lease requirements .

the act requires that with respect to a mortgage loan to finance a manufactured home intended to be placed on a leased lot in a manufactured home community , the lease must expire at least three years after the origination date of the loan and must be renewable annually thereafter .

 ( sec .

2150 ) .

