in late may and early june 2008 , several midwestern states were hit with a series of storms that produced flooding along many mississippi river tributaries and nearby segments of the mississippi river .

this flooding raised concerns about both the risk of another disaster like the devastating 1993 midwest flood and the state of the nation's flood policies , programs , and infrastructure .

although emergency response has improved since 1993 and hazard mitigation programs have reduced some risks , the region's flood risk continues to increase as more investments and people are concentrated in flood - prone areas affected by extreme precipitation .

riverine and coastal flooding remain serious risks to the nation's population and economy .

the principal causes of floods in eastern states and the gulf coast are hurricanes and storms .

coastal counties are 17% of the land area , and home to roughly 50% of the country's population and jobs .

flooding in the midwest and western states is primarily from snowmelt and rainstorms .

at least 9 million homes and $390 billion in property are at risk from a flood with a 1% annual probability of occurring .

increasing flood hazards are putting existing developments at risk .

new development is occurring in flood - prone areas , often behind aging levees constructed to reduce agricultural damages rather than protect urban populations .

national flood damages , which averaged $3.9 billion annually in the 1980s , nearly doubled in the decade 1995 through 2004 .

total disaster assistance for emergency flood response operations , and subsequent long - term recovery efforts , increased from an average of $444 million during the 1980s to $3.75 billion from 1995 to 2004 .

congress and federal agencies have taken steps to address selected flood challenges ; at the same time , climate , population , and investment trends have increased the threat , vulnerability , and consequences of flooding .

in response to the 1993 flood , congress shifted federal programs to increase support for a wider range of activities that reduce damage and prevent loss of life , such as moving flood - prone structures and developing evacuation plans ; this broader set of activities is known as hazard mitigation .

this shift has prompted wider use of nonstructural mitigation , particularly for new development and repairing damaged property .

traditional structural approaches , such as levees , floodwalls , and dams , continue to dominate much of the national investment in flood damage reduction .

often structural measures are the most readily available and locally acceptable tools to reduce flood risk for existing population , economic , and infrastructure hubs .

since 2005 , congress has considered legislation and enacted other measures to address some flood issues ; broader efforts to adopt a comprehensive flood policy and management strategy , however , have not been pursued .

hurricane katrina's devastation in 2005 and the 2008 midwest flood have again prompted attention to the suite of tools available to create a more flood - resilient nation .

many of these tools would require action by local governments , regulation of floodplain use , significant changes to federal programs , and substantially increased investment in flood damage reduction .

achieving these actions and implementing improved floodplain management is likely to confront opposition from those benefitting from the status quo and those opposed to land use regulation .

and it likely would require broader congressional action than the incremental policy alterations that have been typical following recent floods .

this report first provides a primer on recent developments , the federal role in flood policy , and the limitations of levees and dams .

the report then discusses lessons from the 2008 midwest flood and contrasts the 2008 flood with the 1993 flood .

it then discusses the evolution of u.s. flood policy , with particular attention to the role of congress and federal agencies and programs , and the available tools for addressing the nation's flood challenge .

the 2008 midwest flood , hurricane katrina , and other levee breaches have increased the congressional debate about how to manage flood and infrastructure risks , what is an acceptable level of risk — especially for low - probability , high - consequence events — and who should bear the costs to reduce flood risk ( particularly in the case of levee construction and rehabilitation ) .

issues to be addressed include protecting concentrated urban populations , reducing risk to the nation's public and private economic infrastructure , reducing vulnerability by investing in natural buffers , and equity in protection for low - income and minority populations .

a challenge for congress is structuring federal actions and programs so they provide incentives to reduce flood risk without unduly infringing on private property rights or usurping local decision making .

tackling this challenge would require significant adjustments in the flood insurance program , disaster aid policies and practices , and programs for structural and nonstructural measures and actions .

recommendations for how to improve flood policy abound .

figure 2 illustrates how different tools can combine to lower risk , but that some risk will always remain .

often following a significant flood or hurricane , changes are made to implement some tools and improve existing programs , but other tools and changes are not pursued .

a comprehensive strategy to realign floodplain management would confront many challenges and require dramatic changes in how local , state , and federal government agencies and programs operate .

one proposal for a national strategy was the 1986 unified national program for floodplain management by the interagency task force on floodplain management .

it laid out a four - part strategy for a balanced approach to floodplain management ( see box 4 ) .

implementing the risk reduction tools in this strategy would realign government programs to reward behaviors that decrease flood risk .

use of these tools also would represent a policy choice to shift more of the long - term costs of staying or locating in flood - prone areas from the federal government to local communities and individuals .

the 2008 midwest flood , hurricane ike , and hurricane katrina have been recent reminders of the nation's flood risk .

these events have raised both concerns about the state of the nation's flood policies , programs , and infrastructure , and awareness of the tradeoff between the benefits and risks of developing flood - prone areas .

after the 1993 midwest flood , congress took several actions that departed from historic flood policies which relied heavily on structural solutions by providing more incentives and assistance for hazard mitigation .

nonetheless , many fundamental issues identified in reports following the 1993 flood remain today .

many federal , state , and local policies and programs continue to encourage floodplain development and use .

local - state - federal tensions over proper and respective roles and responsibilities continue to cloud resolution of difficult water resource issues and can slow recovery in disaster - affected communities .

flood damage reduction and mitigation projects are still largely authorized and implemented in piecemeal fashion , and water and related land use decisions and programs are rarely coordinated .

federal legislation enacted since 1993 generally has addressed individual programs or agencies , rather comprehensively dealing with the disparate federal policies , programs , and agencies influencing the nation's flood risk .

in summary , although federal programs have improved through congressional and agency action since 1993 , the fundamental direction and approach of national flood policies and programs remain largely unchanged .

appendix a .

congressional flood direction and oversight congress shapes how federal agencies implement their missions through authorization , appropriations , and oversight .

to illustrate how congress shapes federal agencies flood - related actions through legislative direction , table a - 1 provides a list of the direction that congress has given to the corps on how the agency should implement its flood damage reduction mission and conduct its flood studies and projects .

how to use this direction in guiding implementation can be challenging when one provision of law may conflict with another .

table a - 2 is a listing of flood - focused congressional hearings between the 1993 midwest flood and 2008 ; the table illustrates the role and focus of congressional oversight .

table a - 3 is a list of flood - focused reports by the gao from 1993 through 2008 ; gao reports investigate how the federal government spends taxpayer dollars in order to assist congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and ensure the accountability of the federal government .

appendix b .

analysis of the upper mississippi river comprehensive plan wrda 1999 authorized the upper mississippi river comprehensive plan ( umrcp ) .

the umrcp final report , which is dated june 2008 , was transmitted to congress on january 15 , 2009 .

the umrcp was conducted as a preliminary study , similar to the level of detail in a corps reconnaissance study .

the umrcp final report and supporting documents are not at the level of detail of a feasibility study , which typically informs decision - making on construction authorization .

the umrcp preferred ( but not recommended ) plan the umrcp final report states "additional authority to implement the comprehensive plan is not being recommended nor requested at this time based upon the [national economic development] evaluation of alternative plans. .

nonetheless , the umrcp final report did identify a preferred alternative from among the fourteen analyzed ; the alternatives were evaluated on multiple criteria , including environmental , social , and regional benefits .

the report presented one "no action" alternative and thirteen other alternatives that would provide 500-year urban protection .

these thirteen varied primarily on the level of protection and type of flood damage reduction actions taken in agricultural areas ; the alternatives ranged from increase in existing protection to 500-year protection for agricultural areas .

the preferred alternative , known as plan h , would provide a 500-year level of flood protection along the length of the mainstem of the mississippi and illinois rivers ( but not other tributaries ) and ecosystem restoration benefits .

the preferred plan would protect urban areas and towns with 500-year levees ; for agricultural areas it would provide 500-year levees except where buyouts would be more cost effective .

the umrcp final report indicates that up to 39 levee districts would be bought out while 144 would have levees raised to 500-year protection .

if buyouts of districts are implemented , there would be opportunities to pursue ecosystem restoration actions .

the total initial cost for plan h would be $4.42 billion ─ $3.97 billion for flood damage reduction construction , and $460 million for ecosystem restoration ; these costs do not include operation , maintenance , and rehabilitation .

mixed recommendations on how to proceed the umrcp final report indicates that none of the alternatives studied would meet the current economic test for federal participation of the plan's national benefits exceeding costs .

current guidelines exclude regional benefits from these calculations because regional benefits are viewed as transfers from one region to another , and do not produce national gains .

the thirteen umrcp alternatives analyzed ( excluding the no action alternative ) had costs from $3 billion to $9 billion and benefit - cost ratios ranging from 0.03 to 0.07 for the national economic development benefits .

for corps projects , other than ecosystem restoration projects , a national benefit - cost ratio greater than 1.0 generally is used in gauging the economic attractiveness of the federal investment , consistent with the direction in the flood control act of 1936 .

congress is faced with deciding how to proceed given differing recommendations .

consistent with the umrbc final report , the assistant secretary of the army ( civil works ) in his january 2009 transmittal letter to congress stated that "recommendations for implementation of a specific plan based on a reconnaissance level of detail is premature. .

the assistant secretary instead recommended intermediate steps ─ expanding the umrcp to include mississippi river tributaries , conducting cost - shared studies of the reconstruction needs for the basin's existing flood damage infrastructure ( where a federal interest is identified ) , and conducting a study of flood protection for critical transportation infrastructure such as bridge approaches and railroads .

earlier in august 2008 , the mississippi river commission voted to support implementing the preferred alternative .

the commission believed that the full benefits of implementing the preferred alternative were not adequately measured with the current corps project planning guidelines .

in 2008 , the then - governor of illinois and the then - governor of missouri wrote letters of support for plan m. plan m at a total cost of $6.88 billion would provide 500-year protection without the option for agricultural district buyouts and without trying to minimize the impacts in the lower basin ( i.e. , plan m would increase the height of floodwaters below st. louis ) .

plan m would provide less ecosystem restoration opportunities than plan h. a plan with limited scope and detail although the study authorization was labeled as comprehensive and inclusive of some navigation maintenance and habitat management considerations , the authorized flood study did not fully integrate navigation , flood , and ecosystem management as recommended in the 1994 galloway report .

instead , the corps studied and obtained construction authorization for navigation and ecosystem restoration actions ( in title viii of wrda 2007 , p.l .

110-114 ) separately from the flood plan .

due to the large study area for the flood plan , the corps chose not to perform a comprehensive watershed analysis encompassing the entire 185,000 square miles , instead it limited the study to the mississippi and illinois river floodplain encompassing 4,000 square miles , and the only tributary that was included was the illinois river .

the missouri river and smaller tributaries were excluded .

for the comprehensive flood plan , the corps identified preliminary alternatives and scoped out the federal interest in the effort ; the level of detail of the plan is compared to a corps reconnaissance study .

therefore , the umrcp final report and supporting documentation are not at the level of detail typically used to inform congressional decision - making regarding construction authorization .

the analyses used to support the umrcp ( eg , counting as benefits the increased development opportunities behind levees ) , the scoping of the study and the selection of alternatives studied , and whether nonstructural alternatives and enhanced floodplains were given equal consideration are some of the items that may be scrutinized as the final report is discussed .

for example , the hydrology and hydraulics analysis supporting the umrcp final report did not account for the effects on precipitation , runoff , and river crests from future changes in land use , population , and climate .

moreover , the scope of the umrcp final report leaves out much of the areas most severely affected in 2008 .

visions of the future floodplain whether plan h , particularly the raising of most agricultural levees to a significantly higher level of protection than currently available , contrasts with the vision of the future floodplain described in the galloway report likely will be debated .

the galloway report stated: urban centers whose existence depends on a river for commerce or whose locational advantage is tied historically to a floodplain would be protected from the ravages of devastating floods by means of levees , floodwalls , upstream reservoirs , or floodwater storage in managed upland and floodplain natural areas .

sections of communities with frequently flooded businesses or homes would become river - focused parks and recreation areas as former occupants relocated to safer areas on higher ground .

in areas outside of these highly protected communities , where land elevation provided natural protection from floods , state and local officials would control new construction by requiring it to be at elevation well out of harm's way .

those who were at risk in low - lying areas would be relocated , over time , to other areas .

… outside of the urban areas , industry would protect its own facilities against major floods .

critical infrastructure , such as water and wastewater treatment plants , power plants , and major highways and bridges would be either , elevated out of the flood's reach or protected against its ravages .

much of the infrastructure , as well as the homes , businesses , and agricultural activities located behind lower levees , would be insured against flooding through participation in commercial or federally supported insurance programs .

the potential role of higher mainstem levees in increasing risk because of their encouragement of floodplain development and reduction in flood storage is an active part of the debate over the future of the basin's floodplains .

the experience of extreme floodwaters along mississippi river tributaries in the 2008 flood and differing visions for the future of the upper mississippi river basin floodplains may be central to the debate about how to proceed with reducing flood risk in the midwest and the umrcp .

regional development and the federal role according to the economic analysis used for the development of the umrcp final report , the regional economic benefit of an alternative similar to plan h would be $27.1 billion .

the majority of regional benefits ( 79% ) cluster in illinois , with iowa and missouri receiving most of the remaining benefits .

therefore , regional stakeholders , particularly in illinois , iowa , and missouri , may view plans , like plan h and plan m , as attractive investments .

the majority of those regional economic benefits ( $20.5 billion ) are due to the increase in economic development behind the higher levees .

plan h potentially would open to development up to 215,775 acres .

this potential for expanded economic development behind levees raises concerns regarding the residual risk behind levees and the evaluation of that risk in selecting plan h as the preferred alternative .

that is , it remains unclear the extent to which the flood risk reduction benefits of plan h may be offset by the residual risk of more development behind levees .

the methodology used in developing the study appears to be more similar to the traditional corps flood damage reduction study , than a flood risk reduction study .

as well as noting that plan h has not been thoroughly vetted with the public and stakeholders , the umrcp final report stated: there is likely to be limited federal interest , based upon current guidance , in plan implementation by federal agencies.… regional or national oversight ( eg , the mississippi river commission ) would be required to ensure the plan functions as a system over the implementation and operation phases of the project and project priorities are established to reflect the changing systemic needs.… the states of illinois , iowa , and missouri need to agree on the plan and plan implementation to insure the plan is acceptable .

the corps could provide facilitation and technical support to this effort .

in effect , the umrbc final report is identifying that the states could choose to further develop then implement one of the alternatives studied without significant federal leadership or funding .

