since 2002 , overlapping strategic and economic interests have led the united states and vietnam to improve relations across a wide spectrum of issues .

starting in 2010 , the two countries accelerated this process , effectively forming a partnership on several fronts .

obama administration officials identify vietnam as one of the new partners they are cultivating as part of their "rebalancing" of u.s. priorities toward the asia - pacific , a move commonly referred to as the united states' "pivot" to the pacific .

in 2010 , the two countries mobilized a multinational response to china's perceived attempts to boost its claims to disputed waters and islands in the south china sea , and they have continued to work closely on issues of maritime freedom and security .

additionally , the obama administration encouraged vietnam to be a "full partner" in the ongoing 12-country trans pacific partnership ( tpp ) free trade agreement negotiations and has given a higher priority to cleaning up sites contaminated by agent orange / dioxin used by u.s. troops during the vietnam war .

over the past several years , the two sides also have signed a new agreement on civilian nuclear cooperation and have increased their non - proliferation cooperation .

in 2013 , president obama and vietnamese president truong tan sang met in the white house and announced a bilateral "comprehensive partnership" that is to provide an "overarching framework" for moving the relationship to a "new phase. .

as discussed in detail below , the biggest obstacle to the two countries taking a dramatic step forward in their relationship is disagreements over vietnam's human rights record .

the united states' post - world war ii military involvement in vietnam began in the early 1960s , with the dispatch of military advisers to assist the south vietnamese government ( officially known as the republic of vietnam ) in its battles with communist north vietnam and indigenous ( i.e. , south vietnamese ) communist forces and their allies .

thereafter , the u.s. presence escalated .

by the time the nixon administration withdrew u.s. forces in 1973 , millions of u.s. troops had served in vietnam , with more than 50,000 killed .

the war became increasingly unpopular in the united states and in congress .

in 1973 , following the conclusion of a paris peace agreement that brought an end to u.s. military involvement in vietnam , congress began cutting nixon administration requests for military and economic assistance to south vietnam .

u.s. - vietnam diplomatic and economic relations were virtually nonexistent for more than 15 years following north vietnam's victory in 1975 over south vietnam .

the united states maintained a trade embargo and suspended foreign assistance to unified vietnam .

obstacles to improved relations included u.s. demands that vietnam withdraw from cambodia ( which vietnam invaded in 1978 ) , u.s. insistence on the return of and information about u.s .

prisoners of war / missing in action ( pow / mias ) , and vietnamese demands that the united states provide several billion dollars in postwar reconstruction aid , which they claimed had been promised by the nixon administration .

a series of actions by vietnam following the end of the vietnam war had a long - term negative effect on u.s. - vietnamese relations .

stymied in its efforts to establish relations with the united states , vietnam aligned itself economically and militarily with the soviet union .

in addition , it invaded cambodia and installed a government backed by 200,000 vietnamese troops .

china conducted a one - month military incursion along vietnam's northern border in 1979 , which led to nearly three decades of disputes over the land border , and kept strong military pressure on vietnam until 1990 .

u.s. policy toward vietnam was also influenced by the exodus of hundreds of thousands of vietnamese "boat people," including many ethnic chinese , who fled or were expelled under vietnam's harsh reunification program .

developments in the mid - and late 1980s set the stage for the rapid normalization of ties in the following decade .

inside vietnam , disastrous economic conditions and virtual diplomatic isolation led the vcp to adopt ( at its 6 th national party congress in 1986 ) a more pragmatic , less ideological , line .

hanoi adopted market - oriented economic reforms ( dubbed doi moi , or "renovation" ) , loosened many domestic political controls , and began to seek ways to extract itself from cambodia .

u.s. - vietnam cooperation on the pow / mia issue began to improve following a 1987 visit to vietnam by general john vessey , president reagan's special emissary for pow - mia issues .

as vietnam withdrew forces from cambodia in 1989 and sought a compromise peace settlement there , the george h. w. bush administration decided to improve relations with hanoi , which was also interested in restoring ties to the united states .

in april 1991 , the united states laid out a detailed "road map" for normalization with vietnam .

later that year , vietnam allowed the united states to open an office in hanoi to handle pow / mia affairs .

in 1993 , president clinton built on the thaw by signaling the end of u.s. opposition to vietnam receiving international financial assistance .

in february 1994 , president clinton announced the end of the u.s. trade embargo on vietnam .

two months later , congress passed the foreign relations authorization act , fiscal years 1994 and 1995 ( p.l .

103-236 ) , which contained a "sense of the senate" section expressing that chamber's support for the normalization of relations with vietnam .

despite congressional efforts to tie normalization to the pow / mia issue and vietnam's human rights record , president clinton continued to advance u.s. relations with vietnam .

he appointed the first post - war ambassador to vietnam in 1997 and signed the landmark u.s. - vietnam bilateral trade agreement ( bta ) in 2000 .

throughout this period , the normalization process was made possible by vietnam's strategic desire to improve relations with the united states , continued improvements in pow / mia cooperation , vietnam's ongoing reform efforts , and by vietnam's general cooperation on refugee issues .

president clinton visited vietnam from november 16-20 , 2000 , the first trip by a u.s. president since richard nixon went to saigon ( now ho chi minh city ) in 1969 .

the visit was notable for the unexpected enthusiasm expressed by ordinary vietnamese , who thronged by the thousands to greet or catch a glimpse of the president and the first lady .

these spontaneous outbursts , combined with the president's public and private remarks about human rights and democratization , triggered rhetorical responses from conservative vietnamese leaders .

during the visit , vietnamese leaders pressed the united states for compensation for agent orange victims , for assistance locating the remains of vietnam's soldiers still missing , and for an increase in the united states' bilateral economic assistance program .

progress towards the resumption of normal bilateral relations continued under the george w. bush administration .

despite growing concerns about the vietnamese government's human rights record , congress ratified the u.s. - vietnam bta in october 2001 and the new agreement went into effect on december 10 , 2001 .

under the bta , the united states granted vietnam conditional normal trade relations ( ntr ) , a move that significantly reduced u.s. tariffs on most imports from vietnam .

in return , hanoi agreed to undertake a wide range of market - liberalization measures .

vietnam's conditional ntr status was renewed every year until december 2006 , when congress passed p.l .

109-432 , a comprehensive trade and tax bill , which granted vietnam permanent ntr status as part of a wider agreement that saw vietnam become a member of the world trade organization ( wto ) as of january 11 , 2007 .

during the bush administration , the united states and vietnam dramatically upgraded diplomatic and strategic aspects of their relationship to the point where the two countries had all - but - normalized bilateral relations , at least from the u.s. point of view .

however , many vietnamese still consider relations to not be completely normalized until the united states provides more compensation for purported victims of " agent orange " and / or drops its legal categorization of vietnam as a non - market economy .

for the first decade after reunification in 1975 , vietnamese leaders placed a high priority on ideological purity and rigid government controls .

by the mid - 1980s , disastrous economic conditions and diplomatic isolation led the country to adopt a more pragmatic line , enshrined in the doi moi ( renovation ) economic reforms of 1986 .

under doi moi , the government gave farmers greater control over what they produce , abandoned many aspects of central state planning , cut subsidies to state enterprises , reformed the price system , and opened the country to foreign direct investment ( fdi ) .

after stalling somewhat in the late 1990s , economic reforms were accelerated in the early 2000s , as vietnam made sweeping changes that were necessary to enter the wto .

politically and socially , the country became much less repressive , even tolerating some expressions of dissent in certain areas that had been considered sensitive .

that said , although vietnam appears to be a freer country than it was two decades ago , according to many sources human rights conditions have worsened compared to the middle of the last decade , particularly for dissenters .

there are signs that factional battles among vietnamese leaders have intensified since at least 2011 .

prime minister nguyen tan dung , who has held his post since 2006 , has come under increasing criticism for allegations of corruption of his allies and for an array of nationwide economic problems .

h.r .

772 ( faleomavaega ) .

states that the united states has an interest in ensuring that "no party threatens or uses force or coercion unilaterally to assert maritime territorial claims in east asia and southeast asia , including in the south china sea.... " condemns chinese vessels' "use of threats or force" in the south china sea and the east china sea .

supports u.s. military operations to uphold freedom of navigation rights in the waters and air space of the south china sea and east china sea .

requires the secretary of state to submit to congress a report on the negotiations over a code of conduct in the south china sea .

introduced february 15 , 2013 ; referred to house subcommittee on asia and the pacific .

h.r .

1682 ( lofgren ) .

adds vietnam to the list of countries ineligible for participating in the generalized system of preferences program unless the president certifies that vietnam is meeting certain requirements in human rights and combating human trafficking .

contains a presidential waiver provision .

introduced april 23 , 2013 ; referred to house ways and means committee .

h.r .

1897 ( smith ) / s. 1649 ( boozman ) .

vietnam human rights act of 2013 .

prohibits increases in many forms of u.s. non - humanitarian assistance to vietnam over fy2012 amounts unless ( a ) vietnam's human rights conditions are certified as improving , or ( b ) the president issues a waiver .

states that the sense of congress is that the united states should not reduce vietnamese language services of the voice of america and radio free asia ; that vietnam should be redesignated as a country of particular concern for religious freedom ; and that vietnam's activities to combat human trafficking are insufficient to justify its elevation to "tier 2" status in the state department's annual trafficking in persons report .

requires the secretary of state to submit an annual report to congress on various matters .

h.r .

1897 was introduced may 8 , 2013 ; passed by the house 405-3 ( roll call 435 ) on august 1 , 2013 ; referred to senate foreign relations committee .

s. 1649 was introduced november 5 , 2013 ; referred to senate foreign relations committee .

h.r .

2519 ( lee ) .

directs the departments of state and veterans affairs to provide assistance and support research to help "covered individuals" affected by agent orange .

defines "covered individual" as a vietnam resident who is affected by health issues related to agent orange exposure between january 1 , 1961 , and may 7 , 1975 , or who lives or had lived in or near geographic areas in vietnam that continue to contain high levels of agent orange , or who is affected by such health issues as the child or descendant of such resident .

introduced june 26 , 2013 ; referred to house subcommittee on disability assistance and memorial affairs .

h.r .

4495 ( forbes ) .

the asia - pacific region priority act .

contains a number of provisions regarding maritime disputes in the south china sea and various countries' actions there .

states that the united states has an interest in "maintaining freedom of navigation , freedom of the seas , respect for international law , and unimpeded lawful commerce" in the south china sea .

states that u.s. policy urges all parties to the disputes to "refrain from engaging in destabilizing activities. .

introduced april 28 , 2014 ; referred to house armed services committee and house foreign affairs subcommittee on asia and the pacific .

h.r .

4254 ( royce ) .

imposes financial and immigration sanctions on certain vietnamese who are complicit in human rights abuses .

requires the president to submit to congress a list of individuals complicit in certain human rights abuses .

introduced march 14 , 2014 ; referred to the house foreign affairs committee , ways and means committee , financial services committee , and judiciary subcommittee on immigration and border security .

h.j.res .

116 ( kinzinger ) / s.j.res .

39 ( reid ) .

state that congress approves of the u.s. - vietnam nuclear cooperation agreement .

h.j.res .

116 introduced june 9 , 2014 ; referred to house committee on foreign affairs .

s.j.res .

39 introduced june 9 , 2014 ; referred to senate foreign affairs committee .

h.res .

218 ( royce ) .

"encourages" the state department to redesignate vietnam as a country of particular concern for "particularly severe violations of religious freedom. .

"urges" the state department to demonstrate that the expansion of u.s. - vietnam relations will depend on improvements in religious freedom in vietnam .

introduced may 16 , 2013 ; referred to the house subcommittee on asia and the pacific .

s. 929 ( cornyn ) .

the vietnam human rights sanctions act .

requires the president to ( a ) compile and submit to congress a list of vietnamese deemed to be complicit in human rights abuses , ( b ) prohibit these individuals from entering the united states , and ( c ) impose financial sanctions on these individuals .

authorizes the president to waive sanctions to comply with international agreements or if in the u.s. national interest .

expresses the sense of congress that the secretary of state should designate vietnam as a country of particular concern ( cpc ) with respect to religious freedom , and that bilateral relations cannot expand unless vietnam's human rights conditions improve .

introduced may 9 , 2013 ; referred to the senate committee on foreign relations .

s.j.res .

36 ( menendez ) .

states that congress favors the u.s. - vietnam nuclear cooperation agreement .

except for certain allied countries and institutions , prohibits issuance of any export license pursuant to a nuclear cooperation agreement 30 years after the agreement's entry into force .

introduced may 22 , 2014 ; referred to senate foreign relations committee .

s.res .

167 ( menendez ) .

states that the united states has an interest in freedom of navigation and overflight in asia - pacific maritime domains .

"condemns" maritime vessels' and aircrafts' use of coercion , threats , or force in the south china sea and east china sea to assert disputed maritime or territorial claims or alter the status quo .

"supports" asean and china's efforts to develop a code of conduct for the south china sea .

"supports" u.s. military operations in the western pacific , including in partnership with other countries , to support the freedom of navigation .

introduced june 10 , 2013 ; passed by the senate by unanimous consent july 29 , 2013 .

