since 1946 , congress has approved , on four occasions , legislation to regulate lobbyist contacts with members of congress .

in each instance , the legislation was designed to require individuals and companies who lobby members of congress to register with the house of representatives and the senate and disclose receipts and expenditures related to lobbying .

initial registration and disclosure provisions , contained in the legislative reorganization act of 1946 , required lobbyists to register with congress and disclose receipts and expenditures .

in 1995 , the lobbying disclosure act repealed the 1946 act and created a system of detailed reporting and registration thresholds .

in 1998 , technical amendments to the 1995 law were passed .

in 2007 , the honest leadership and open government act amended disclosure and reporting requirements to require quarterly , instead of semi - annual reporting .

the clerk of the house and the secretary of the senate have collected registration and disclosure data since the passage of the lda in 1995 .

using these data , it is possible to analyze registration and disclosure trends under the lda and changes made by the hloga amendments .

the following sections examine registration and disclosure data filed under the lda between 2001 and 2007 , and between 2008 and 2010 following the passage of the hloga amendments .

all data are presented from the clerk's lobbying disclosure website .

the lda requires the clerk and the secretary to use a single , computer based system for lobbyists and lobbying firms to file registration and disclosure forms .

the clerk and the secretary , however , use different search engines and display the data differently .

data from the clerk are utilized because they provide distinctions between paper and electronically filed reports .

the distinction between report submission methods shows compliance with the lda requirements for electronic submissions and the rate of online filing prior to the passage of the hloga amendments .

tracking these numbers is important because it enables a comparison of lobbying registration and disclosure before and after the hloga amendments .

analyzing the registration , termination , and disclosure data before and after the hloga amendments allows a systematic examination of the amendments impact on the lobbying community .

if the goal of the hloga was to more closely regulate lobbyists by requiring additional disclosure , the data constitute an opportunity to examine the law's impact .

the impact of the hloga on the registration , termination , and disclosure of lobbyists and lobbying firms is mixed .

in the three years since the hloga amendments were implemented , it appears the registration trends that existed between 2001 and 2007 continue under the hloga amendments .

for termination , overall trends also continue , with an increase in terminations in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009 .

since the first quarter of 2009 , the number of terminations has stabilized and roughly mirrors the 2008 numbers .

overall , while terminations in 2008 and 2009 are greater than anytime between 2001 and 2007 , the pattern of increased terminations in congressional election years , followed by a slight decline the following year , continues .

the most significant change in reporting occurred for the filing of disclosure statements .

instead of filing two reports per year on lobbying activity , lobbyists , and lobbying firms are required to report four times per year .

collecting the data in quarters instead of semi - annual periods appears to have uncovered a reporting trend that was otherwise obscured under the semi - annual system .

for 2008 and 2010 , the data shows an overall decline in disclosure reports for the fourth quarter .

the data suggest that lobbyists and lobbying firms make more contacts and engage in a greater percentage of their lobbying activity in the first three quarters of the year than at the end of a congressional session .

the year - end report data from 2001 to 2007 , which included both third and fourth quarter activity , may have been motivated by third quarter activity that was previously included in year end reports .

it is possible , however , that the 2008 and 2010 upticks in reporting reflect the transition to a new presidential administration coupled with the beginning of a new congress .

for 2009 , the volume of disclosure reports does not easily fit with the volume of reports for 2008 and 2009 .

fourth quarter lobbying activity , as shown by the number of disclosure reports continues at a high level .

this may reflect the continuation of congress's legislative agenda from the first to the second session .

in the 111 th congress , many issues that were initiated during the first session continued through an after - thanksgiving session and into the second session .

lobbying for those provisions continued throughout that period .

pursuant to the lobbying disclosure act , as amended by the honest leadership and open government act of 2007 ( chapter 26 , title 2 , united states code ) , the following definitions are applicable to the registration and disclosure process .

