since the mid - 1980s , congress has passed legislation that is intended to support older youth in foster care who are expected to leave care without being reunited with their parents or having another permanent family placement .

at the center of these policies is the chafee foster care independence program ( cfcip ) , authorized in 1999 ( p.l .

106-169 ) to provide services , including housing , for older foster youth .

with funding from the cfcip and other sources , states have developed independent living programs that supplement youth's own efforts to attain self - sufficiency .

additionally , federal law directs child welfare agencies to develop policies , where appropriate , targeted to older youth that assist in their transition from care , such as written case plans outlining the services they will receive to prepare for independent living .

despite these services and supports , research has demonstrated that compared to their counterparts in the general population , current and former foster youth are more likely to have difficulty making the transition to adulthood .

the limited research literature on this topic demonstrates that during their early adult years , former foster youth are much more likely than their peers to forego higher education , describe their general health as fair or poor , become homeless , and rely on public supports .

this research , along with the efforts of policy makers and child welfare advocates , has brought greater attention to the challenges facing youth transitioning from care .

congress has focused on efforts to ensure that youth have connections to caring adults and can continue to receive support from the state after they reach the legal age of majority — usually age 18 — to help ease the challenges associated with the transition to adulthood .

asserting that most youth are not ready to live independently at age 18 , federal policy makers have expressed special interest in providing a safety net for youth who are wards of the state .

the 110 th congress conducted a series of hearings on child welfare reforms , some of which focused on older youth in care .

these hearings culminated in the passage of the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-351 ) , an omnibus child welfare bill that addresses several aspects of the child welfare system .

p.l .

110-351 is arguably one of the most significant laws that pertain to older youth in foster care .

more recently , the 113 th congress held hearings on child welfare topics that focus , in part , on older youth .

following these hearings and other efforts , congress passed the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) .

president obama signed the bill into law on september 30 , 2014 .

the law specifies protections for older youth in care , seeks to promote "normalcy" among children in foster care so they can participate in age and developmentally - appropriate extracurricular and other activities , and requires child welfare agencies to respond to children who are victims of sex trafficking or may be at risk for such victimization .

this report presents issues affecting older youth as they transition from foster care into adulthood , particularly with regard to implementation of p.l .

110-351 and p.l .

113-183 .

perhaps the most pressing implementation issue concerning p.l .

110-351 is the challenges states may face in extending foster care to older youth .

as of fy2011 , states may extend care after age 18 by authorizing partial reimbursement for the cost of that continued support .

one possible challenge in implementing this provision is that even with assistance from the federal government , states may be hesitant to extend care because of the cost .

in addition , states are required to assist youth in developing a transition plan within 90 days of exiting care that identifies the supports and services available when they transition from care .

in carrying out the plan , states can take a variety of approaches , such as beginning the transition planning process well before the 90-day requirement and engaging adults who can have meaningful connections to the youth when they emancipate from care .

even with the option to extend foster care , policy makers and advocates remain concerned that older foster youth and those who have aged out will continue to experience challenges during the transition to adulthood .

emancipated youth face particular obstacles in fostering permanent connections with caring adults , securing health insurance and housing , and staying connected to work and school .

further , little is known about youth as they transition from foster care , although a new national database will likely provide some insight into their outcomes across a number of areas , such as education , employment , and contact with social service and criminal justice systems .

another concern is that youth in foster care are vulnerable to child sex trafficking , which refers to adults sexually exploiting children under age of 18 for commercial purposes .

p.l .

113-183 requires , one year after the law's enactment , that child welfare agencies have policies in place to serve these youth .

congress may wish to monitor how states are implementing these and related requirements , including how many victims have been reported by state child welfare agencies to the federal government and any best practices that have been identified for serving these victims .

after a brief background on federal child welfare policies concerning transitioning youth , this report will include discussions on implementation of select aspects of p.l .

110-351 and other ongoing issues .

the report is a companion to another report that provides context about older foster youth and related federal policy .

see crs report rl34499 , youth transitioning from foster care: background and federal programs .

under title iv - e of the social security act , states and indian tribes may seek federal funds for partial reimbursement of the room and board costs needed to support eligible children who are in out - of - home foster care .

funding for the title iv - e foster care program is appropriated out of the general treasury and is available on an open - ended entitlement basis .

this means the federal government is obligated to reimburse states for every eligible expenditure made on behalf of an eligible child .

a child or youth is eligible for title iv - e foster care if he or she is in the care and under the responsibility of the state and , among other things the child or youth is a citizen or qualified alien and meets certain income / assets tests , age , and family structure / living arrangement rules in the home he / she was removed from ; a judge has determined that ( 1 ) the home the child was removed from was "contrary to the welfare" of the child ; ( 2 ) the state made reasonable efforts to initially prevent the child's placement in a foster care setting ; and ( 3 ) on a continuing basis , the state makes reasonable efforts to secure a permanent home for the child ; and the child is placed in an eligible licensed setting with an eligible provider .

the state or tribal child welfare agency must provide a "foster care maintenance payment" on behalf of every title iv - e eligible child in foster care .

this payment is made to the licensed foster family home or institution where the eligible child is placed to provide for his or her care and safety .

a title iv - e maintenance payment is defined as "payments to cover the cost of ( and the cost of providing ) food , clothing , shelter , daily supervision , school supplies , a child's personal incidentals , liability insurance with respect to a child , reasonable travel to the child's home for visitation , and reasonable travel for the child to remain in the school in which the child is enrolled at the time of placement. .

federal reimbursement of these costs may only be sought for children placed in a licensed child care institution or foster care home , except that eligible young people who remain in extended care may be placed in an independent living setting , as described in a subsequent section .

states and tribes that receive federal child welfare funds must also carry out activities that are designed to promote the safety , permanency , and well - being of all youth in care , regardless of whether they are eligible for a federal maintenance payment .

a child remains eligible for title iv - e foster care maintenance payments until his or her 18 th birthday , or 19 th birthday if the child is still completing secondary school or equivalent training ; however , beginning with fy2011 , states and tribes may also provide these payments to youth until age 21 .

states may seek reimbursement for a youth age 18 or older who is title iv - e eligible and ( 1 ) completing high school or a program leading to an equivalent credential ; ( 2 ) enrolled in an institution that provides post - secondary or vocational education ; ( 3 ) participating in a program or activity designed to promote , or remove barriers to , employment ; or ( 4 ) employed at least 80 hours per month ( i.e. , at least part - time ) .

states and tribes may also seek reimbursement for an older youth's foster care if the youth has a medical condition that makes him or her incapable of participating in the activity and this incapacity is supported by regularly updated information in the youth's case plan .

the law does not describe programs that may help to remove barriers to employment , or what constitutes a medical condition that could preclude a youth from working or attending school .

states are permitted to seek federal foster care reimbursement for all eligible youth ( including those who remain in care ) who live in licensed foster homes or a licensed "child care institution. .

a child care institution is defined as a private child care institution or a public child care institution for no more than 25 children that is licensed by the state .

the definition excludes a detention facility , forestry camp , training school , or any other facility operated primarily to detain delinquent children and youth .

as authorized by p.l .

110-351 , and beginning with fy2011 , states may also seek reimbursement for youth ages 18 or older who remain in foster care at state option and are placed in a "supervised setting in which the individual is living independently. .

the act directs hhs to establish in regulation what qualifies as such a setting .

other provisions of the law address the connection of youth to caring adults , through adoption or placement with relatives .

with limited exceptions , monthly federal ( title iv - e adoption and kinship guardianship ) assistance has not generally been available for a child who has reached his or her 18 th birthday and who left foster care for a permanent family via adoption or kinship guardianship .

however , as of fy2011 , states and tribes that choose to provide adoption or kinship guardianship subsidies on behalf of eligible children who leave foster care after their 16 th birthday , so long as those youth have not yet reached their 21 st birthday and are enrolled in school , employed at least 80 hours a month , or participating in an activity designed to promote or remove barriers to employment .

states and tribes may also cover an older youth with a medical condition that makes him or her incapable of participating in the activity and this incapacity is supported by regularly updated information in the child's case plan .

in addition , a state or tribe is allowed to continue this assistance up to the 21 st birthday on behalf of any child , regardless of the age at which the child left foster care , if the state determines that "the child has a mental or physical handicap that warrants the continuation of assistance. .

 ( this was and remains true with regard to adoption assistance ; p.l .

110-351 extended this , as of fy2011 , to kinship guardianship assistance. ) .

with regard to kinship guardianship , the child must have been "residing for at least six consecutive months in the home of the prospective relative guardian," among other requirements .

hhs's july 2010 program instructions direct states that opt to extend foster care beyond age 18 to provide adoption and kinship guardianship subsidies to youth age 18 and older , up to the age the state has elected .

the instructions advise that the term "relative" for purposes of kinship guardianship assistance can include biological and legal familial ties or refer more broadly to tribal kin , extended family and friends , or other "fictive" kin .

states and tribes are further advised that they may establish conditions under which a person may qualify to be a child's guardian or enter into a legal guardianship arrangement .

for example , such conditions can include requiring a child to be in care for more than a six - month period , and targeting certain age groups for guardianship , such as children over age 12 .

the chafee foster care independence program ( cfcip ) funds services to assist youth who are expected to emancipate from foster care .

as enacted by the foster care independence act of 1999 ( p.l .

106-169 ) , the purposes of the cfcip are to identify youth who are likely to remain in foster care until age 18 and provide them with support services to help make the transition to self - sufficiency ; assist these youth in obtaining employment and preparing for and entering postsecondary training and educational institutions ; provide personal and emotional support to youth aging out of foster care through mentors and other dedicated adults ; enhance the efforts of former foster youth ages 18 to 21 to achieve self - sufficiency through supports that connect them to employment , education , housing , and other services ; and assure that these former foster youth recognize and accept personal responsibility for preparing for and then making the transition from adolescence to adulthood .

p.l .

110-351 explicitly enables states and tribes to provide independent living services to youth who leave foster care after attaining age 16 for placement in an adoptive home or with a legal kinship guardian .

the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) , signed into law on september 30 , 2014 , added a purpose area to the chafee program that is effective one year after the law's enactment — to ensure children who are likely to remain in foster care until 18 years of age have regular , ongoing opportunities to engage in age - or developmentally appropriate activities .

the cfcip is a capped entitlement with an annual ceiling set at $140 million .

states and tribes are entitled to an amount based on their share of the nation's foster care population , in the most recent year for which information is available .

however , no state may receive less than the greater of $500,000 or the amount received by the state in fy1998 .

states must provide a 20% match .

with funding from the cfcip and other sources , states have developed independent living programs consistent with the purposes of the law .

these programs provide direct services to youth such as housing , career exploration , education services , preventative health activities , counseling , mentoring , training in financial management , and other services .

to be eligible for cfcip funds , states and tribes must describe in their five - year child and family services plan how they will carry out their independent living program .

among other things , they must ensure statewide coverage ( although not necessarily uniform ) of the program and ensure that the program serves children of various ages and at various stages of achieving independence .

states and tribes must also certify in their plans that they meet certain requirements pertaining to the youth served and how funding will be spent .

for example , no more than 30% of program funds may be used for the room and board of youth ages 18 to 21 .

separately , the chafee education and training voucher program ( etv ) was authorized by the promoting safe and stable families amendments of 2001 ( p.l .

107-133 ) for children who have emancipated from care or were adopted from care at age 16 or older .

p.l .

110-351 also permits youth who leave foster care for guardianship at age 16 or older to be eligible .

congress authorized $60 million in discretionary funds for the program , which is allocated to states based on their relative share of the foster care population .

congress has appropriated approximately $45 million each year for the program .

the program authorizes vouchers worth up to $5,000 annually per eligible youth for the cost of full - time or part - time attendance at an institution of higher education , as defined by the higher education act of 1965 .

"cost of attendance" refers to tuition , fees , books , supplies , equipment and materials , room and board , and related expenses .

students are eligible for the vouchers if they are in good academic standing and making progress toward completing their program or graduating , though states may have additional requirements .

only youth receiving a voucher at age 21 may continue to participate in the voucher program until age 23 .

p.l .

110-351 explicitly authorizes states to provide independent living services to youth who have left foster care under a permanent arrangement before reaching age 18 , either by adoption or kinship guardianship , in addition to the traditional cfcip population of foster youth who age out without a permanent home .

this means that independent living services — with their focus on connecting youth to school , work , and other resources — may be available to these youth until they reach age 21 .

states currently provide cfcip services to youth "likely to remain in foster care until age 18," and they have broad discretion in defining this term .

going forward , as states prioritize which youth to serve in the program , they may need to determine whether independent living programs have the capacity to serve any additional youth .

in addition , states will need to determine how to fulfill the purpose that addresses youth participating in age - or developmentally appropriate activities .

this purpose area will go into effect in fy2016 , before new mandatory funding is available under the program ( in fy2020 ) .

child welfare law , as amended by p.l .

110-351 , requires that a youth's caseworker , and as appropriate , other representative ( s ) of the youth , assist and support him or her in developing a transition plan .

the plan is to be directed by the youth , and is to include specific options on housing , health insurance , education , local opportunities for mentors , workforce supports , and employment services .

the plan must be implemented 90 days prior to a youth's 18 th birthday ( or the 19 th , 20 th , or 21 st birthdays of youth in states that take up the option to extend foster care ) , "whether during that period foster care maintenance payments are being made on the child's behalf or the child is receiving benefits or services under [the chafee foster care independence program]. .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( ppaca , p.l .

111-148 ) , added another element to the transition plan .

the law requires that the plan must address the importance of designating another individual to make health care treatment decisions on behalf of the youth if he or she becomes unable to participate in these decisions and does not have a relative who would be authorized to make these decisions under state law , or he or she does not want a relative to make these decisions .

in addition , the transition plan must provide the youth with the option to execute a health care power of attorney , health care proxy , or other similar document recognized under state law .

the transition plan is distinct from a case plan , which is required for every child and youth in foster care , but the two would appear to be somewhat complementary .

the case plan is implemented and modified as needed while the youth is in care .

in the case plan , the child welfare agency must describe in a written document the youth's placement and a plan for ensuring the youth receives safe and proper care , among other items .

for youth ages 16 or older , the case plan must also address the programs and services that will help the youth make a successful transition to adulthood "where appropriate. .

in contrast , the transition plan is to include options about the services and supports that the youth may receive ( presumably ) when he or she is no longer in the custody of the state or receiving cfcip - funded independent living services .

further , the transition plan requires that youth and other stakeholders identify specific options that will help youth live independently .

for example , the plan must specify which type of housing options the youth will have ( and presumably alternative options if housing is not available ) .

the transition plan must also be directed by the youth in consultation with others , and can be as detailed as the youth would like .

finally , the case plan is reviewed by a court as part of annual hearings to review the youth's ( or child's ) permanency goal ( s ) .

the transition plan is not reviewed by a court or other body .

the july 2010 program instructions issued by hhs on p.l .

110-351 provide additional guidance on the transition plan .

the instructions encourage child welfare agencies to use transition planning to build on earlier efforts to assist young people in making the transition from foster care , including through the case planning process and permanency hearings .

child welfare agencies are encouraged to begin engaging youth in the transition plan process "well in advance" of the 90-day period .

the july 2010 program instructions state that the transition plan is not required for a youth who leaves foster care more than 90 days before his or her 18 th birthday , or an older age in states that elect to extend care .

this raises questions about those youth who emancipate at any earlier age .

thousands of youth emancipate from care at age 17 , raising the possibility that without a transition plan , they could leave care less prepared than their peers in care who are emancipated at ages 18 or older .

 ( these youth might also be less likely to benefit from the medicaid pathway for emancipated youth , who must have been in care on their 18 th birthday to be eligible for this pathway , effective in 2014. ) .

similarly , states and tribes would not necessarily help develop transition plans for youth who remain in care beyond age 18 but leave at least 90 days before reaching age 19 , 20 , or 21 ( depending on the state ) .

those in the field of social work have begun to develop guidance on how to carry out a transition plan .

this guidance emphasizes that the plan should engage youth and stakeholders in a process , and not serve solely a checklist of skills , and further that the transition planning process should focus on helping the youth achieve permanency with caring adults that will provide lifelong and possible legal relationships to youth .

the guidance stresses that plans should be developed with the strengths of the young people in mind ; be directed by the youth to ensure they actively participate in the process ; and encourage service providers and those closest to the youth to share information and jointly help the youth in planning for their future ; among other principles .

in a 2014 report , gao found that states have adopted policies to engage youth in the transition planning process and providing essential supports as part of the transition from foster care .

for example , of 53 jurisdictions nearly all ( 49 ) require that youth input on the plan is documented and that the plan includes ensuring that youth have key documents ( eg , birth certificate ) .

further , 35 jurisdictions require that the transition plan is separate from other transition planning efforts , such as plans developed in connection with permanency hearings .

over half ( 28 ) of jurisdictions require a transition planning specialist or outreach worker to assist the youth with the plan .

nonetheless , several jurisdictions reported challenges with transition planning , including a lack of staff training or time to effectively engage youth in transition planning ( 21 jurisdictions ) , identifying and engaging supportive adults from the youth's life in the transition planning process ( 21 ) , and identifying appropriate housing for youth transitioning from care ( 31 ) .

some states , including hawaii and nebraska , have developed transition planning processes that provide detailed directives about engaging youth and others who are involved in these processes .

in hawaii , youth and others hold transition planning "circles" to celebrate the young person becoming an adult and assisting the youth plan for their future .

these conferences are intended to be driven by the youth and to draw on the youth's support system to generate options and resources that help the youth make decisions about their future and meet their goals .

they include specific options that are outlined in federal law , as well as options for transportation and spirituality .

foster club , an advocacy organization for youth in foster care , has developed a transition planning kit for older youth in nebraska .

it specifies the roles of the transition plan team and courts in oversight .

it also includes a transition proposal checklist that is revisited six months after it is initially created , and again 90 days before the youth ages out .

in addition , it includes what is referred to as a "permanency pact," whereby youth consider which individuals can assist them as they transition and the specific types of supports they may be able to provide ( eg , a place to spend the holidays , job search assistance , assistance with medical appointments , co - signer , emergency cash , inclusion in social circle / community activities ) .

even with the passage of p.l .

110-351 , policy makers and child welfare advocates remained concerned that older foster youth and those who have aged out face challenges as they transition to adulthood .

the midwest evaluation and other research demonstrate that youth have difficulty in fostering permanent connections with caring adults , securing health insurance and housing , and staying connected to work and school .

further , little is known about youth as they transition from foster care and the effectiveness of the services they receive , although a new national database will likely provide some insight into their outcomes across a number of areas , such as education , employment , and contact with social service and criminal justice systems .

finally , a recent focus of congress has been on increasing protections for children who are vulnerable to going missing from care , or may go missing , and responding to youth in foster care who may be vulnerable to sex trafficking or have been victims of sex trafficking .

the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) , enacted in september 2014 , seeks to address some of these issues .

state and local child welfare agencies are responsible for carrying out child welfare policies that are intended to promote the safety , well - being , and permanency of all children .

child victims of sex trafficking may come to the attention of the child welfare agency if they are reported to the agency's child protective services ( cps ) hotline .

in addition , children in foster care — who are typically placed out of their homes due to abuse or neglect by their parents or caregivers — may be vulnerable to trafficking .

youth who run away from foster care are perceived to be especially susceptible to this type of victimization .

the capacity for state and local child welfare agencies to respond to the needs of sex trafficking victims is believed to be limited .

this may be due , in part , to inadequate training , insufficient resources , high caseloads , and the perception that victims should be handled in the juvenile justice system .

in addition , states may not have mechanisms in place to "screen in" cases involving children who are sex trafficked because the perpetrator involved is not the child's parent or caregiver as these terms are defined under state law .

as part of its report on child sex trafficking , the national academy of sciences recommends , among other items , improving collaboration and information sharing across multiple sectors such as the federal government , state and local governments , academic and research institutions , foundations and nongovernmental organizations , and the commercial sector .

in the 113 th congress , the house ways and means subcommittee on human resources and the senate finance committee held hearings about child sex trafficking and the opportunities and challenges for child welfare agencies to respond .

witnesses testified about how children become victimized and the strategies that selected child welfare agencies have taken to recognize and combat child sex trafficking .

these hearings and other efforts culminated in passage of the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) .

the act amends the title iv - e foster care program to require state child welfare agencies to develop and implement procedures to identify , document in agency records , and determine appropriate services for certain children or youth who are victims of sex trafficking , or at risk of being such victims as defined under the trafficking victims protection act .

the procedures must be developed in consultation with state and local law enforcement , juvenile justice systems , health care providers , education agencies , and organizations with experience in dealing with at - risk children and youth .

the procedures must also ensure relevant training for caseworkers .

the law provides that these procedures need to be developed within one year of the bill's enactment ( on september 30 , 2014 ) and implemented within two years of that date .

further , no later than two years after the enactment of p.l .

113-183 , the law requires state child welfare agencies to report to law enforcement authorities immediately , or in no case later than 24 hours , after they receive information about child or youth victims of sex trafficking .

additionally , within three years of the law's enactment , state child welfare agencies are required to annually report to hhs the total number of children and youth who are sex trafficking victims .

hhs in turn is required , within four years of that date , to annually report to congress and the public ( via the hhs website ) the total number of children and youth who are reported by state child welfare agencies as victims of sex trafficking .

p.l .

113-183 also directs hhs to submit a written report to congress , no later than two years after enactment of the bill , summarizing demographic information and discussing state efforts to provide specialized services , foster family homes , child care institutions , or other forms of placement for children who are victims of sex trafficking , and related requirements .

under the law , hhs must also establish the national advisory committee on domestic sex trafficking and to appoint all members of the committee ( in consultation with the attorney general ) within 180 days after the bill's enactment .

the committee is charged with advising the hhs secretary and the attorney general on policies concerning improvements to the nation's response to domestic sex trafficking of minors from the child welfare system and developing recommended best practices for states to follow in combating the domestic sex trafficking of minors , among other responsibilities .

congress may wish to monitor how states implement these requirements when they go into effect one to four years after the law's enactment .

some considerations include ( 1 ) the type of guidance and technical assistance hhs provides states to make them aware of the child welfare agency's role in responding to child sex trafficking , ( 2 ) whether states are serving youth who are not or were not previously in foster care , ( 3 ) how many victims are reported by state child welfare agencies to the federal government , and ( 4 ) any best practices that have been identified for serving these victims .

in addition , state child welfare agencies are required to serve only children and youth victims ( or possible victims ) who are already in the child welfare system , and not necessarily those who may come to the attention of the agency as a victim .

as congress examines implementation of the new law , it may wish to consider the extent to which state child welfare agencies should take on responsibilities to screen in victims ( or possible victims ) .

pending legislation ( including h.r .

5081 , passed by the house in july 2014 ) would require state child welfare agencies to have procedures in place to identify and assess reports involving children who are sex trafficking victims , and train child protective services ( cps ) workers to identify and assess child victims of sex trafficking , among other changes .

children who are removed from their parents or guardians and placed in foster care homes because of abuse and neglect may go missing .

federal law and policy have generally provided limited guidance to states on serving children missing from care , and the focus of this guidance is exclusively on children who run away from their placements .

further , the federal runaway and homeless youth program and the missing and exploited children's program do not target services and supports specifically for children in foster care .

some child welfare stakeholders have sought a more uniform and robust response to children missing from care .

in an unpublished survey from 2004 conducted by the child welfare league of america ( cwla ) , a child welfare organization , many states reported that they had policies and procedures in place to prevent children from going missing from foster care or recovering them when they do .

still , it is unclear the extent to which these states carry out the policies they have established and whether implementation differs across jurisdictions within states .

the recently enacted preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) provides a directive to state child welfare agencies on children missing from care .

it focuses on responding to children who go missing and directing the child welfare agency to involve other entities when a child goes missing .

specifically , the law requires the state child welfare agency ( as part of its title iv - e plan ) to develop protocols for ( 1 ) expeditiously locating any child missing from foster care ; ( 2 ) determining the primary factors contributing to the child running away or otherwise going missing from care and responding to those factors in the current and subsequent placements of the child ; ( 3 ) learning about the child's experience while absent from care , including determining if the child is a possible victim of sex trafficking ; and ( 4 ) reporting any related information as required by hhs .

these protocols must be developed and implemented within one year of the law's enactment .

p.l .

113-183 further requires state child welfare agencies to report information it receives on missing and abducted children or youth to the national center on missing and exploited children ( ncmec ) , a federally funded resource center on missing children , and to law enforcement authorities for inclusion in the federal bureau of investigation's ( fbi ) national crime information center ( ncic ) database .

children missing from care raise several issues about the role of child welfare agencies and the federal government in responding to these cases .

for example , child welfare agencies may need to examine larger issues that may play a role in whether a child goes missing .

best practice guidelines issue by the child welfare league of america ( cwla ) in 2005 recommend that state child welfare agencies have certain procedures and policies in place , such as ( 1 ) recruit , retain , and train a sufficient and competent workforce and maintain caseload standards that permit workers to perform the duties necessary to achieve successful outcomes ; ( 2 ) include youth , birthparents , extended family , tribal members , and caregivers in all decision making as appropriate ; ( 3 ) examine the structure and operation of foster and group homes , residential facilities , or agencies that display higher rates of runaways ; and ( 4 ) implement remedial action if necessary to correct the structural and operational deficiencies that cause or contribute to running behavior of children in care .

another consideration is how states define missing , and whether to report all missing children to law enforcement agencies .

for example , at least a couple of states define "missing" to include children whose whereabouts are known but are not at their foster care placements .

this raises questions about whether children who are missing , including those whose whereabouts are known , ought to be reported to law enforcement .

states could restrict reporting children who are missing from care to circumstances where law enforcement can be most helpful .

this may be necessary because law enforcement agencies often have competing demands from other pressing public safety threats , and smaller law enforcement agencies may not have dedicated staff for missing persons cases .

further , law enforcement agencies may choose not to respond as vigorously to certain types of missing incidents such as frequent runaways , due to a variety of factors such as competing demands , the time it takes to process paperwork and transport juveniles , the frustration of runaway cases involving juveniles who do not want to return home , and the likelihood that juveniles will run again .

nonetheless , even children and youth whose whereabouts are known may still be at risk of endangerment .

a related issue is the extent to which coordination between the child welfare agency and law enforcement and the courts can help prevent children from going missing .

federal child welfare policy provides some general requirements related to child welfare agency work and courts and law enforcement .

none of these are provided necessarily in the context of children missing from care but they might be a starting point for any needed collaboration .

the cwla best practices guidelines , and the guidelines written by ncmec , encourage law enforcement agencies and child welfare agencies to delineate roles and share clear , consistent definitions of missing children .

finally , little is known about children missing from foster care .

currently , state child welfare agencies must report to hhs , via the reporting system known as afcars , on the number of children who run away from their foster care placement settings and have not returned as of the last day of the six - month reporting period , and children who remained in that runaway status when they were discharged from foster care ( i.e. , exited care ) .

afcars does not have a separate reporting category for children who may go missing for other reasons , such as abductions or negligence by the child welfare agency .

to enable states to identify and work to locate children who are no longer living where they were placed by child welfare agencies , states may need to more completely track these children .

for example , they might also need to identify and count those children who were abducted or are otherwise missing .

child welfare stakeholders have raised concerns that child welfare agencies may limit the opportunity for foster youth to participate in "normal," age - appropriate activities because of policies that prioritize safety above other considerations .

at a house ways and means subcommittee hearing on balancing safety with opportunities to let foster youth have normal experiences , witnesses testified about the restrictions foster youth face .

for example , they may be prevented from having sleepovers at the homes of their friends , dating , using the phone , obtaining a driver's license , driving a vehicle , working , going on school trips , and participating in sports .

or youth may be able to participate in these activities only after friends' parents ( or other adults such as chaperones and coaches ) have been subject to background screenings .

witnesses asserted that youth naturally also want to take on more risk as they test out their independence , and their behaviors may put them at risk of injury .

one witness explained that changes in brain development during adolescence often mean that teenagers exhibit more risk taking behaviors: "[b]ecoming an adult and taking on adult responsibilities involves taking on risks ... [a] teenager's brain is literally primed for risk - taking since chemicals in the brain that act to link such action to pleasure are shifting during adolescences. .

prior to the enactment of the preventing sex trafficking and strengthening families act ( p.l .

113-183 ) , few federal child welfare provisions specifically addressed efforts to promote normalcy for youth in foster care .

p.l .

113-183 includes several such provisions , and congress will likely be interested in monitoring how the law is implemented when the provisions generally go into effect one year after the law's enactment .

for example , the law established a "reasonable and prudent parenting" standard under which foster parents and other caregivers apply knowledge and skills necessary to make decisions that enable children and youth in care to participate in age and developmentally - appropriate activities .

hhs must help states identify best practices for assisting foster parents in using the standard .

the law also requires child welfare agencies to provide training to prospective foster parents on children's developmental stages and on how to apply the reasonable and prudent parent standard when determining whether a foster child's participation in school or other social , extracurricular , or cultural activities ( eg , sports teams , field trips , overnight events and related transportation ) is age - or developmentally - appropriate .

states are further required to revise their licensing standards for foster family homes and child care institutions to reflect provisions around normalcy , among other related changes .

a major concern for youth aging out of foster care is the lack of adequate and affordable housing .

several studies have examined rates of homelessness among former foster youth , and the share of youth reported homeless varies from 11% to 36% .

the studies were conducted using differing methodologies , localities , length of time since exit , and other variations .

the midwest evaluation , which has examined outcomes of foster youth in three midwestern states , found that 24% of 23-year - olds reported being homeless at least once since exiting care .

some youth have also couch surfed , wherein they do not have permanent housing and stay at the homes of family and friends .

estimates of emancipated youth who couch surf range from one - quarter to one - half .

the housing status of former foster youth is often affected by individual characteristics ( eg , their lack of financial supports and ties to family members and other caring adults , early parenthood , and involvement with the juvenile justice system ) ; their involvement with the child welfare system ( eg , lack of preparation in making the transition to adulthood and lack of coordination with other systems that may be able to assist young people in securing housing ) ; and the housing market ( eg , ability to secure affordable housing ) .

youth who lack housing may have difficulty staying in school and / or maintaining employment .

although the cfcip authorizes states to spend up to 30% of their allotment on room and board for youth ages 18 to 21 who emancipate from care , child welfare researchers point out that these funds alone cannot adequately cover the cost of housing for many former foster youth .

nonetheless , former foster youth may have access to housing programs operated by nonprofit organizations , sometimes in combination with a housing developer or property management agency .

in a review of nearly 60 housing programs for former foster youth in 21 states and the district of columbia , researchers found that these programs provide housing options that include single - site locations ( eg , apartments in one building ) , scattered - site locations ( eg , housing provided by different landlords throughout a community ) , and host homes ( eg , homes hosted by a foster family or other adults ) .

most of the programs focused on providing independent living supports to former foster youth and required the youth to be working or in school .

none of the programs have been rigorously evaluated to determine if they prevent homelessness or reduce housing stability , or otherwise have helped young people achieve positive outcomes such as attainment of a high school diploma .

in addition , youth who live in states that take up the extended foster care option under p.l .

110-351 can be housed in a foster home or independent living setting .

still , states that extended care report challenges with finding appropriate housing options .

another housing issue concerns current and former foster youth in college who are unable to stay with family or friends over school breaks , when college facilities are often closed .

some states require public universities to provide housing for these youth .

for example , california law requires that the california state university system and the community college system , "review housing issues for those emancipated foster youth living in college dormitories to ensure basic housing during the regular academic school year , including vacations and holidays other than summer break. .

the higher education act ( hea ) , as amended , seeks to address some of these housing concerns by authorizing services specifically for youth in foster care or recently emancipated youth , including housing services , among other related changes .

the law authorizes services for these youth ( and homeless youth ) through student support services — a program intended to improve the retention and graduation rates of disadvantaged college students — that can include temporary housing during breaks in the academic year .

hea further allows additional uses of funds through the fund for the improvement of postsecondary education to establish demonstration projects that provide comprehensive support services for students who were in foster care ( or homeless ) any time before age 13 .

as specified in the law , the projects can provide housing to the youth when housing at an educational institution is closed or unavailable to other students .

nevertheless , authority to fund housing during breaks does not mean that universities and colleges will necessarily use funds from the two programs for this purpose .

separately , federal law enables owners of properties financed in part with low - income housing tax credits ( lihtc ) to claim as low - income units those units occupied by low - income students who were in foster care .

owners of lihtc properties are required to maintain a certain percentage of their units for occupancy by low - income households ; students ( with some exceptions ) are not generally considered low - income households for this purpose .

the law does not specify the length of time these students must have spent in foster care nor require that youth are eligible only if they emancipated .

in its february 2008 report on disconnected youth , the u.s. government accountability office defined this population as individuals ages 14 to 24 who are not in school and not working , or lack family or other support networks .

as identified in the report , youth in care and certain other groups of youth are at greater risk of becoming disconnected from employment and education .

young people who have aged out of care tend to have low rates of employment and low earnings .

one study of youth who emancipated in three states — california , minnesota , and north carolina — linked child welfare , unemployment insurance ( ui ) , and public assistance administrative data to determine the employment outcomes of these young people .

at age 24 , about three out of five youth who aged out in the three states were working , a rate lower than that of youth nationally and youth from low - income families .

these young people were also less likely to earn as much as their counterparts .

the average monthly earnings for emancipated youth in all three states were substantially lower than earnings for youth nationally , who earned $1,535 a month on average .

on the education front , young people in care or who have aged out face numerous challenges .

while in care , youth tend to experience multiple school placements , delays in enrollment , loss of academic credit , and lack of a consistent education advocate who is knowledgeable about their needs in the special education process , among other challenges .

foster care alumni , even those who remain in care beyond age 18 , are far less likely to attend college .

the midwest evaluation demonstrates that by age 26 , only about 7% of youth who aged out of care in three states attained an associate's degree or bachelor's degree .

about one - third of the general youth population had the same .

this suggests that young foster care alumni may need additional supports to facilitate completing their education .

for example , they may benefit from academic , social / emotional , and logistical support , including year - round housing .

federal child welfare law addresses the educational needs of youth who are in or were in foster care .

state child welfare agencies are required to also give assurances in each child's written case plan that when selecting a child's placement in foster care , the agency had taken into account the setting's proximity to the school in which the child was enrolled at the time of placement in foster care .

the law also stipulates that a state child welfare agency must include certain education - related records in the child's case plan ( i.e. , names and addresses of educational providers , grade level performance , and school and immunizations records ) .

further , state child welfare agencies must work with relevant state and local education authorities to ensure that a child remains in the same school in which he or she is enrolled at the time of foster care placement , or , if this is not in the best interests of the child , to ensure immediate and appropriate enrollment for the child in a new school .

to help support this requirement , the law permits states to claim federal funding for the cost of transporting children to their "school of origin" at the same reimbursement rate that is provided for foster care maintenance payments .

separately ( under the title iv - e plan ) , the law requires states to assure that children who have reached the minimum age for mandatory school attendance in their state , and who are receiving federal foster care maintenance payments , adoption assistance , or kinship guardianship assistance , are enrolled in school or have completed high school .

finally , educational records must be reviewed , updated , and supplied to a child's foster care parent ( or other foster care provider ) at the time of each foster care placement .

federal agencies are collaborating to address the multiple needs of vulnerable youth populations , including the education needs of current foster youth .

the u.s .

departments of health and human services and education convened a summit in november 2011 that brought together state teams representing education and child welfare agencies , along with the judicial branch , to discuss how best to promote educational stability and improve educational outcomes for children in foster care .

teams were charged with creating a plan for collaborating across systems that were to be implemented following the conference .

despite this collaboration , federal education law does not address the educational needs of children in foster care .

recent legislation seeks to improve access to education for children and youth in foster care via federal education statute .

for example , s. 1094 ( a bill reported by the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) to reauthorize the elementary and secondary education act in the 113 th congress ) would amend federal education law to reflect related provisions in child welfare law .

the bill would require state education agencies ( seas ) to ensure that a child in foster care remain in the same school in which he or she is enrolled at the time of foster care placement , or , if this is not in the best interests of the child , to ensure immediate and appropriate enrollment for the child in a new school .

the bill would also require seas to have policies in place to ensure that a child in care who is changing schools can transfer school credits and receive partial credit .

federal education law does , however , address the postsecondary educational needs of current and former foster youth .

the higher education act includes provisions that authorize supportive educational services for foster youth .

the law stipulates that youth in foster care ( including youth who have left foster care after reaching age 16 ) and homeless children and youth are eligible for what are collectively called the federal trio programs .

the law directs the department of education to require applicants seeking trio funds to identify and make available services , including mentoring , tutoring , and other services , to these youth .

the trio programs are designed to identify potential post - secondary students from disadvantaged backgrounds , prepare these students for higher education , provide certain support services to them while they are in college , and train individuals who provide these services .

the programs are known individually as talent search , upward bound , student support services , and educational opportunity centers .

finally , the fy2014 appropriations law ( p.l .

113-76 ) directs the department of education ( ed ) to modify the fafsa form so that it includes a box for applicants to identify whether they are or were in foster care , and to require ed to provide these applicants with information about federal educational resources that may be available to them .

at the time of this writing , it does not appear that ed has issued guidance on this modification .

the chafee foster care independence program is a major source of funding for independent living services for youth who are in care or have aged out .

yet little is known about the effectiveness of these services or the outcomes of foster youth after they leave care .

the few studies of independent living programs and other interventions have not been rigorous , or have shown that the interventions have not been effective at improving outcomes for youth .

further , no studies have provided a national picture of how well former foster youth make the transition to adulthood .

the midwest evaluation and other studies have focused on the transition for youth in select regions of the country .

though a new national database — known as the national youth in transition database ( nytd ) — will provide insight into the lives of youth when they leave care , full implementation of the database will likely take several years .

the chafee foster care independence program is the only dedicated source of funding for independent living services for transition - age young people in and recently emancipated from foster care .

an annual appropriation of $140 million for the program is distributed to states based on their relative share of children in care .

states must provide a 20% match in order to receive the funds .

nearly all states routinely draw down their maximum amount of cfcip dollars .

based on a 2008 survey of 45 states by the university of chicago's chapin hall center for children , 31 of the states ( 68.9% ) spend additional funds — beyond the 20% match — to provide independent living services and supports to eligible youth .

this suggests that federal funding alone is not likely enough for states to carry out their independent living programs .

given that funding for independent living services is somewhat limited , states can likely benefit from learning about which services are the most effective .

the research literature on independent living programs is scarce .

however , pursuant to the law that established the cfcip , hhs was required to conduct evaluations of independent living programs funded by the cfcip deemed to be innovative or of national significance .

hhs contracted with the urban institute and its partners to conduct an evaluation known as the multi - site evaluation of foster youth programs .

the goal of the evaluation was to determine the effects of independent living programs funded by p.l .

106-169 in achieving key outcomes , including increased educational attainment , higher employment rates and stability , greater interpersonal and relationship skills , reduced non - marital pregnancy and births , and reduced delinquency and crime rates .

the evaluation involved randomly assigning 1,400 eligible foster youth to four programs in california and massachusetts — an employment services program in kern county , ca ; a one - on - one intensive , individualized life skills program in massachusetts ; and a classroom - based life skills training program and tutoring / mentoring program , both in los angeles county , ca .

the 1,400 youth participating in the evaluation at the four sites were assigned to intervention and control groups and were surveyed at three points: baseline , one year after baseline , and two years after baseline .

the researchers also conducted in - person interviews with the youth , program administrators , community advocates , and directors of community provider agencies .

further , the evaluation team held focus groups with youth , independent living program staff , and other agency staff responsible for referring youth to the programs .

the team used extracts of state administrative data to determine child and family demographics , child welfare placement history , physical and mental health status , and delinquency history .

in short , the evaluation of the los angeles and kern county programs found no statistically significant impacts as a result of the interventions ; however , the life skills program in massachusetts showed impacts for some of the education outcomes that were measured .

the program is known as the massachusetts adolescent outreach program for youth in intensive foster care , or outreach .

the program assists youth who enroll voluntarily with preparing to live independently and with having permanent connections to caring adults upon exiting care .

outreach is intended to help youth achieve a range of outcomes , including receiving a high school diploma , continuing their education , avoiding non - marital childbirth and high - risk behaviors , and gaining employment , among other outcomes .

the program provides services that are tailored to each youth and it emphasizes a youth development approach , which emphasizes that youth can be empowered to make positive decisions about their lives .

a core feature of the outreach model is that the social workers in the program oversee a small caseload ( approximately 15 youth each ) and have regular ( approximately once a week ) interactions with the youth .

the workers seek to develop a close relationship with the youth , with the goal of the youth viewing the worker as his or her advocate .

caseworkers assist youth with tasks like obtaining their driver's licenses , applying for college , and gaining employment .

caseworkers may also refer youth to service providers as needed .

the evaluation examined educational , employment , and other outcomes that can reflect how well a young person is transitioning to adulthood .

outreach youth were more likely than their counterparts in the control group to report having ever enrolled in college , and they were more likely to stay enrolled .

outreach youth were also more likely to experience outcomes that were not a focus of the evaluation: youth were more likely to remain in foster care and to report receiving more help in some areas of educational assistance , employment assistance , money management , and financial assistance for housing .

according to the study , remaining in care and enrolling and persisting in college appear to be strongly interrelated .

in short , the outreach youth may have been less successful on the educational front if they had not stayed in care .

youth in the program reported similar outcomes as the control group for multiple other measures .

for example , outreach youth did not report better outcomes in employment , economic well - being , housing , delinquency , pregnancy , or preparedness for various tasks associated with living on one's own .

this evaluation raises questions about the efficacy of independent living programs , and whether classroom - based instruction is effective in helping youth make the transition to independent living .

the outreach program , which assigns case workers to a small number of transitioning youth , appears promising ; however , as discussed above , youth in this program did not fare any better than similarly situated foster youth in areas other than education and remaining in foster care .

the national youth in transition database ( nytd ) , authorized by the chafee foster care independence act ( p.l .

106-169 ) , is intended to track demographic and outcome information of current and former foster youth .

this database is beginning to provide insight into the outcomes of foster youth throughout the country , and may help to identify promising approaches to serving these youth ; however , states have reported information to the database .

p.l .

106-169 required that hhs consult with state and local public officials responsible for administering independent living and other child welfare programs , child welfare advocates , members of congress , youth service providers , and researchers to ( 1 ) "develop outcome measures ( including measures of educational attainment , high school diploma , avoidance of dependency , homelessness , non - marital childbirth , incarceration , and high - risk behaviors ) that can be used to assess the performance of states in operating independent living programs ; " ( 2 ) identify the data needed to track the number and characteristics of children receiving independent living services , the type and quantity of services provided , and state performance on the measures ; and ( 3 ) develop and implement a plan to collect this information beginning with the second fiscal year after the passage of p.l .

106-169 .

the final rule establishing the nytd became effective april 28 , 2008 , 60 days after publication .

the rule required states to begin collecting data on youth in fy2011 .

hhs is using nytd to engage in two data collection and reporting activities .

first , states ( as of fy2011 ) collect and report information twice each fiscal year on eligible youth who currently receive independent living services ( provided or funded by the state ) .

information will include whether they continue to remain in foster care , were in foster care in another state , or received child welfare services through an indian tribe or privately operated foster care program .

second , states collect data on the outcomes of current and former foster youth on or about their 17 th birthday , two years later on or about their 19 th birthday , and again on or about their 21 st birthday .

these youth are tracked regardless of whether they receive independent living services at ages 17 , 19 , and 21 .

states have the option of tracking a sample of youth who participated in the outcomes collection at age 17 to reduce the data collection burden .

the rule imposes financial penalties on states that do not meet data and data submission requirements .

