"death , a necessary end , will come when it come," is a portion of a shakespeare quotation that speaks to the inevitability of death .

death is common to all who are living .

it is the eventual consequence of life .

and despite its commonality and pervasiveness , death has a profound and distinct effect on each person that it touches — each dying person , each loved one , each friend and colleague , and each health care provider .

"dying is at once a fact of life and a profound mystery. .

achieving a system of end - of - life care that is sensitive to and accommodates the needs of all those involved , requires attention to a range of ethical and policy issues , including personal choice , cost , and quality of care .

over the past century , several demographic and historical changes have affected the experience of death and dying in the united states .

these changes include increases in the average lifespan ; growth in the size and proportion of the older u.s. population ; changes in the leading causes of death ; and advances in medicine and medical interventions that have altered the setting and timing of death .

the following briefly describes these demographic and historical changes as they relate to the experience of death and end - of - life care in the united states .

lastly , an understanding of culture notions of death in the u.s. and how the current health care system may work against the concept of a "good" death are described in this section .

end - of - life care can be broadly defined as health care , including acute care and long - term care , provided to persons who: are very ill , have a prognosis that is likely to worsen , and most likely will die from their illness .

those diagnosed with a serious or terminal illness experience health declines associated with the disease and the dying process differently .

as a result , there is not necessarily a boundary between when life - prolonging therapy ends and end - of - life care begins .

palliative care is one form of health care that can assist those diagnosed with a terminal illness as well as others who have a chronic disease or serious illness .

hospice care is a form of palliative care specifically for those at the end of life .

 ( see figure 1 ) .

the following briefly describes the concepts of palliative care and hospice care .

additional information is also provided on hospice providers and patients .

costs of care at the end of life may be paid by public payers such as medicare or medicaid , private insurance , out - of - pocket , or by some other source such as the department of veterans affairs or charity organizations .

much of the data available on end - of - life care costs are for medicare beneficiaries , thus this section focuses on analyses conducted on costs to the medicare program for care at the end of life .

about one - fourth of total medicare spending is for the last year of life .

this share has remained generally constant for the past 20 years .

as previously mentioned , end - of - life care includes acute care often provided in a hospital setting or palliative care within a hospice setting .

in addition , the predictability and timing of an individual's death may determine the setting for end - of - life care .

for example , beneficiaries who are terminally ill may become more involved in decisions about their end - of - life care .

those terminally ill individuals — with a life expectancy of six months or less — may reject curative treatment and instead elect to receive hospice care under medicare .

conversely , individuals with acute medical conditions may die unexpectedly .

these individuals may receive aggressive and expensive procedures in a hospital setting prior to their death .

as a result , end - of - life care costs under medicare generally vary by setting .

further research suggests there is variation in end - of - life care costs by geographic region .

the following describes these variations in medicare costs for end - of - life care in further detail .

the development of new technologies , and the associated prospect of longer , more protracted deaths , have focused some policy discussions on the topic of patients' wishes .

one result has been the development of laws regarding end - of - life care .

federal law generally defers to state law concerning health - care decision making , including end - of - life care decision making .

given the complexities in decision making surrounding medical interventions that have life - extending potential , all 50 states and the district of columbia have passed laws to address end - of - life care issues .

specifically , state laws concerning end - of - life care include provisions for how end - of - life care decisions should be made when there is an advance directive that is signed prior to loss of competence and how decisions are to be made in the absence of an advance directive .

however , state laws vary considerably regarding the terminology used , scope of decision making that can be addressed in the directive , restrictions on who may serve as a proxy , and the formalities required for making an advance directive .

only one state , oregon , has passed a law legalizing physician - assisted suicide .

the following describes the two types of advance directives ( living wills and health care powers of attorney ) and federal medicare and medicaid laws concerning advance directives .

end - of - life care to individuals , where death is a certain or predictable outcome , is a critical component of the continuum of health care services .

due to its timing , duration , and intensity , end - of - life care presents numerous challenges and opportunities for quality measurement , assessment , and improvement .

because end - of - life care can be palliative , and not curative , assessments of quality are often based on family and patient satisfaction .

studies have documented several factors which are associated with perceptions of higher quality care by patients and families .

these include expressions of patients' wishes , discussions of families' spiritual needs , documentation of a living will , and family presence at the time of death .

 , a number of initiatives are currently underway in the private and public sectors to improve the quality of care individuals receive at the end of life , and specifically the quality of palliative and hospice care .

these initiatives broadly cover efforts to develop and disseminate consensus - based quality of care measures for hospice and palliative care ; to return more rights to the individual patient with regard to his or her own care ; to create changes in and alignment of payment policy to improve quality of end - of - life care ; and to drive evidence - based change in the provision of end - of - life care .

the center for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) has undertaken efforts toward improving the quality of care provided at the end of life .

specifically , these include updating medicare conditions of participation for hospice providers to include quality improvement activities and incorporating an advance plan measure into the physician quality reporting initiative ( pqri ) .

these efforts are described in more detail below .

as the nation prepares for an aging population and likely increase in demand for high quality end - of - life care services among the elderly , congress may face a decision whether to modify or expand the role of the federal government in providing support to individuals and families to assist with end - of - life care .

some policy makers may favor enhancing federal support for research on end - of - life care practices or programs that provide end - of - life care services .

in doing so , the federal government would devote additional funding to new or existing programs , implying increasingly difficult tradeoffs between end - of - life care services and supports and federal programs that benefit other populations .

alternatively , some policy makers may feel that additional federal support to states regarding end - of - life care issues is warranted , and that the federal government can best serve individuals and families by providing technical assistance in care planning and service delivery or federal funding for end - of - life care services .

still others may believe the federal government has a limited responsibility in assisting individuals and families regarding such a private and personal matter as the provision of medical and health care at the end of life .

thus , congress may decide that no additional federal assistance can be made available .

in this case , federal policy makers may want to evaluate how best to spend existing funds .

this section briefly describes policies that would expand the federal government's role in addressing the issue of end - of - life care and have been the subject of discussion among federal policy makers and other interested stakeholders .

they are organized into the following topics: training for health professionals , end - of - life care planning , support to family caregivers , and other policy issues .

the provision of high quality end - of - life care is a complex issue for policymakers .

individuals diagnosed with a terminal illness have different preferences for treatment , including differing cultural and spiritual attitudes related to death and dying and availability of family or social supports to assist them .

where death is predictable , end - of - life care may be delivered and managed by a team of health professionals , resulting in the necessity for care coordination and enhanced communication between health providers and among providers , individuals , and families .

the provision of end - of - life care services also involves multiple entities , including the services and support needs not only of patients , but of family members and friends .

as a result of this complexity , public policy that aims to improve the quality of end - of - life care may need to take a multifaceted approach by addressing a range of issues such as those mentioned above – training for health professionals , end - of - life care planning , and support to family caregivers .

in addition , further research on the costs , delivery of services , and quality measures related to end - of - life care may assist policymakers in improving care at the end of life .

