in a criminal law context , bail is most often thought of as the posting of security to ensure the presence of an accused at subsequent judicial proceedings — that is , "to obtain the release of ( oneself or another ) by providing security for future appearance. .

the term itself is less frequently used now , however , due in part to the practice of release on personal recognizance , which consists of permitting an individual to pledge his word , rather than his property , for his future appearance .

moreover , today , an individual's release pending subsequent criminal proceedings is often predicated on conditions other than , or in addition to , the posting of an appearance bond , secured or unsecured .

as a consequence , rather than speaking of bail , existing federal law refers to release or detention pending trial , to release or detention pending sentencing or appeal , and to release or detention of a material witness .

this is an overview of federal law in each of these areas , as well as in the area of extradition from the united states to another country .

an individual released prior to trial remains free under the same conditions throughout the trial until conviction or acquittal , subject to modification or revocation by the court .

for that reason , the term pretrial release is understood to include all pre - conviction release , both before and during trial .

under existing federal law , an individual arrested under federal authority must be brought before a magistrate or judge without unnecessary delay .

any federal or state judge or federal or state magistrate may qualify .

the magistrate judge may order an individual accused of a federal crime either released or detained prior to trial and conviction .

the law affords the judge or magistrate four options , which it places in descending order of preference .

first , he may release the accused on personal recognizance or under an unsecured appearance bond , subject only to the condition that the accused commit no subsequent federal , state , or local crime and that he submit a sample for dna analysis .

second , he may release the accused subject to certain additional conditions .

third , he may order the accused detained for bail revocation , parole revocation , probation revocation , or deportation proceedings .

fourth , he may order the accused detained prior to trial .

if the magistrate or judge does not initially release the accused on personal recognizance or conditions , a hearing on the release of the accused must be held "immediately" upon the individual's first appearance before the judge or magistrate .

the accused or the government may request that the hearing be postponed for up to five days — up to only three days when the postponement is granted at the government's behest .

the accused is entitled to assistance of counsel at the hearing and to the appointment of counsel if necessary .

the accused may testify at the hearing and present and cross - examine witnesses .

evidence may be introduced at the hearing without deference to the rules that apply at a criminal trial .

federal law treats bail following conviction but prior to sentencing in one of three ways depending upon the crime of conviction .

first , a defendant may not be detained prior to sentencing for an offense for which the u.s .

sentencing guidelines do not recommend a sentence of imprisonment .

second , when the defendant has been convicted of a capital offense , a 10-year federal crime of terrorism , a 10-year controlled substance offense , a crime of violence , or a violation of 18 u.s.c .

§1591 ( commercial sex trafficking ) , the defendant must be detained unless the court finds that the defendant is not likely to flee or pose a safety concern , and either that a motion for acquittal or a new trial is likely to be granted , or that the prosecution has recommended no sentence of imprisonment be imposed , or that exceptional reasons exist for granting bail .

third , in any other case , the defendant must be detained , unless the court concludes that the defendant is unlikely to flee or pose a safety concern if released conditionally or on his own recognizance .

when a defendant appeals following conviction , the judge or magistrate may release him on condition or recognizance , if the judicial official is convinced that the defendant poses neither a flight risk nor a safety concern and that his appeal raises substantial questions that offer the prospect of success .

"a question is substantial if the defendant can demonstrate that it is 'fairly debatable' or is 'debatable among jurists of reason.' .

an additional requirement applies when the defendant has been sentenced to prison upon conviction for a capital offense , a 10-year federal crime of terrorism , a 10-year controlled substance offense , or a crime of violence .

in such cases , bail is available only under exceptional circumstances .

the circumstances considered exceptional have been variously described as uncommon , unusual , unique , and rare .

when the government alone appeals , the pretrial bail provisions of section 3142 apply , unless the government is simply appealing the sentence imposed .

when the government appeals the sentence imposed , the defendant must be detained if he has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment ; otherwise , section 3142 applies .

a number of consequences flow from an individual's failure to appear or to honor the conditions imposed upon his release .

he may be prosecuted for contempt of court ; he may be prosecuted separately for failure to appear ; his release order may be revoked or amended ; security pledged for his compliance may be forfeited ; he may be subject to arrest by his surety ; and he may be prosecuted for any crimes that constituted a violation of his bail conditions .

the u.s .

probation and pretrial service office conducts preliminary investigations and otherwise assists the courts in their administration of federal bail law .

its officers enjoy statutory authority to provide judges and magistrates with information relevant to initial bail determinations ; prepare reports relevant for the review of release and detention orders ; supervise bailees released into its custody ; operate halfway houses , treatment facilities , and the like for those released on bail ; inform the court and prosecutors of release order violations ; advise the court on the availability of third - party custodians ; help bailees secure employment , medical , legal , and social services ; prepare reports on supervision of pretrial detainees ; prepare reports on the bail system ; prepare pretrial diversion reports for prosecutors ; contract for the performance of its responsibilities ; supervise and report on prisoners conditionally released following hospitalization for mental disease or defect ; carry firearms ; provide services for juveniles ; and perform other functions assigned to it by the bail laws .

federal law authorizes the arrest and detention or bail of individuals with evidence material to the prosecution of a federal offense .

with limited variations , federal bail laws apply to material witnesses arrested under section 3144 .

thus , arrested material witnesses are entitled to the assistance of counsel during bail proceedings and to the appointment of an attorney when they are unable to retain private counsel .

release is generally favored ; if not , release with conditions or limitations is preferred , and finally as a last option detention is permitted .

an accused is released on his word ( personal recognizance ) or bond unless the court finds such assurances insufficient to guarantee his subsequent appearance or to ensure public or individual safety .

a material witness , however , need only satisfy the appearance standard .

a material witness who is unable to do so is released under such conditions or limitations as the court finds adequate to ensure his later appearance to testify .

if neither word nor bond nor conditions will suffice , the witness may be detained .

the factors a court may consider in determining whether a material witness is likely to remain available include his deposition , character , health , and community ties .

federal bail laws make no mention of bail in extradition cases .

the federal courts instead adhere to the doctrine announced by the supreme court over a century ago that "bail should not ordinarily be granted in cases of foreign extradition" except under "special circumstances. .

the doctrine has withstood constitutional challenge .

there is no precise definition of what constitutes "special circumstances" ; the category is reserved for those extraordinary characteristics of a case which the court feels merit the designation .

in addition , the individual must establish that if released , he will not flee or pose a danger and may be made subject to whatever relevant conditions the court deems to impose .

