the house can readily create an ad hoc select committee — to consider measures or matters that fall within the jurisdiction of two or more standing committees , to take action on measures or matters that standing committees have not considered , or for another reason .

to create such a committee , the house approves a simple resolution , or incorporates language creating a select committee into another resolution , such as the ones reported by the rules committee or the house administration committee .

the resolution may create a study committee , with directions to make recommendations for legislation , or it could grant legislative authority to the select committee — authority to report legislation to the house .

if the select committee is authorized to report legislation , the legislation could be considered on the floor without action by the standing committee ( s ) with jurisdiction , or it could be referred to some or all of the standing committee ( s ) with jurisdiction , whether before or after the select committee's consideration .

in establishing select committees in the past , the house has carefully defined a select committee's legislative authority and its relationship to the standing committees of jurisdiction .

in addition to resolutions that might be reported from the rules or house administration committee , other current authority and procedures for creating and assigning members to select committees with legislative authority date to the committee reform amendments of 1974 .

section 101 of the committee reform amendments authorized the speaker to — ...refer the matter to a special ad hoc committee appointed by the speaker with the approval of the house ( from the members of the committees having legislative jurisdiction ) for the specific purpose of considering that matter and reporting to the house thereon.... today , house rule xii , dealing with the referral of measures and matters , allows the speaker to — ...refer the matter to a special , ad hoc committee appointed by the speaker with the approval of the house , and including members of the committees of jurisdiction , for the specific purpose of considering that matter and reporting to the house thereon... .

the sole change from the original language concerns membership , changing the language to "including members of the committees of jurisdiction" from "from the members of the committees having legislative jurisdiction. .

in addition , house rule i , cl .

11 gives appointment power for certain committees to the speaker: "the speaker shall appoint all select , joint , and conference committees ordered by the house .

at any time after an original appointment , the speaker may remove members , delegates , or the resident commissioner from , or appoint additional members , delegates , or the resident commissioner to , a select or conference committee. .

the speaker's authority to appoint members of select committees has existed in house rules since 1880 .

authority for the speaker to remove or add members to select and conference committees after the initial appointment of members was added in the 103 rd congress .

by custom , the minority leader proposes to the speaker the names of minority - party members to be appointed to a select committee .

the principal explanation offered in creating each of the four select committees with legislative authority was that their creation solved jurisdictional problems .

the proponents in each case indicated that multiple committees claimed jurisdiction over a subject and that the house would be unable to legislate , or at least legislate efficiently , in the absence of a select committee .

the reason advanced for creating the select committee on homeland security in the 108 th congress was slightly different: it provided a transition committee responsible for homeland security while the house decided whether and how to reorganize its committees to accommodate the new department of homeland security .

members of the standing committees of jurisdiction held all of the seats but two on the outer continental shelf select committee and dominated seats on the energy select committee .

the two more recent select committees were not so constituted .

the homeland security select committee in the 107 th congress comprised only members of the party leadership .

the 108 th congress homeland security select committee included members serving on nearly every other house committee , and no committee or small set of committees dominated the membership .

each of the select committees had a defined relationship to the standing committees of jurisdiction , ranging from nearly complete independence to , arguably , equality .

the relationship between the energy select committee and the homeland security select committee ( 107 th congress ) and the standing committees was carefully defined , but standing committees had a much more influential role in the legislation reported by the energy select committee .

this part of the report analyzes several aspects of the select committees , seeking to explain similarities and differences and examine the considerations and consequences of the choices made by the house .

the aspects analyzed are the purpose of granting legislative authority , jurisdiction and referral , the relationship between the select committees and the standing committees of jurisdiction , reporting deadlines , membership and chairmanship , resources made available to the select committees , floor and post - passage consideration of the legislation reported by the select committees , and the select committees' life - spans .

to guide the reader through this part of the report , table 1 summarizes some of the key factual aspects about the select committees created since 1974 .

in developing legislation matched to a strategic policy goal , a number of advantages can accrue to the house by using an ad hoc select committee with legislative authority .

 ( discussion in this part will refer to "legislation" ; the phrase is intended to include the alternatives of one bill or a set of related bills. ) .

a select committee , however , cannot guarantee success , although there are some factors that might increase the potential for success .

if the house is attempting to address an issue comprehensively and in a timely fashion , it may confront a situation where the standing committees' jurisdiction over the issue is fragmented or overlapping .

no one committee might be able to assert its jurisdictional leadership , or , alternately , more than one committee can assert jurisdictional leadership .

the result could be competing pieces of legislation reported from committees deeply invested in their product .

for there to be orderly consideration of such an issue by the house , a means will need to be found to handle the competing legislation .

one option is to use a select committee with legislative authority .

a select committee could supplant the standing committees as the outer continental shelf select committee did ; it could consider the work of the standing committees as the energy and homeland security ( 107 th congress ) select committees did ; or a select committee could draft legislation that would then be considered by the standing committees , an option that has not been used since the committee reform amendments of 1974 .

coupled with the speaker's authority to establish time limitations for committees to report , a select committee could allow the house to look at a "problem as one composite problem," as majority leader wright said in 1977 , and to move with a "sense of deliberative urgency," as rules chairman dreier said in 2002 .

when standing committees report competing legislation , the house often looks to the majority leadership or the rules committee to determine what will be the legislative vehicle that the house considers and what amendment procedure will be followed .

a special rule reported from the rules committee could provide for consideration of a legislative vehicle different from that reported from any of the standing committees and will provide an amendment process .

if adopted by the house , the special rules resolution will govern procedures used to consider the legislation identified in the resolution .

alternately , this process of reconciling texts could be performed in one or more open , formal markup meetings by a select committee , as was done by the energy and homeland security ( 107 th congress ) select committees .

in the former case , the energy select committee considered parts of the standing committees' reported legislation topically and , pursuant to the speaker's directive , developed amendments for the house's consideration .

in the latter case , the homeland security select committee considered the standing committees' recommendations , but developed its own amendment in the nature of a substitute that was then considered by the house .

in the instance of the outer continental shelf select committee , the standing committees were supplanted , but the select committee operated in open markup sessions .

a select committee can provide a mechanism for a more transparent process for the development of legislation and amendments .

in a standing committee , there may be established policy preferences related to a specific issue , and those preferences might be ones favored or not favored by a house or a party majority .

these policy preferences might be similar or dissimilar to a presidential proposal .

they might be able to attract broad congressional and public support or they might not be able to do so .

in a standing committee , there are also likely established relationships among committee members , committee staff , federal executive officials , interest groups , and others , such as public officials and the media .

interactions based on these relationships could facilitate or impede the policy process , and are also likely to influence policymaking .

when contemplating the consideration of comprehensive legislation , an ad hoc select committee is one option for circumventing , overcoming , mediating , or otherwise responding to differences between standing committees and the standing committees' individuality .

even with a membership that is representative of standing committees of jurisdiction , a select committee provides a new forum with fewer established relationships and defined policy preferences .

it could also play a mediating or integrating or deciding role in considering recommendations from standing committees , leadership , the president , and perhaps elsewhere .

a select committee could be part of a legislative effort to develop legislation matched to a strategic policy goal .

with so - called comprehensive legislation , it can be difficult to ensure that each provision is compatible with other provisions .

the problem is compounded when several committees report legislation .

the house often looks to the majority leadership or the rules committee to deal with this kind of problem in determining what will be the legislative vehicle that the house will consider .

again , alternately , this process of developing a coherent text could be performed in one or more open , formal markup meetings by a select committee , as was done by the energy and homeland security ( 107 th congress ) select committees .

complete coherence cannot be guaranteed , but the process used by the energy select committee could be a model for seeking a coherent text .

the energy select committee received briefings from the professional staffs of the standing committees that marked up and reported legislation , it adopted an order of procedure to group topically the provisions reported by the standing committees , and it then marked up topically the bill it considered .

the homeland security select committee held hearings at which the chairs and ranking minority members of the standing committees could explain their recommendations to the select committee .

the outer continental shelf select committee considered its legislation exclusively , presumably enhancing the select committee's ability to ensure coherence .

a select committee can provide a mechanism for developing legislation and amendments that are coherent .

the broader the scope of legislation and the higher the profile of legislation , the more attractive the option of a select committee might be as a means of dealing with controversial provisions and keeping them as a part of comprehensive legislation .

a select committee might be able to report provisions that are not acceptable to a standing committee of jurisdiction , or it might be better able to mediate conflicting views to draft a compromise .

there are other ways that controversial provisions can be made part of broader legislation , such as through action by the rules committee .

another option is for a select committee to report controversial provisions as part of a legislative package .

it took two congresses for the outer continental shelf select committee to find the right legislative package to pass both chambers and be signed into law by the president .

the legislative package of the energy select committee protected the conference report's natural gas provisions , which members of nearly every perspective believed would be defeated if those provisions were voted on separately by the house .

individual committees and their members opposed provisions that included certain agencies or programs within their jurisdiction in the new homeland security department , but most members of both parties supported creation of the department .

a select committee can provide a mechanism for keeping together legislation matched to a strategic policy goal .

a select committee might be used to expedite consideration of legislation through committee in the house .

legislation it reports , however , must still be able to obtain the support of a majority in the house , and be passed by the senate , reconciled by the two chambers , and signed into law by the president .

the first conference report brought to the house by the outer continental shelf select committee failed ; the select committee was successful only in the following congress .

the house employed a select committee to move energy legislation expeditiously through committee and through orderly floor consideration .

the senate , however , used five legislative vehicles , and conferees met for nearly a year seeking a conference agreement acceptable to the president that would also pass both houses .

the house passed legislation creating a department of homeland security less than two months after it was first proposed by the president , but senate consideration continued through the fall and after the election .

the efforts of a select committee might enhance the opportunity to draft legislation that has majority support , but it cannot guarantee that outcome .

in the instances of both outer continental shelf legislation and energy legislation , the conference agreements with the senate ran into trouble when they were considered by the house .

as already mentioned , the outer continental shelf conference report failed on a motion to recommit in the 94 th congress .

the special rule governing consideration of the energy conference report in the 94 th congress was cleared by just one vote when the house voted 207-206 to move the previous question .

while some decisions of the outer continental shelf , energy , and homeland security ( 107 th congress ) select committees can be characterized as compromises , the majority in each instance used its status to work its will .

perhaps consequently , both the outer continental shelf ( 95 th congress ) and energy select committees reported on largely partisan votes , with some majority members voting with the minority against reporting a measure .

the homeland security select committee ( 107 th congress ) reported legislation on a party - line vote .

as is already evident , a strong majority in one chamber does not guarantee support for the same policy decisions in the second chamber .

the senate gave strong votes in two congresses to outer continental shelf legislation , but it was only when a second conference report was presented to the house — in yet a third congress — did the house agree to the conference report .

while the house acted promptly on president carter's energy plan , and the senate completed its consideration two - and - one - half months later — still within the first session — it took nearly a year for conferees to come to agreement .

the homeland security department also passed the house promptly , but the senate completed its work in a lameduck session only after the general election seemed to deliver a political message that members interpreted in part as a decision on the legislation .

each of the four select committees was created after bipartisan discussion and with bipartisan support .

this factor in each instance did not bridge policy differences when they were debated and voted on , but it perhaps contributed to leaders and members being invested in the select committee as a critical part of the process of considering legislation .

concomitantly , the support of each party's leaders through bipartisan discussions seemed to lead to at least tacit agreement on appointing members of the select committee who would support the goal of reporting legislation .

again , leadership support did not bridge policy differences when they were debated and voted on , but leaders appointed members who favored legislation even if they had strong views on that legislation .

minority leader rhodes's comment on appointing members of the energy select committee stand out , "i intend to appoint members to the committee from the republican side who will want legislation , and not those who do not want it. .

leader support , especially with at least some previously agreed - on procedures , can also facilitate the development of procedures by which the house will consider legislation reported by a select committee .

the legislation reported by the outer continental shelf select committee was considered under an open rule .

the legislation reported by the energy and homeland security ( 107 th congress ) select committees was considered under structured rules .

while there was criticism of some specific decisions made on amendments , the special rules were easily approved .

in the instance of the outer continental shelf , energy , and homeland security ( 107 th congress ) select committees , the roles of the standing committees and the participation of their members gave them a stake in the work of the select committees .

all of the outer continental shelf select committee members were drawn from the committees of jurisdiction in the 94 th and 95 th congresses , except for two members in 95 th congress .

more than three - fourths of the members of the energy select committee served on one or more of the five standing committees with significant jurisdiction over energy .

in addition , a process was used to protect the expertise and work of the standing committees .

the homeland security select committee had only party leaders as members , but the standing committees were given a role in the development of legislation and were able to develop and present their recommendations to the select committee .

to develop legislation matched to a strategic policy goal , it seems axiomatic that the house would need the expertise of the standing committees of jurisdiction , their members , and their staff , and needs their affirmative support of and participation in the legislative process .

both in committee and on the floor , sufficient time is needed to debate legislation and vote on amendments — to build majorities , to consider and compromise , to achieve coherence , and to allow as many members who want to participate to have some opportunity to do so .

the speaker can use his or her authority to set time limits to keep standing committees and select committees on track , and the rules committee can draft special rules resolutions that allow sufficient debate time and an appropriate amendment process .

momentum behind legislation can be lost by moving too slowly , but committees and members can create obstacles if sufficient time is not allowed for deliberation .

the outer continental shelf , energy , and homeland security ( 107 th congress ) select committees were understood to have a specific purpose of reporting one piece of legislation on a specific subject .

each did so , and in each case the legislation was enacted .

the select committee on homeland security ( 108 th congress ) had a largely unprecedented role .

it was created for just one congress , but was given legislative and oversight authority very much like that given to standing committees .

it was also given a purpose very similar to a select committee created only as a study committee — to make recommendations on the rules of the house .

it considered just a few pieces of legislation , but seemed at a disadvantage vis - à - vis the standing committees .

it held oversight hearings on the new department , but the standing committees did also .

it did , however , make comprehensive recommendations on house rules in response to the reorganization of the executive branch for homeland security .

each of the four select committees succeeded in reporting on a single purpose .

speaker thomas p. "tip" o'neill jr.'s april 20 , 1977 , letter to the members of the house on creation of the ad hoc committee on energy was inserted in the congressional record during debate on the resolution creating the select committee .

the letter is reproduced here .

u.s. house of representatives , washington , d.c. , april 20 , 1977 .

dear colleague: as you know , it is my intention to create a new ad hoc committee to facilitate consideration of the president's energy message .

to this end , i have asked jim wright [the majority leader] to call up a resolution tomorrow establishing the committee .

the committee will be created around the president's speech .

this will afford the committee an early opportunity to organize and perhaps hold general hearings .

sometime next week the president will send his actual legislative recommendations to the congress .

this legislation will first be parceled out among the appropriate standing committees just as if no ad hoc committee existed .

i will place a reporting deadline on consideration of the bill by the standing committees .

at the conclusion of this period , the legislation will be sequentially referred to the ad hoc committee .

the committee will not have authority to change the recommendations reported by the standing committees .

it will have authority to recommend amendments for consideration on the floor .

when this measure goes to the rules committee , i will recommend that the legislation reported by the standing committees be considered as an original bill , with the ad hoc committee amendments in order thereto .

i will further recommend that on the floor each standing committee manage those portions of the bill that fall within its jurisdiction .

of course , when the house finally goes to conference with the senate on the energy legislation , primary responsibility will rest with representatives of each of the standing committees to settle differences relating to its portion of the bill .

throughout the process , it is my intention to protect the prerogatives of the standing committees , drawing on their experience and expertise .

what the ad hoc committee adds is an opportunity for comprehensive consideration of our national energy policy .

it can function as a conference committee of the house to facilitate resolution of competing claims .

this should help smooth matters on the floor .

the membership of the ad hoc committee will be proportionate to the standing committees' jurisdiction over the legislation .

in addition , i will do my best to see that every interest and region is fairly represented .

i hope that you can join me in supporting this attempt to respond innovatively and responsibly to the president's recommendations .

dealing with them will be among the most difficult and important challenges facing the congress in this generation .

with every good wish , sincerely , thomas p. o'neill , jr .

