the home mortgage foreclosure rate in the united states began to rise rapidly around the middle of 2006 and remained elevated for several years thereafter .

the large increase in home foreclosures negatively impacted some individual households , local communities , and the economy as a whole .

consequently , an issue before congress was whether to use federal resources and authority to help prevent some home foreclosures and , if so , how to best accomplish that objective .

this report provides background on the increase in foreclosure rates in the years following 2006 , describes temporary initiatives intended to preserve homeownership that were implemented by the federal government and remained active through at least 2016 , and briefly outlines some of the challenges inherent in designing foreclosure prevention initiatives .

additional foreclosure prevention initiatives that were established in 2007 or after but ended prior to the end of 2016 are described in the appendix .

foreclosure refers to formal legal proceedings initiated by a mortgage lender against a homeowner after the homeowner has missed a certain number of payments on his or her mortgage .

when a foreclosure is completed , the homeowner loses his or her home , which is either repossessed by the lender or sold at auction to repay the outstanding debt .

in general , the term "foreclosure" can refer to the foreclosure process or the completion of a foreclosure .

this report deals primarily with preventing foreclosure completions .

in order for the foreclosure process to begin , two things must happen: a homeowner must fail to make a certain number of payments on his or her mortgage , and the mortgage holder or mortgage servicer must decide to initiate foreclosure proceedings rather than pursue other options , such as offering a repayment plan or a loan modification .

 ( see the nearby text box explaining the role of mortgage servicers. ) .

a borrower that misses one or more payments is usually referred to as being delinquent on a loan ; when a borrower has missed three or more payments , he is generally considered to be in default .

servicers can generally begin foreclosure proceedings after a homeowner defaults on his mortgage , although servicers vary in how quickly they begin foreclosure proceedings after a borrower goes into default .

furthermore , the foreclosure process is governed by state law .

therefore , the foreclosure process and the length of time the process takes vary by state .

as foreclosure rates began to increase rapidly in the years after 2006 , there was broad bipartisan consensus that the rapid rise in foreclosures had negative consequences on households and communities .

however , there was less agreement among policymakers about how much the federal government should do to prevent foreclosures .

proponents of enacting government policies and using government resources to prevent foreclosures argued that , in addition to assisting households experiencing hardship , such action may prevent further damage to home values and communities that can be caused by concentrated foreclosures .

supporters also suggested that preventing foreclosures could help stabilize the economy as a whole .

opponents of government foreclosure prevention programs argued that foreclosure prevention should be worked out between lenders and borrowers without government interference .

opponents expressed concern that people who did not really need help , or who were not perceived to deserve help , could unfairly take advantage of government foreclosure prevention programs .

they argued that taxpayers' money should not be used to help people who could still afford their loans but wanted to get more favorable mortgage terms , people who may be seeking to pass their losses on to the lender or the taxpayer , or people who knowingly took on mortgages that they could not afford .

despite the concerns surrounding foreclosure prevention programs , and disagreement over the proper role of the government in preserving homeownership , the federal government implemented a variety of temporary initiatives to attempt to address the high rates of residential mortgage foreclosures .

some of these initiatives were enacted by congress , while others were created administratively by the george w. bush and obama administrations .

several of these initiatives remained active through at least 2016 , including the following: the home affordable modification program ( hamp ) , which provided financial incentives to mortgage servicers to modify certain mortgages ; the home affordable refinance program ( harp ) , which allows certain homeowners with little or no equity in their homes to refinance their mortgages ; the hardest hit fund , which provides funding to certain states to use for locally tailored foreclosure prevention programs ; the fha short refinance program , which allowed certain borrowers to refinance their mortgages into new loans insured by the federal housing administration ( fha ) while reducing the principal amount of the loan ; and additional funding for housing counseling to assist people in danger of foreclosure .

in addition to federal efforts to address mortgage foreclosures , many state and local governments also implemented a range of initiatives to reduce the number of foreclosures in recent years .

the private sector also pursued foreclosure prevention efforts , including creating the hope now alliance , a voluntary alliance of mortgage servicers , lenders , investors , counseling agencies , and others that formed in october 2007 with the encouragement of the federal government to engage in active outreach efforts to troubled borrowers .

while many private lenders and mortgage servicers participate in federal foreclosure prevention initiatives , many also have their own programs or procedures in place to work with borrowers who are having difficulty making their mortgage payments .

this report focuses on federal efforts to prevent foreclosure , and does not address these state , local , and private sector efforts .

the following sections describe federal foreclosure prevention initiatives that remained active through at least 2016 .

the appendix describes certain additional federal foreclosure prevention initiatives that were implemented in response to the increase in foreclosure rates but ended prior to 2016 .

on february 18 , 2009 , president obama announced the making home affordable ( mha ) initiative .

making home affordable included separate programs to ( 1 ) help certain troubled borrowers obtain affordable loan modifications and ( 2 ) make it easier for certain homeowners with little or no equity in their homes to refinance their mortgages .

these initiatives were known as the home affordable modification program ( hamp ) and the home affordable refinance program ( harp ) , respectively .

this section describes hamp , while a later section describes harp .

the deadline to apply for hamp was december 30 , 2016 .

in the past , treasury extended the program expiration date multiple times , but the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) put the december 31 , 2016 , expiration date in statute .

hamp applications received prior to december 30 , 2016 , can still be considered for modifications , and modifications that have already been made through hamp remain in effect .

hamp was primarily administered by the department of the treasury .

fannie mae and freddie mac each issued their own hamp requirements for the mortgages that they owned or guaranteed .

harp is the refinancing component of the making home affordable initiative .

it applies to mortgages backed by fannie mae and freddie mac , and the program requirements are set by those entities and their regulator , the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) .

harp was originally scheduled to end on june 10 , 2010 , but has been extended multiple times .

harp is currently scheduled to be available until september 30 , 2017 .

fhfa has announced that it will be implementing a new refinancing option for fannie mae - and freddie mac - backed loans with high loan - to - value ratios in october 2017 .

harp was most recently extended so that it will remain available until the new program is in place .

another temporary program created by treasury is the hardest hit fund ( hhf ) .

the hhf provides funds to selected states to use to create foreclosure prevention programs that fit local conditions .

ultimately , 18 states plus the district of columbia were selected to receive funds through the hhf through several rounds of funding .

the funding comes from the tarp funds that treasury initially set aside for hamp .

therefore , all hardest hit fund funding must be used in ways that comply with the law that authorized tarp , the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) , and state hhf programs must be approved by treasury .

states originally had until december 31 , 2017 , to use their funds .

in 2016 , treasury extended the deadline to december 31 , 2020 .

on march 26 , 2010 , the administration announced a new federal housing administration ( fha ) short refinance program for homeowners who owed more on their mortgages than their homes were worth .

detailed program guidance was released on august 6 , 2010 .

the fha short refinance program began on september 7 , 2010 , and ended on december 31 , 2016 .

under the fha short refinance program , certain homeowners who owed more than their homes were worth were eligible to refinance into new , fha - insured mortgages for an amount lower than the home's current value .

specifically , the new mortgage could not have a loan - to - value ratio of more than 97.75% .

the original lender would accept the proceeds of the new loan as payment in full on the original mortgage ; the new lender would have fha insurance on the new loan ; and the homeowner would have a first mortgage balance that was below the current value of the home , thereby giving him or her some equity in the home .

homeowners had to be current on their mortgages to qualify for this program .

further , the balance on the first mortgage loan had to be reduced by at least 10% .

this program was voluntary for lenders and borrowers , and borrowers with mortgages already insured by fha were not eligible .

the fha short refinance program was similar in structure to the hope for homeowners program ( described in the appendix ) , which was still active at the time that the fha short refinance program began but ended in 2011 .

however , there were some key differences between the two programs .

first , hope for homeowners required that any second liens on the property be extinguished .

under the fha short refinance program , second liens were specifically allowed to remain in place .

incentives were offered for the second lien - holder to reduce the balance of the second lien , and the homeowner's combined debt on both the first and the second lien was not allowed to exceed 115% of the value of the home after the refinance .

second , under hope for homeowners , borrowers could be either current or delinquent on their mortgages and qualify for the program .

under the fha short refinance program , borrowers had to be current on their mortgages .

finally , under hope for homeowners , borrowers had to agree to share some of their initial equity in the home with the government when the house was eventually sold .

the fha short refinance program did not appear to require any equity or appreciation sharing .

as of the end of december 2016 , fha reported insuring about 7,200 refinanced loans through the program .

while the program expired on december 31 , 2016 , it is possible that fha could insure some additional mortgages where the applications were received prior to the deadline .

treasury originally planned to use up to $8 billion of the tarp funds originally set aside for hamp to pay for the cost of this program , but given the low volume of participation and the associated lower number of defaults expected under the program , it has since reduced the total maximum amount that it will spend on the program to just over $100 million .

any additional program costs would be borne by fha .

another federal effort to slow the rising number of foreclosures has been to provide additional funding for housing counseling .

in particular , congress has provided funding specifically for foreclosure mitigation counseling to be administered by the neighborhood reinvestment corporation , commonly known as neighborworks america .

neighborworks america is a nonprofit organization created by congress in 1978 that has a national network of community partners .

it traditionally engages in a variety of housing and community reinvestment activities , including housing counseling , and also provides training for other nonprofit housing counseling organizations .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) provided $180 million to neighborworks to use for housing counseling for borrowers in danger of foreclosure , which it did by setting up the national foreclosure mitigation counseling program ( nfmcp ) .

neighborworks competitively awards the funding to qualified housing counseling organizations .

congress directed neighborworks to award the funding with a focus on areas with high default and foreclosure rates on subprime mortgages .

the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera , p.l .

110-289 ) provided an additional $180 million for neighborworks to distribute through the nfmcp , $30 million of which was to be distributed to counseling organizations to provide legal help to homeowners facing delinquency or foreclosure .

since hera , congress continued to provide funding for the nfmcp through annual appropriations acts , in amounts ranging from $40 million to $80 million per year .

funding provided for the nfmcp is shown in table 4 .

in fy2016 , congress provided $40 million for the nfmcp .

neighborworks reports that , as of april 30 , 2016 , over 2 million borrowers received foreclosure prevention counseling through the nfmcp .

evaluations of the program have found that borrowers who received counseling through the nfmcp were more likely to receive loan modifications , and more likely to remain current on their mortgages after receiving a loan modification , than borrowers who did not receive counseling .

there are several challenges associated with designing successful programs to prevent foreclosures .

some of these challenges are practical and concern issues surrounding the implementation of loan modifications .

other challenges are more conceptual , and are related to questions of fairness and precedent .

this section describes some of the most prominent considerations that were involved in developing programs to preserve homeownership in the years following the increase in foreclosure rates that began in 2006 , as well as how some of these challenges were addressed in the years following the programs' establishment .

some of these issues evolved over the years as loan modification programs came into wider use .

this section also briefly describes debate over the use of principal reduction in mortgage modifications and the extent to which principal reduction was utilized in mortgage modifications as of the end of 2016 .

over the past several decades , the practice of lenders packaging mortgages into securities and selling them to investors has become more widespread .

this practice is known as securitization , and the securities that include the mortgages are known as mortgage - backed securities ( mbs ) .

when mortgages are sold through securitization , several players become involved with any individual mortgage loan , including the lender , the servicer , and the investors who hold shares in the mbs .

the servicer is usually the organization that has the most contact with the borrower , including receiving monthly payments and initiating any foreclosure proceedings .

however , servicers are usually subject to contracts with investors which limit the activities that the servicer can undertake and require it to safeguard the investors' financial interest .

one question that has faced foreclosure prevention programs , particularly in the early stages of the response to rising foreclosure rates , has been the extent to which servicers have the authority to make certain loan modifications .

contractual obligations may limit the amount of flexibility that servicers have to modify loans in ways that could arguably yield a lower return for investors .

in some cases , loan modifications can result in less of a loss for investors than foreclosure ; however , servicers may not want to risk having investors challenge their assessment that a modification is more cost - effective than a foreclosure .

one possible way to partially address the question of who can modify mortgages is to provide a safe harbor for servicers .

in general , a safe harbor protects servicers who engage in certain mortgage modifications from lawsuits brought by investors .

while proponents of a safe harbor believe that a safe harbor is necessary to encourage servicers to modify more mortgages without fear of legal repercussions , opponents argue that a safe harbor infringes on investors' rights and could even encourage servicers to modify mortgages that are not in trouble if it benefits their own self - interest .

the helping families save their homes act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-22 ) provided a safe harbor for servicers who modified mortgages prior to december 31 , 2012 , in a manner consistent with the making home affordable program guidelines or the since - expired hope for homeowners program .

the legislation specified that the safe harbor does not protect servicers or individuals from liability for any fraud committed in their handling of the mortgage or the mortgage modification .

the existence of hamp and other foreclosure prevention programs may have also helped to standardize mortgage modifications to some extent , possibly providing a clearer set of guidelines to servicers about what constitutes an appropriate mortgage modification .

the net present value test in programs such as hamp is intended to help ensure that the modifications servicers make are in the best interest of the investors in the mortgage .

another issue that has faced loan modification programs is the high volume of delinquencies and foreclosure proceedings that have been underway since 2007 .

lenders and servicers have a limited number of employees to reach out to troubled borrowers and find solutions , and this was particularly true in the early years of the foreclosure response before servicers increased staffing levels to address the volume of delinquent mortgages .

contacting borrowers — some of whom may avoid contact with their servicer out of embarrassment or fear — and working out large numbers of individual loan modifications can overwhelm the capacity of the lenders and servicers .

in addition , the complexity of mortgage modification programs and changes in program requirements can stress servicing staff .

streamlined plans that use a formula to modify all loans that meet certain criteria may make it easier for lenders and servicers to help a greater number of borrowers in a shorter amount of time .

however , streamlined plans may be more likely to run into the contractual issues between servicers and investors described above .

mortgage servicers are the entities that are often primarily responsible for making the decision to modify a mortgage or to begin the foreclosure process .

some observers have raised concerns that mortgage servicers' compensation structures may provide incentives for them to pursue foreclosure rather than modify loans in certain cases , even if a modification would be in the best interest of the investor as well as the borrower .

servicers' actions are governed by contracts with mortgage holders or investors that generally require servicers to act in the best interests of the entity on whose behalf they service the mortgages , although , as described above , such contracts may in some cases also include restrictions on servicers' abilities to modify loans .

in addition to their contractual obligations , servicers have an incentive to service mortgages in the best interest of investors because that is one way that mortgage servicers ensure that they will attract continued business .

however , some have suggested that servicers' compensation structures may provide incentives for servicers to pursue foreclosure even when it is not in the best interest of the investor in the mortgage .

for example , servicers' compensation structures may not provide an incentive to put in the extra work that is necessary to modify a mortgage , and servicers may be able to charge more in fees or recoup more expenses through a foreclosure than a modification .

programs such as hamp provide financial payments to servicers to modify mortgages , but some argue that these may not be large enough to align servicers' incentives with those of borrowers and investors .

in 2011 , the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) and hud announced a joint initiative to consider alternative servicer compensation structures .

a challenge associated with loan modification programs is the possibility that a homeowner who receives a modification will nevertheless default on the loan again in the future .

this possibility might be of particular concern for lenders or investors if the home's value is falling , because in that case delaying an eventual foreclosure reduces the value that the mortgage holder can recoup through a foreclosure sale .

furthermore , modified mortgages that default again in the future can potentially harm borrowers .

if a borrower defaults again and eventually loses his home to foreclosure , he may have been better off going through foreclosure earlier rather than making modified mortgage payments for a period of time when that money could have been put to another use .

according to data from the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , redefault rates for modified mortgages improved dramatically over the years .

for loans that were modified in 2008 , nearly 45% were at least 60 days delinquent again six months after the modification , and over 60% were at least 60 days delinquent again three years after the modification .

in contrast , for loans modified in 2012 , about 13% were at least 60 days delinquent six months after the modification and 17% were 60 days delinquent three years after the modification .

the six - month redefault rate for mortgages modified in subsequent years remained in a similar range .

a number of factors may have contributed to the improvement in redefault rates over the years , including changes in the types of loan modifications being offered , improvements in mortgage servicers' responses to delinquent borrowers , and improving housing market conditions .

the occ also reports data that show redefault rates according to whether the loan modification increased monthly payments , decreased monthly payments , or left monthly payments unchanged .

the reports include such data for loans modified since the beginning of 2008 .

the report covering the third quarter of 2015 shows that , for loans modified in 2014 , about 15% of loan modifications that resulted in monthly payments being reduced by 20% or more were 60 or more days delinquent 12 months after modification .

this compares to a redefault rate of 22% for loans where monthly payments were reduced by between 10% and 20% ; 28% for loans where payments were reduced by less than 10% ; 31% for loans where payments remained unchanged ; and 33% for loans where monthly payments increased .

while loan modifications that lower monthly payments do appear to perform better than modifications that increase monthly payments , a significant number of modified loans with lower monthly payments still become delinquent again after the loan modification .

another challenge is that loan modification programs may provide an incentive for borrowers to intentionally miss payments or default on their mortgages in order to qualify for a loan modification that provides more favorable mortgage terms .

while many of the programs described above specifically require that a borrower must not have intentionally missed payments on his or her mortgage in order to qualify for the program , it can be difficult to prove a person's intention .

programs that are designed to reach out to distressed borrowers before they miss any payments , as well as those who are already delinquent , may minimize the incentive for homeowners to intentionally fall behind on their mortgages in order to receive help .

opponents of some foreclosure prevention plans argue that it is not fair to help homeowners who have fallen behind on their mortgages while homeowners who may be struggling to stay current receive no help .

others argue that borrowers who took out mortgages that they knew they could not afford should not receive federal government assistance .

supporters of loan modification plans point out that many borrowers go into foreclosure for reasons outside of their control , and that some troubled borrowers may have been victims of deceptive , unfair , or fraudulent lending practices .

furthermore , some argue for foreclosure prevention programs because foreclosures can create problems for other homeowners in the neighborhood by depressing property values or putting a strain on local governments .

to address these concerns about fairness , some loan modification programs reach out to borrowers who are struggling to make payments but are not yet delinquent on their mortgages .

most programs also specifically exclude individuals who provided false information in order to obtain a mortgage .

some opponents of government efforts to provide or encourage loan modifications argue that changing the terms of a contract retroactively sets a troubling precedent for future mortgage lending .

these opponents argue that if lenders or investors believe that they could be required or encouraged to change the terms of a mortgage in the future , they will be less likely to provide mortgage loans in the first place or will only do so at higher interest rates to counter the perceived increase in the risk of not being repaid in full .

most existing programs attempt to address this concern by limiting the program's scope .

often , these programs apply only to mortgages that were originated during a certain time frame , and end at a predetermined date , although the end dates for several programs have been extended multiple times .

while the federal government has undertaken several types of initiatives to help prevent foreclosures — including encouraging mortgage modifications , facilitating refinancing for underwater borrowers , and providing funding for counseling — over the years some policymakers and others have argued for additional actions to be taken to assist troubled borrowers .

among other things , some policymakers and advocates have urged wider use of principal reduction , whereby the mortgage holder forgives some of the principal amount that the borrower owes .

mortgages that are not backed by fannie mae or freddie mac or government agencies such as the federal housing administration ( fha ) are eligible for principal reduction at the discretion of the mortgage holder .

according to data from the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) , for mortgages modified in the third quarter of 2015 , about 25% of modifications of mortgages held by private investors and 29% of modifications of mortgages held in bank portfolios included principal reduction .

however , only about 8% of the total number of mortgages modified in the third quarter of 2015 included principal reduction .

given over 3 million homes with mortgages continued to be in negative equity positions as of the fourth quarter of 2016 , advocates of principal reduction argue that increasing its use could be an effective tool in preventing foreclosures .

proponents of principal reduction argue that it can provide an advantage over other types of modifications because it better aligns the amount a borrower owes with the amount that the house is worth , possibly giving borrowers more of an incentive to remain current on the modified mortgage .

advocates also argue that reducing principal can be in the best interest of mortgage holders if the cost of principal reduction is less than the cost of foreclosure .

those who oppose more widespread use of principal reduction argue that monthly mortgage payments can be reduced without forgiving mortgage principal , that reducing principal for some borrowers is unfair to others who do not benefit from such relief , and that greater use of principal reduction could encourage some people to purposely default on their mortgages to try to qualify for principal reduction .

programs such as the hamp principal reduction alternative ( pra ) , described earlier in this report , provided incentives for reducing mortgage principal for certain borrowers .

however , mortgages backed by the federal housing administration ( fha ) are not eligible for principal reduction , nor are most mortgages backed by fannie mae or freddie mac .

the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , the regulator of fannie mae and freddie mac , has generally not allowed principal reduction on mortgages backed by those entities , either through the pra or otherwise .

however , in april 2016 fannie mae and freddie mac announced the availability of a principal reduction modification for a limited number of borrowers .

only borrowers with mortgages backed by fannie mae or freddie mac who met specific criteria were eligible for this principal reduction .

servicers sent solicitation letters to eligible borrowers , and the deadline for servicers to offer eligible borrowers a principal reduction modification was december 31 , 2016 .

fhfa estimated that approximately 33,000 borrowers may be eligible .

in addition to the foreclosure prevention initiatives described earlier in this report , several other foreclosure prevention initiatives were created or announced in response to the housing market turmoil that began around 2007-2008 but ended in earlier years .

some of these programs were precursors to the programs that are described in the body of this report .

this appendix briefly describes some of these initiatives .

the programs discussed in this appendix include the emergency homeowners loan program , hope for homeowners , fhasecure , fannie mae's and freddie mac's streamlined modification program , and the fdic's program for modifying loans that had been held by indymac bank .

all of these initiatives expired between 2008 and 2011 , although some borrowers may have continued to receive assistance through these programs if they began participating in the program prior to the program's end date .

emergency homeowners loan program the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( p.l .

111-203 ) , which was signed into law by president obama in july 2010 , included up to $1 billion for hud to use to administer a program to provide short - term loans to certain troubled borrowers who had experienced a decrease in income due to unemployment , underemployment , or a medical emergency , in order to help them make their mortgage payments .

hud chose to provide this funding to the 32 states ( and puerto rico ) that did not receive funding through the administration's hardest hit fund ( described in the " hardest hit fund " section of this report ) .

by statute , hud was not able to enter into new agreements under this program , called the emergency homeowners loan program ( ehlp ) , after september 30 , 2011 .

ehlp funds were used to provide five - year , zero - interest , nonrecourse loans secured by junior liens on the property to help pay arrearages on the mortgage and to assist the borrower in making mortgage payments for up to 24 months going forward .

an individual borrower was eligible to receive up to a maximum loan of $50,000 .

to qualify for the ehlp , borrowers had to meet certain conditions , including the following: borrowers must have had a household income of 120% or less of area median income prior to the unemployment , underemployment , or medical event that made the household unable to make its mortgage payments ; borrowers must have had a current gross income that was at least 15% less than the household's income prior to the unemployment , underemployment , or medical event ; borrowers must have been at least three months delinquent and have received notification of the lender's intent to foreclose ; borrowers must have had a reasonable likelihood of being able to resume making full monthly mortgage payments within two years , and had a total debt - to - income ratio of less than 55% ; and borrowers must have resided in the property as a principal residence , and the property must have been a single - family ( one - to four - unit ) property .

borrowers were required to contribute 31% of their monthly gross income at the time of their application ( but in no case less than $25 ) to monthly payments on the first mortgage , and were required to report any changes in income or employment status while they were receiving assistance .

the assistance ends when one of the following events occurs: ( 1 ) the maximum assistance amount has been reached ; ( 2 ) the household regains an income level of 85% or more of its income prior to the unemployment or medical event ; ( 3 ) the homeowner no longer resides in or sells the property or refinances the mortgage ; ( 4 ) the borrower defaults on his portion of the first mortgage payments ; or ( 5 ) the borrower fails to report changes in employment status or income .

borrowers are not required to make payments on the ehlp loans for a five - year period as long as the borrowers remain in the properties as their principal residences and stay current on their first mortgage payments .

if these conditions are met , the balance of the ehlp loan declines by 20% annually until the debt is extinguished at the end of five years .

however , the borrower will be responsible for repaying the loan to hud under certain circumstances .

hud has not released final data on how many borrowers participated in the program .

media reports from the time the program ended suggested that between 10,000 and 15,000 borrowers may have been assisted , with only about half of the funding allocated to the program ultimately being spent .

participation may have been lower than initially anticipated in part because of delays in getting the program started and borrowers having difficulty meeting the eligibility criteria to qualify for assistance .

hope for homeowners congress created the hope for homeowners ( h4h ) program in the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) , which was signed into law by president george w. bush on july 30 , 2008 .

the program , which was voluntary on the part of both borrowers and lenders , offered certain borrowers the ability to refinance into new mortgages insured by fha if their lenders agreed to certain conditions .

hope for homeowners began on october 1 , 2008 , and ended on september 30 , 2011 .

in order to be eligible for the program , borrowers were required to meet the following requirements: the borrower must have had a mortgage that was originated on or before january 1 , 2008 .

the borrower's mortgage payments must have been more than 31% of gross monthly income .

the borrower must not have owned another home .

the borrower must not have intentionally defaulted on his or her mortgage or any other substantial debt within the last five years , and he or she must not have been convicted of fraud during the last 10 years under either federal or state law .

the borrower must not have provided false information to obtain the original mortgage .

under hope for homeowners , the lender agreed to write the mortgage down to a percentage of the home's currently appraised value , and the borrower received a new loan insured by the fha .

the new mortgage was a 30-year fixed - rate mortgage with no prepayment penalties , and could not exceed $550,440 .

homeowners paid upfront and annual mortgage insurance premiums to fha , and any second lien - holders were required to release their liens .

when the homeowner sells or refinances the home , he or she is required to pay an exit premium to hud .

the exit premium is a percentage of the initial equity the borrower had in the home after the h4h refinance ; if the borrower sells or refinances the home during the first year after the h4h refinance , the exit premium is 100% of the initial equity .

after five years , the exit premium is 50% of the initial equity .

congress authorized certain changes to the hope for homeowners program in the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 ) and the helping families save their homes act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-22 ) .

hud used the authority granted in both of these laws to make changes to h4h from its original form .

for example , hud lowered the mortgage insurance premiums charged to borrowers ; made changes to the maximum loan - to - value ratio on the refinanced loan ; offered immediate payments to certain second lien - holders to release their liens ; eliminated a requirement for a borrower to share any home price appreciation with hud when the home was sold or refinanced ; and replaced a requirement for a borrower to share equity in the home with hud with the exit premium .

furthermore , eligibility for the program was limited to borrowers with a net worth below a certain threshold .

the congressional budget office originally estimated that up to 400,000 homeowners could be helped to avoid foreclosure over the life of h4h .

in total , about 760 borrowers refinanced through the program .

some have suggested that more borrowers and lenders did not use hope for homeowners because the program was too complex .

the legislative and administrative changes described above were intended to address some of the obstacles to participating in the program .

fhasecure fhasecure was a program announced by the federal housing administration ( fha ) on august 31 , 2007 , to allow delinquent borrowers with non - fha adjustable - rate mortgages ( arms ) to refinance into fha - insured fixed - rate mortgages .

the new mortgage helped borrowers by offering better loan terms that either reduced a borrower's monthly payments or helped a borrower avoid steep payment increases under his or her old loan .

fhasecure expired on december 31 , 2008 .

to qualify for fhasecure , borrowers originally had to meet the following eligibility criteria: the borrower had a non - fha arm that had reset .

the borrower became delinquent on his or her loan due to the reset , and had sufficient income to make monthly payments on the new fha - insured loan .

the borrower was current on his or her mortgage prior to the reset .

the new loan met standard fha underwriting criteria and was subject to other standard fha requirements ( including maximum loan - to - value ratios , mortgage limits , and up - front and annual mortgage insurance premiums ) .

in july 2008 , fha expanded its eligibility criteria for the program , such as allowing borrowers who were delinquent due to circumstances other than the mortgage reset to participate and relaxing the definition of being current on the mortgage .

fhasecure expired on december 31 , 2008 .

in the months before its expiration , some housing policy advocates called for the program to be extended ; however , hud officials contended that continuing the program would be prohibitively expensive , possibly endangering fha's single - family mortgage insurance program .

hud also pointed to the hope for homeowners program as filling the role that fhasecure did in helping households avoid foreclosure .

supporters of extending fhasecure argued that the statutory requirements of hope for homeowners may have offered less flexibility in the face of changing circumstances than fhasecure , which could have been more easily amended by hud .

when fhasecure expired at the end of 2008 , about 4,000 loans had been refinanced through the program .

critics of the program point to the relatively stringent criteria that borrowers had to meet to qualify for the program as a possible reason that more people did not take advantage of it .

indymac loan modifications on july 11 , 2008 , the office of thrift supervision in the department of the treasury closed indymac federal savings bank , based in pasadena , ca , and placed it under the conservatorship of the federal deposit insurance corporation ( fdic ) .

in august 2008 , the fdic put into place a loan modification program for holders of mortgages either owned or serviced by indymac that were seriously delinquent or in danger of default , or on which the borrower was having trouble making payments because of interest rate resets or a change in financial circumstances .

many of the features of the indymac loan modification program were later included in hamp .

in order to be eligible for a loan modification , the mortgage must have been for the borrower's primary residence and the borrower had to provide current income information that documented financial hardship .

furthermore , the fdic conducted a net present value test to evaluate whether the expected future benefit to the fdic and the mortgage investors from modifying the loan would be greater than the expected future benefit from foreclosure .

if a borrower met the above conditions , the loan would be modified to achieve a mortgage debt - to - income ( dti ) ratio of 38% .

the 38% dti could be achieved by lowering the interest rate , extending the period of the loan , forbearing a portion of the principal , or a combination of the three .

the interest rate would be set at the freddie mac survey rate for conforming mortgages , but if necessary it could be lowered for a period of up to five years in order to reach the 38% dti ; after the five - year period , the interest rate would rise by no more than 1% each year until it reached the freddie mac survey rate .

then - fdic chairman sheila bair estimated that about 13,000 loans were modified under this program while indymac was under the fdic's conservatorship .

the fdic completed a sale of indymac to onewest bank on march 19 , 2009 .

onewest agreed to continue to operate the loan modification program subject to the terms of a loss - sharing agreement with the fdic .

onewest became a participating servicer in hamp , described earlier in this report .

fannie mae and freddie mac streamlined modification program on november 11 , 2008 , james lockhart , then the director of the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , which oversees fannie mae and freddie mac , announced a new streamlined modification program for fannie mae and freddie mac and certain private lenders and servicers .

fannie mae and freddie mac had helped troubled borrowers through individualized loan modifications for some time , but the smp represented an attempt to formalize the process and set an industry standard .

the smp took effect on december 15 , 2008 , but was soon replaced by hamp , which was announced in february 2009 and is described in the " home affordable modification program ( hamp ) " section of this report .

in order for borrowers whose mortgages were owned by fannie mae or freddie mac to be eligible for the smp , they had to meet the following criteria: the mortgage must have been originated on or before january 1 , 2008 .

the mortgage must have had a loan - to - value ratio of at least 90% .

the home must have been a single - family residence occupied by the borrower , and it must have been the borrower's primary residence .

the borrower must have missed at least three mortgage payments .

the borrower must not have filed for bankruptcy .

mortgages insured or guaranteed by the federal government , such as those guaranteed by fha , the department of veterans affairs , or the rural housing service , were not eligible for the smp .

the smp shared many features of the fdic's plan to modify troubled mortgages held by indymac , and many of these features were also later included in hamp .

qualified borrowers' monthly mortgage payments were lowered so that the household's mortgage debt - to - income ratio ( dti ) was 38% ( not including second lien payments ) .

after borrowers successfully completed a three - month trial period ( by making all of the payments at the proposed modified payment amount ) , the loan modification automatically took effect .

in order to reach the 38% mortgage debt - to - income ratio , servicers were required to follow a specific formula .

first , the servicer capitalized late payments and accrued interest ( late fees and penalties were waived ) .

if this resulted in a dti of 38% or less , the modification was complete .

if the dti was higher than 38% , the servicer could extend the term of the loan to up to 40 years from the effective date of the modification .

if the dti was still above 38% , the interest rate could be adjusted to the current market rate or lower , but to no less than 3% .

finally , if the dti was still above 38% , servicers could offer principal forbearance .

the amount of the principal forbearance would not accrue interest and was non - amortizing , but would result in a balloon payment when the loan was paid off or the home was sold .

principal forgiveness was not allowed under the smp .

to encourage participation in the smp , fannie mae and freddie mac paid servicers $800 for each loan modification completed through the program .

if the smp did not produce an affordable payment for the borrower , servicers were to work with borrowers in a customized fashion to try to modify the loan in a way that the homeowner could afford .

fannie mae and freddie mac completed over 51,000 loan modifications between january 2009 and april 2009 , when fannie and freddie stopped using the smp and began participating in the making home affordable program instead .

however , it is unclear how many of these loan modifications were done specifically through the smp .

