the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 , h.r .

1 ) is a broad economic recovery measure with $787 billion in tax cuts and spending .

among the purposes of the law are preserving and creating jobs ; promoting economic recovery ; and making investments in transportation , environmental protection , and other infrastructure that will provide long - term economic benefits .

the economic stimulus law included funds for certain accounts and activities of the four major federal land management agencies .

these agencies are the forest service ( fs ) in the department of agriculture , and the bureau of land management ( blm ) , fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , and national park service ( nps ) , all within the department of the interior ( doi ) .

in total , the law contained $2.50 billion for these agencies .

the agencies received different amounts of this total: $320.0 million for blm , $280.0 million for fws , $750.0 million for nps , and $1,150.0 million for fs .

these appropriations represented varying percentages of each agency's fy2009 regular annual appropriation , ranging from about a fifth to a third of the total appropriation: 31% for blm , 19% for fws , 30% for nps , and 24% for fs .

the economic stimulus law did not provide geographic requirements for how the funds for these agencies were to be allocated , which is consistent with past practice .

the senate originally had approved a slightly lower total for the four land management agencies — $2.49 billion — while the house had passed a higher amount — $3.93 billion .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

in general , the law contained levels of appropriations for accounts and activities of the four agencies that were closer to the levels originally approved by the senate rather than by the house .

the funds enacted for the federal land management agencies are the focus of this report .

this report includes a comparison of the house and senate provisions for the land management agencies , as contained in title viii of the house - passed version of h.r .

1 and title vii of the senate - passed version of the bill .

the economic stimulus law provided an appropriation to each of the four land management agencies for construction .

traditionally , while the construction accounts of the agencies have not been used for identical purposes , they have funded the construction , repair , and maintenance of buildings , roads , and other physical facilities .

each of the agencies has substantial physical assets .

for instance , an inventory of physical assets within the national park system identified more than 1,800 bridges and tunnels , 26,000 historic structures ( including historic buildings ) , 7,590 public use and administrative buildings , 770 campgrounds , 8,500 monuments and statues , 500 dams , 680 water systems and waste water collection systems , 200 solid waste systems , 5,300 family housing units , approximately 5,450 paved miles of public park roads , the equivalent of 948 paved miles of parking areas , 6,544 miles of unpaved roads , and 1,679 associated road structures .

many of the older assets present particular challenges , and nps construction funds often are targeted for correction of critical health and safety problems .

included in the economic stimulus law were appropriations to the blm and fs for wildland fire management .

specifically , the law contained $500.0 million for the fs and $15.0 million for the blm .

the blm funds were provided for "hazardous fuels reduction," for clearing excess forest biomass that can contribute to severe wildfires .

the joint explanatory statement directed that these funds be used for high - priority projects on federal lands .

the law and accompanying joint explanatory statement contained more detail for the allocation of the fs funds than for the blm funds .

in general , the conferees on the bill again encouraged the fs to give priority to individual projects based on their capacity "to create the largest number of jobs in the shortest period of time and to create lasting value" for the public .

of the fs funds , the law specified that $250.0 million is to be used on federal lands for several purposes — "hazardous fuels reduction," forest health protection , rehabilitation , and fire hazard mitigation activities .

these activities traditionally have been funded under the annual appropriations laws .

the other $250.0 million is to be used for cooperative activities on state and private lands , under all existing fs authorities .

such cooperative activities also traditionally have been funded in the annual appropriations laws .

under p.l .

111-5 , activities on state and private lands are to include hazardous fuels reduction , forest health , and ecosystem improvement .

the law allowed the fs to determine how the $250.0 million would be allocated among state and private activities for choice of "programs that provide the maximum public benefit," according to the joint explanatory statement .

funds in p.l .

111-5 for state and private activities are not subject to matching or cost - share requirements ; this provision was included in response to the current economic conditions at the state and local levels , according to the joint explanatory statement .

in addition , of the $500.0 million in total fs fire funding , $50.0 million may be used for "wood - to - energy grants" to encourage utilization of biomass from federal , state , and private lands to be used to produce energy .

the $50.0 million is a sub - amount within the other activities ; thus it is not additive to the $250.0 million for federal activities and the $250.0 million for state and private activities .

the levels of appropriations in p.l .

111-5 for wildland fire management were similar to those included in the earlier senate - passed version of h.r .

1 .

the senate - passed bill also had included $15.0 million for blm , but did not identify the purposes of the funds .

the house - passed bill did not specifically fund this account .

both the senate - and house - passed versions of h.r .

1 had included appropriations for the fs for wildland fire management , with the senate bill providing a significantly lower amount ( $485.0 million ) than the house bill ( $850.0 million ) .

of the amount in the senate bill , $260.0 million was available for work on state and private lands , under all existing fs authorities .

in addition , $50.0 million of these ( state and private ) funds could be used for grants to encourage utilization of biomass from the national forests .

the remaining $225.0 million of the total fs funds was to be used for hazardous fuels reduction and fire hazard mitigation in areas at high risk of catastrophic wildfire .

while this purpose traditionally had been included within the fs wildland fire management funding account , the senate - passed bill provided additional specification — for high - risk wildfire areas .

the house - passed bill had allowed that the fs appropriations ( $850.0 million ) could be transferred to the agency's state and private forestry and national forest system accounts .

of the total , $550.0 million was directed to an array of state and private forestry assistance programs .

the remaining $300.0 million was to be used on federal lands for fuels reduction , forest health , wood - to - energy grants , and rehabilitation and restoration .

wildfire funding has been a continuing congressional issue for much of the past decade .

following the severe wildfire season in 2000 , appropriations for wildland fire management activities tripled .

these funds have remained at substantially higher levels than during the 1990s due to subsequent severe fire seasons .

for instance , for fy2008 , appropriations for the fs and blm / doi totaled $4.46 billion ( including emergency appropriations ) , with $1.19 billion for blm / doi and $3.27 billion for the fs .

the fy2009 regular appropriation was $2.99 billion , with $859.5 million for doi and $2.13 billion for fs .

much of the attention has been on high and rising wildfire suppression costs , and their impact on other agency programs ; funds for suppression activities were not explicitly provided in the economic stimulus law .

other attention has been on the need to reduce fuel levels on the federal lands , to reduce wildfire damages and increase the ability to control the fires .

explicit estimates of needs for fuel treatment funding have not been presented in public documents .

however , based on funding levels in recent years , it would take an estimated 77 years to reduce fuels on federal lands with high or moderate risk of ecological damage from wildfires .

the additional funding in p.l .

111-5 would appear to accelerate fuel reduction activities .

the economic stimulus law did not include funds for the nps centennial challenge .

only the house - passed version of h.r .

1 had included appropriations for the centennial challenge , with $100.0 million .

the funds were to be provided under an existing law that authorizes the secretary of the interior to enter into "challenge cost - share agreements" with any "cooperator" for the purpose of sharing costs or services .

the appropriation in the house - passed bill was for "centennial challenge signature projects and programs. .

the nps centennial challenge program matches private contributions with federal funds for projects and programs in parks .

under the house - passed bill , not less than 50% of the total cost of each project or program was to be derived from non - federal sources .

the centennial challenge program was proposed by president george w. bush in 2006 to strengthen visitor services and park programs over 10 years in anticipation of the nps's 100 th anniversary in 2016 .

most recently , on january 13 , 2009 , the nps announced $27 million for centennial challenge projects and programs in 2009 , consisting of $10.5 million in federal contributions and $16.5 million in private donations .

the centennial challenge was one of three components of the bush administration's 2006 national park centennial initiative .

overall , the initiative sought up to $3 billion in new funds for parks over 10 years through a public / private joint effort .

the components of the initiative were ( 1 ) a commitment to add $100.0 million annually in discretionary funds for the nps , ( 2 ) a challenge for the public to donate $100.0 million annually ( the "centennial challenge" ) , and ( 3 ) a request that legislation be enacted to establish a mandatory fund with $100.0 million annually to match public donations .

a question for congress is whether to establish such a mandatory spending program to match donations through the centennial challenge .

related legislative proposals were introduced but not enacted in the 110 th congress .

in the absence of such a mandatory fund providing $100.0 million annually , the house - passed version of h.r .

1 had provided an appropriation of $100.0 million .

congress first provided funds for the centennial challenge in fy2008 , with $24.6 million .

no funds were included for the centennial challenge in the fy2009 regular annual appropriations law .

a central issue of debate has been how such a centennial fund could be financed .

proposals have included financing through appropriations from the general fund of the treasury , fees for commercial activities on federal lands , revenues from offshore oil and gas activities in the gulf of mexico , and revenues from the establishment and sale of special postage stamps .

another area of discussion has been the role of the nps and congress in determining projects eligible for funding .

because the centennial challenge relies on corporate , foundation , and other private donations , an issue for congress is the role of philanthropic , corporate , foundation , and other private donors in raising money for parks .

some observers believe that non - federal funding has been successful in expanding and enhancing a variety of important park programs and is necessary to supplement a shortfall in federal appropriations .

other observers are concerned that non - federal funding will lead to commercialization of national parks and excessive private influence over park operations .

