the federal government provides grants - in - aid to states and local governments to provide a range of benefits and human services programs to disadvantaged families and persons .

most such human services are administered , and often designed , at the state and local level .

states and localities also often contribute spending from their own funds for these programs .

some human services are provided by community or nonprofit organizations .

the current recession is straining the budgets of state and local governments , putting pressure on many jurisdictions to cut spending or raise taxes .

the recession also might increase the demand for services for programs designed to alleviate economic hardship .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 , h.r .

1 ) includes provisions to temporarily increase funding for several human services programs .

some of the funding is directed to help finance increases in payments through the states to households and families .

some of the additional funds provided offer fiscal relief to the states for a portion of the costs of certain programs .

additional funding increases would go to localities , community organizations , and faith - based organizations that provide human services .

this report discusses provisions of the arra for selected human services programs .

the selected programs generally are those that provide benefits and services to families with children , though some programs ( eg , the community services block grant ) provide services to other families as well .

all of the programs discussed in this report are administered by the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

this report does not address proposals related to the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap , the program formerly known as food stamps ) , nor does it discuss the medicaid proposals in the bill .

the arra changes spending for some mandatory programs ( e.g .

temporary assistance for needy families and the title iv - e programs of the social security act ) , as well as providing additional , supplemental appropriations for other programs .

the term "additional funding" is used to denote appropriations above those in the regular appropriations for the program .

at this point , fy2009 regular appropriations are contained in the fy2009 continuing resolution ( p.l .

110-329 ) .

the first part of the report provides a summary of each grant or program's purpose , current funding , and the proposed changes in the enacted version of the arra .

it concludes with a table that provides a detailed comparison of current law , the house - passed version of the arra , the senate - passed version of the arra , and the final , enacted version of the arra .

proposed funding increases for low income home energy assistance ( $1 billion in the house version of arra ) and the social services block grant ( $400 million in the senate version of arra ) were not a part of the final bill , but are shown in the table .

the tanf block grant is best known as a funding source for cash welfare programs that provide assistance to needy families with children .

however , tanf also funds a wide range of benefits and services for disadvantaged families with children , as well as activities to further the goals of reducing out - of - wedlock pregnancies and promoting the formation and maintenance of two - parent families .

the child care and development block grant ( ccdbg ) is the primary source of federal funding dedicated solely to child care subsidies for low - income working families ( regardless of welfare status ) .

through the ccdbg , low - income parents receive vouchers or other reimbursement for child care costs to enable them to work or participate in education or training activities .

generally , families must provide a co - payment for child care , but co - pays may be waived under certain circumstances .

the child support enforcement ( cse ) program was enacted in 1975 as a federal - state program ( title iv - d of the social security act ) to help strengthen families by securing financial support for children from their noncustodial parent on a consistent and continuing basis and by helping some families to remain self - sufficient and off public assistance by providing the requisite cse services .

the cse program serves both welfare and non - welfare families .

all 50 states and four jurisdictions ( the district of columbia , guam , puerto rico , and the virgin islands ) operate cse programs .

on average , child support constitutes about 17% of family income for households who receive it .

among poor households who receive it , child support constitutes about 30% of family income .

in fy2007 , the cse program collected $24.9 billion in child support payments and served nearly 15.8 million child support cases .

child welfare agencies seek to ensure the well - being of children and their families , including protecting children from abuse or neglect and ensuring that they have safe and permanent homes .

the federal government provides support to state child welfare agencies primarily through programs that are authorized under title iv - b and title iv - e of the social security act .

title iv - e of the social security act authorizes the foster care , kinship guardianship , and adoption assistance program .

under this program , states are required to provide foster care maintenance payments and adoption assistance payments to eligible children , and the federal government is obligated to reimburse states for a part of the cost of those payments .

the recent enactment of the fostering connections to success and increasing adoptions act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-351 ) also gives states the option of providing kinship guardianship assistance payments to eligible children .

head start is a federal program that has provided comprehensive early childhood development services to low - income children since 1965 .

services provided to preschool - aged children include child development , educational , health , nutritional , social and other activities , intended to prepare low - income children for entering kindergarten .

federal head start funds are provided directly to local grantees , rather than through states .

programs are locally designed and are administered by a network of over 1,600 public and private nonprofit and for - profit agencies .

in fy2007 , head start was funded at $6.888 billion , allowing for funded enrollment of 908,412 children ( of whom 61,788 were served by early head start programs ) .

the head start act was reauthorized with the signing of the improving head start for school readiness act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-134 ) on december 12 , 2007 .

the new law significantly restructured the statutory formula for allocating head start funds .

under section 640 of reauthorized head start act , funds are to be distributed as follows: ( 1 ) all programs are allotted the same base grant they received in the prior fiscal year ; ( 2 ) certain set - asides are taken off the total appropriation for activities related to training and technical assistance , research and demonstrations , and discretionary payments for activities such as monitoring ; and ( 3 ) any funds remaining are then allocated , depending on the amount left available , toward cost - of - living increases , program expansions , quality improvement activities , and state advisory councils .

the community services block grant ( csbg ) program provides federal funds to states , territories and indian tribes for distribution to local agencies in support of a variety of antipoverty activities .

the origins of the community services block grant date back to 1964 and lyndon johnson's war on poverty .

a centerpiece of the federal antipoverty campaign was the community action program , under which a nationwide network of local , mostly non - profit , community action agencies ( caas ) was developed .

csbg funds are used for activities designed to have a "measurable and potentially major impact on causes of poverty. .

a key feature is the direct involvement of low - income people in the design and administration of antipoverty activities , through mandatory representation on the caas' governing boards .

there is no typical caa , since each agency designs its programs based on a local community needs assessment .

examples , however , of csbg - funded services include emergency assistance , home weatherization , activities for youth and senior citizens , transportation , income management and credit counseling , domestic violence crisis assistance , parenting education , food pantries , and emergency shelters .

in addition , local agencies provide information and referral to other community services , such as job training and vocational education , depending on the needs of individual clients .

the program is intended to serve the poor , but states ( and eligible entities within those states ) may choose to serve populations with incomes up to 125% of the federal poverty level .

of amounts appropriated for the csbg , 1.5% is reserved by hhs for certain activities , including training and technical assistance , evaluation and program monitoring .

another half of 1% is reserved for the territories , and the remainder is allocated among states according to a formula , which effectively gives states the same percentage shares they received in 1981 .

states , in turn , are required to pass through at least 90% of their federal block grant allotments to local "eligible entities," or community action agencies .

under the authority of section 1110 of the social security act , the compassion capital fund provides grants to help local faith - based and community organizations expand their ability to provide social services to low - income communities .

the fund does not typically provide money for direct services .

the fy2009 continuing resolution provides $53 million for the compassion capital fund in fy2009 .

the arra provides $50 million for direct grants to nonprofit organizations for capacity building activities to expand social services to communities affected by the economic downturn .

these grants will not be provided through the compassion capital fund ( as proposed in the house version of arra ) , but through a separate funding stream .

