nevada's yucca mountain has been the sole candidate site for the nation's first permanent high - level nuclear waste repository since congress singled it out in 1987 and halted consideration of any other location .

after numerous delays , the department of energy ( doe ) , which was supposed to open a waste repository by 1998 , submitted a repository license application for yucca mountain to the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) in june 2008 .

if nrc approves the license , doe hopes to begin shipping nuclear waste to the repository by 2020 .

the congressional decision to focus solely on yucca mountain was highly controversial and continues to face harsh criticism , particularly from the state of nevada .

yucca mountain opponents dispute doe's determination that the site is suitable for long - term disposal of nuclear waste and call for fundamental change in the program .

nonetheless , the proposed yucca mountain repository has consistently maintained sufficient congressional support to continue moving forward .

congress explicitly rejected a nevada "state veto" of the site in 2002 , has blocked repeated efforts to halt the program's funding , and has not taken up any of numerous legislative proposals to delay the program or find a new site .

president george w. bush also steadfastly supported the yucca mountain project .

but administration support for yucca mountain will apparently change under president obama .

in their campaign statement on nuclear energy policy , obama and vice president biden laid out the following position: in terms of waste storage , barack obama and joe biden do not believe that yucca mountain is a suitable site .

they will lead federal efforts to look for safe , long - term disposal solutions based on objective , scientific analysis .

in the meantime , they will develop requirements to ensure that the waste stored at current reactor sites is contained using the most advanced dry - cask storage technology available .

the obama - biden campaign statement on yucca mountain raises numerous questions about the future direction of u.s. nuclear waste policy .

in particular , what type of long - term disposal solutions could be considered ? .

every option for handling nuclear waste ultimately requires a method of long - term isolation from the environment .

if yucca mountain were rejected , it would appear that a new repository site search would need to be undertaken at some point .

given the criticism that doe has drawn over its handling of the waste program , pressure may intensify for such a search to be handed over to a new organization entirely .

the current effort to develop a repository at yucca mountain began with the enactment of the nuclear waste policy act of 1982 ( nwpa , p.l .

97-425 ) , and opening a repository at a different location could take a long time as well , even if the process were started right away .

during such an indefinite time period , how would the licensing of new nuclear power plants be affected ? .

would spent nuclear fuel and other highly radioactive waste remain at commercial reactors and other existing nuclear facilities , or would it be moved to centralized interim storage ? .

previous u.s. efforts to develop interim central nuclear waste storage facilities have drawn fierce opposition .

since the 1970s , u.s. nuclear waste policy has been based on the "once through" fuel cycle , in which nuclear fuel is to be used once in a reactor and then permanently disposed of .

the major alternative is the "closed" fuel cycle , in which spent nuclear fuel would be reprocessed into new fuel for advanced reactors or particle accelerators .

fast reactors or accelerators would destroy the longest - lived radioactive components of the fuel , leaving only relatively short - lived radioactive isotopes , which would decay to background levels within 1,000 years , for permanent disposal .

under that scenario , spent fuel could be stored at reprocessing facilities while awaiting its turn to be made into new fuel , and the relatively short life of the resulting waste could make it easier to site a permanent repository .

however , the material for nuclear fuel that results from reprocessing ( primarily plutonium ) can also be used for nuclear explosives , raising concerns about nuclear weapons proliferation .

because current law specifies that yucca mountain is the sole candidate site for a high - level waste repository , legislation would probably be needed if a major change in direction in the nuclear waste program is sought .

but the obama administration does have authority under current law to withdraw the yucca mountain license application , propose reductions in the program's funding , and take other administrative actions to delay or halt the development of a repository at the yucca mountain site .

this report discusses those options and the likely impact of indefinite delays in the waste program .

it then discusses the mid - and long - term alternatives to the existing waste program , and finally reviews the history of u.s. efforts to site nuclear waste facilities .

doe's latest schedules for nuclear waste shipments and projected costs under the existing program provide a baseline for analyzing yucca mountain alternatives .

although the planned opening of the yucca mountain repository is at least 22 years later than nwpa's 1998 deadline , and removing waste from existing storage sites would require many decades , a major redirection of the waste program would probably involve even longer time frames .

of course , there is no certainty that doe will be able to meet its current schedules , or that the yucca mountain repository will receive a license from nrc under the current program .

moreover , policymakers could conclude that the benefits of redirecting the nuclear waste program now would outweigh the almost certain delays in developing a permanent repository and the increased costs of interim storage .

under doe's current schedule , about 400 metric tons of spent nuclear fuel would be shipped to yucca mountain from reactor sites in 2020 .

shipments would rise to 600 metric tons in 2021 , 1,200 metric tons in 2022 , and 2,000 metric tons in 2023 , and reach the planned maximum annual capacity of 3,000 metric tons in 2024 .

because the total u.s. commercial reactor fleet discharges an average of about 2,000 metric tons of spent fuel per year , the above shipment schedule would not begin reducing the backlog of spent fuel stored at reactor sites until 2024 .

doe estimates that the amount of commercial spent fuel stored in pools of water and dry casks at reactor sites and other facilities was 57,700 metric tons at the end of 2007 .

if commercial spent fuel continues to accumulate at the rate of 2,000 metric tons per year , then inventories would reach 81,000 metric tons before shipments are to begin in 2020 and peak at nearly 85,000 in 2023 , after which shipments to yucca mountain would exceed reactor discharges by 1,000 tons per year .

doe projections indicate that shipments of all spent fuel from previous and existing u.s. nuclear power plants would continue until about 2066 , totaling 109,300 metric tons ( under existing reactor license periods and extensions ) .

in addition , the equivalent of 12,800 metric tons of defense - related spent nuclear fuel and high - level radioactive waste would be received at yucca mountain during the same period , for a total of 122,100 metric tons .

although doe's cost projections assume that all spent fuel from existing reactors , plus defense waste , will be shipped to the planned yucca mountain repository , nwpa section 114 ( d ) caps yucca mountain's capacity at the equivalent of 70,000 metric tons of spent fuel until a second repository begins operating .

no such repository is currently authorized .

a recent doe report on the need for a second repository concludes that all existing and anticipated spent fuel and high - level waste could be physically accommodated at yucca mountain .

legislation to lift the 70,000-ton limit proposed by the bush administration was introduced during the 109 th ( h.r .

5360 ) and 110 th ( s. 37 ) congresses but not acted upon .

as amended in 1987 , nwpa provides no backup plan for spent fuel management if the yucca mountain repository were to be halted .

a "monitored retrievable storage" ( mrs ) facility is authorized by nwpa section 142 , but construction is prohibited until nrc has authorized the construction of the yucca mountain repository .

section 302 of nwpa requires nuclear power plant operators to sign contracts with doe under which the nuclear plants must pay fees to the federal government in return for doe's spent fuel disposal services .

the nuclear power plant fees are deposited in a treasury account called the nuclear waste fund to pay for the doe waste program but cannot be spent without congressional appropriation .

the fund's balance was about $20 billion at the end of fy2008 .

because the doe waste program will also handle defense - related waste , congress typically supplements annual appropriations from the nuclear waste fund with appropriations from general revenues .

annual spending for the nuclear waste program , focusing on yucca mountain site studies and the license application , has averaged about $400 million in recent years .

however , doe projects that to build the repository and develop a transportation system within the next 12 years , annual funding would need to increase to nearly $2 billion during the peak of construction .

disposal of all 122,100 metric tons of currently anticipated waste at yucca mountain is projected to cost $96.18 billion ( in 2007 dollars ) through 2133 .

nwpa section 302 ( d ) restricts the use of the nuclear waste fund to disposal activities and research authorized by the act .

the section specifically prohibits doe from expending the funds for any facility besides those expressly authorized by nwpa or subsequent act of congress .

as amended in 1987 , nwpa currently authorizes only a repository at yucca mountain and a monitored retrievable storage facility tied to the operation of a yucca mountain repository .

the contracts that doe signed with nuclear utilities required doe to begin taking waste from reactor sites by january 31 , 1998 .

because that deadline was missed , doe has been ruled liable for all waste storage costs that nuclear utilities would not have incurred had shipments to the planned repository begun on time .

the u.s. court of federal claims has already issued several judgments against doe .

claims are paid from the federal judgment fund , rather than the nuclear waste fund , and require no congressional appropriations .

doe calculates that its nuclear waste liabilities to nuclear reactor operators under current law will ultimately total $11 billion if shipments begin by 2020 as currently planned and potentially much more if waste operations are further delayed .

the yucca mountain repository is now in the final stages of the lengthy approval process established by nwpa .

therefore , if the obama administration does "not believe that yucca mountain is a suitable site," what options are available at this point to stop the project ? .

nwpa sections 113-116 prescribed the following actions by the secretary of energy , the president , and the nuclear regulatory commission toward developing a nuclear waste repository at the yucca mountain site: the secretary was to determine whether the site would be suitable for a repository , and , if so , notify the state of nevada and recommend that the president approve the project .

if the president agreed with the secretary's recommendation , the president was to submit an approval recommendation to congress .

after the presidential recommendation , the nevada legislature or governor was allowed to submit a notice of disapproval to congress .

state disapproval would block the repository unless congress voted within 90 days for an approval resolution that was signed by the president .

once the presidential site designation took effect , the secretary was required to submit a repository license application to nrc .

all these steps have now taken place , and the yucca mountain license application has been docketed by nrc for consideration .

nrc is an independent regulatory body not directly under the president's control .

but the president has a variety of tools at his disposal that could dramatically affect the nuclear waste program .

a decision by the incoming administration to halt or delay development of the yucca mountain repository could have significant impact on the federal budget , proposed new u.s. nuclear power plants , waste storage at existing reactor sites , and disposal of defense - related nuclear waste .

such consequences could be most pronounced if such a policy shift involved simply a halt of yucca mountain without legislation to forge a new direction – legislation that presumably would address the issues discussed below .

no matter what decision is made on yucca mountain , there is a broad scientific consensus that long - term isolation of nuclear waste from the environment – for at least 1,000 years – will still be required .

in other words , if yucca mountain were abandoned , another repository site in the united states would almost certainly have to be found eventually .

reprocessing and recycling of nuclear spent fuel can reduce the amount of long - lived radioactive waste requiring isolation but cannot entirely eliminate the need for such isolation .

alternatives to deep geologic waste isolation have been studied , such as space and subseabed disposal , but they face daunting technical obstacles , and none has ever been developed beyond the conceptual stage .

if development of the yucca mountain repository were delayed or halted , commercial spent fuel and defense - related nuclear waste would almost certainly remain at numerous on - site storage facilities longer than currently planned .

a new repository to replace yucca mountain would be unlikely to open by 2020 to prevent delays in doe's current shipping schedule .

federal centralized interim storage has been proposed repeatedly as a solution , including the mrs facility authorized by nwpa , but no such facility has been developed .

if new legislation were to authorize a central interim storage facility , it possibly could begin receiving waste by 2020 and prevent further delays .

another possibility is a private spent fuel storage facility in utah that has already received an nrc license and might be opened relatively quickly if other administrative approvals were granted ( as discussed in a subsequent section ) .

however , the utah facility's licensed capacity is limited to 40,000 metric tons of spent fuel , which could be stored at the site for no longer than 40 years .

because nwpa specifies that only yucca mountain may be considered for a repository site and that a federal storage facility cannot open before the repository is licensed , the government's waste management options are sharply limited under current law .

without congressional action , alternatives to yucca mountain would consist primarily of indefinite on - site storage or licensing of new private storage sites .

new legislation would open up much broader possibilities , ranging from a search for a new repository site and federal interim storage to reprocessing and alternative disposal technologies .

some – but probably not all – of the consequences of changing the current waste policy could also be mitigated through legislation .

any legislation dealing with nuclear waste siting is almost certain to prove extraordinarily controversial .

significant scientific uncertainty – if not clear technical unsuitability – has arisen at every potential high - level nuclear waste repository site evaluated by the federal government .

such doubts have fed the public controversy that inevitably accompanies the announcement of such sites .

as a result , the federal government has not succeeded in opening any central facilities for permanent disposal or interim storage of spent nuclear fuel and high - level waste .

the controversial nature of siting nuclear waste facilities increases the likelihood that alternatives to the proposed yucca mountain repository would leave waste at existing storage sites longer than under the current program schedule .

major consequences under current law could include increased liability by the federal government for utility storage costs , and fines and penalties for missing cleanup deadlines at defense - related nuclear facilities .

although nrc has determined that waste can be stored safely at reactor sites for many decades , the licensing of new plants could be affected by the lack of a definite disposal plan .

extremely long disposal delays would also increase the risk that adequate maintenance and security at storage sites would end before the waste could be removed .

central interim storage of nuclear waste has regularly been suggested as the quickest way to begin moving waste from existing storage sites .

however , without a plan for permanent disposal , the development of interim sites could be especially controversial .

reprocessing of spent fuel has long been proposed as a way to reduce the hazards of nuclear waste by removing plutonium and other long - lived radioactive material .

while such a technological approach could make it easier to site a permanent repository , the separation of plutonium raises significant opposition because of its potential use in nuclear weapons and effects on u.s. nonproliferation policy .

doe is researching reprocessing techniques that could reduce the separation of pure plutonium , but their effectiveness and potential high cost continues to be a subject of controversy .

the 1987 designation of yucca mountain as the nation's sole candidate site for a national high - level nuclear waste repository was a calculated risk that the site could be developed successfully .

there is no backup plan in place .

yucca mountain opponents contend that , as a result , the federal government has stuck with the site no matter what technical problems have been discovered .

but if yucca mountain is determined to have significant problems , an alternative course will have little existing policy framework to build upon .

