a variety of efforts that seek to reduce greenhouse gas emissions ( ghg ) are currently under way or being developed on the international , national , and sub - national level ( eg , individual state actions or regional partnerships ) .

one option ( of many , see text box below — "other policy options for addressing ghg emissions" ) for controlling ghg emissions is to apply a tax or fee on ghg emissions or the inputs that create them .

this type of approach is commonly called ( and referred to in this report as ) a carbon tax , whether it would apply to co 2 emissions alone or to multiple ghgs , including some that may have no molecular carbon .

this report does not provide a comprehensive comparison and analysis of the multiple policy tools available to congress that would address climate change .

instead , this report focuses on the policy considerations of using a carbon tax to control ghg emissions .

governments may impose taxes for a variety of purposes .

the primary reason that governments impose taxes is to raise revenue to fund various objectives or services: eg , national defense , public education , social security , etc .

generally , governments raise these revenue streams by placing a tax on activities that are recognized as desirable ( "economic goods" ) such as income , employment , and investment .

while this tax placement ensures a relatively steady flow of revenue ( often the primary objective of the tax ) , economists generally describe such taxes as distortionary , because the taxes discourage the "good" activity .

for example , many economists have argued that payroll and income taxes discourage employment and investment .

if these taxes were reduced , the incentives to increase labor and investment would be greater .

economists maintain that levying a charge on pollution ( sometimes referred to as a pigouvian tax ) would be an efficient way to correct an inherent failure in a particular market .

a basic economics principle is that market prices may not reflect the social cost of resource use ( eg , fossil fuel combustion ) when economic activities result in pollution ( eg , co 2 emissions ) .

if social costs are not included , the market price of the resources will not reflect their true costs .

for example , in terms of climate change policy , the price of using fossil fuels , particularly coal , does not reflect the costs — that is , climate change - related damages — associated with co 2 emissions .

in economics parlance , the social cost not reflected in the market price is called an "externality. .

a pollution tax would internalize the external costs by making the party who profits from the polluting activity include the external costs in the price of the good or service .

policymakers could place a pollution tax on ghg emissions or the inputs that create them .

by attaching a price to ghg emissions , a carbon tax would stimulate ghg emission reduction .

if the tax were placed on emissions , entities directly subject to the tax , such as power plants , would have an incentive to take actions — for example , energy efficiency improvements or equipment upgrades — to lower tax payments .

if the tax were placed on emission inputs — for example , fossil fuels — the price of carbon - intensive energy sources , primarily coal , would increase relative to low - carbon fuels ( table a - 1 of this report — located in the appendix — includes estimates of price increases to fossil fuels and motor gasoline based on different carbon tax rates ) .

energy consumers — for example , power plants , industry , households , etc. — would be encouraged to ( 1 ) switch to less carbon - intensive fuels ; ( 2 ) use less energy or use energy more efficiently ; and ( 3 ) prefer products or services that are lower - priced by virtue of incorporating less emission tax .

each of these activities would reduce ghg emissions compared to a business - as - usual track .

these expected behavioral changes mirror the activities that are forecast for a potential cap - and - trade program .

both a carbon tax and a cap - and - trade system would place a price on carbon .

both a carbon tax and cap - and - trade system are intended ( and expected ) to increase the price of coal , oil , and natural gas .

under either program , these price increases would ultimately be borne by energy consumers , both businesses and households .

these price increases are integral to a market - based approach to ghg emission reduction , because they send more accurate information to purchasers about the full cost of their choices .

this report begins with an overview of the fundamental choices involved between a cost ( tax ) and a quantity ( cap ) control instrument .

this includes a discussion of policy tools that could be employed to bridge the gap between a carbon tax and a cap - and - trade program .

following this overview , the report analyzes the potential advantages and disadvantages of a carbon tax .

in many cases , carbon tax attributes are compared with those of a cap - and - trade program .

the next section discusses implementation issues for a carbon tax , including where to apply the tax , at what level to set the tax , and options for distributing tax revenues .

the final section provides conclusions .

if policymakers choose to establish a market - based mechanism to control ghg emissions , a fundamental decision would be whether to use a price instrument , such as a carbon tax , or a quantity instrument , such as an emissions cap .

this report examines four potential advantages of a carbon tax approach to controlling ghg emissions .

first , the report compares a carbon tax to cap - and - trade approach from an economics theory perspective , analyzing the assertion ( of many economists ) that a carbon tax would be more economically efficient than a cap - and - trade system .

second , it discusses the merits of price stability that a carbon tax would provide .

the third discussion highlights the advantage of generating carbon tax revenues and examines various revenue applications and the trade - offs that would ensue .

finally , the report identifies potential implementation advantages , primarily practical considerations , of using a carbon tax approach .

a ghg emission reduction program that employs a carbon tax may face several disadvantages , compared to a cap - and - trade program .

as with the potential advantages , the size and / or relevancy of the disadvantages are dependent on the design of the programs being compared .

the potential disadvantages are discussed below .

if congress were to use a carbon tax to control ghg emissions , policymakers would face several implementation decisions: ( 1 ) the point of taxation — where to impose the tax and what to tax ; ( 2 ) the level of taxation ; and ( 3 ) how to apply the tax revenue .

these considerations are discussed below .

market - based mechanisms that limit greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions can be divided into two types: quantity control ( eg , cap - and - trade ) and price control ( eg , carbon tax ) .

to some extent , a carbon tax and cap - and - trade program would produce similar effects: both would place a price on carbon , and both are estimated to increase the price of fossil fuels , which would ultimately be borne by energy users , particularly households .

in an economically efficient market with perfect information , either a price ( carbon tax ) or quantity control instrument ( cap - and - trade system ) could be designed to achieve the same outcome .

because this market ideal does not exist , preference for a carbon tax or a cap - and - trade program ultimately depends on which variable one prefers to control — emissions or costs .

although there are several design mechanisms that could be included with either program that would blur the distinction , the gap between price control and quantity control can never be completely overcome .

compared to a cap - and - trade system , a carbon tax may both offer several advantages as well as present several possible disadvantages .

a known price on carbon would not add to the volatility of energy prices , such as electricity and household fuels , unlike what may occur under a cap - and - trade program .

moreover , with a set price , industry would have better information to guide investment decisions ( eg , energy efficiency improvements and / or equipment upgrades ) , unless the tax rate was subject to periodic adjustment to achieve ghg emission reduction goals .

economists often highlight the relative economic efficiency advantage of a carbon tax , but this advantage rests on assumptions about the expected costs and benefits of climate change mitigation , both of which contain considerable uncertainty and some controversy .

some contend that a carbon tax may provide implementation advantages , including greater transparency , reduced administrative burden , and relative ease of modification .

in addition , some argue that a carbon tax approach may make it easier to reach a ghg reduction agreement with developing nations .

however , some counter that a cap - and - trade approach is best suited to meet this objective .

the primary disadvantage of a carbon tax is that it would yield uncertain emissions .

for some this concern may present a non - starter , precluding a carbon tax as an option to control ghg emissions .

some argue that the potential for irreversible climate change impacts necessitates the emissions certainty that is only available with a quantity - based instrument ( eg , cap - and - trade ) .

however , depending upon its design , a cap - and - trade program may also include a risk of uncertain emissions .

for example , if offsets are allowed as a compliance option , there is some concern that they would not represent real emission reductions .

emissions leakage offers another threat to the certainty of the emissions cap .

although it may present implementation challenges , policymakers could devise a tax program that yields only short - term emission fluctuations , as it progresses towards its long - term emission reduction objective .

proponents argue that short - term emission fluctuations would be preferable to price fluctuations that might be expected with a cap - and - trade system .

many assert that it would be easier to garner support for a cap - and - trade system , because a tax increase policy typically carries a political stigma .

to some extent , this argument may be viewed by some as based on semantics , because a cap - and - trade program would act very much like a tax , in terms of its effects on energy prices .

however , a carbon tax and a cap - and - trade legislation would fall into different committee jurisdictions within congress .

the committees developing the ghg emission legislation may have members with varying perceptions about the relative values of uncertain costs versus uncertain emission reductions .

the committee jurisdiction factor may play a role in the debate over the preferred policy instrument .

in addition , some environmental groups may oppose a carbon tax , because they assume the tax rate would be set too low to be effective in controlling ghg emissions .

this is more of an argument over stringency than over the instrument used to mitigate ghg emissions .

the debate over a carbon tax versus a cap - and - trade program may be instructive for policymakers because it highlights ( 1 ) the primary differences between the instruments and the ( 2 ) design elements that could be included within either instrument that would blur their distinctions .

for example , congress could devise a cap - and - trade program that controls total costs and price volatility to some degree .

however , a cap - and - trade price control mechanism , such as a safety - valve and / or reserve price , would alter the character of the cap - and - trade program — the level of emissions would no longer be certain .

this potential outcome reinforces the fundamental choice between a carbon tax and a cap - and - trade program: cost certainty versus emissions certainty .

