child nutrition programs and the wic program provide cash , commodity , and other assistance ( including funds for nutrition services and food packages in the wic program and technical assistance and administrative cost aid in child nutrition programs ) under three major federal laws: the richard b. russell national school lunch act ( originally enacted as the national school lunch act in 1946 ) , the child nutrition act ( originally enacted in 1966 ) , and section 32 of the act of august 24 , 1935 ( 7 u.s.c .

612c ) .

the agriculture departments food and nutrition service ( fns ) administers the programs at the federal level ; most funding is included in the annual agriculture department appropriations laws ; and congressional jurisdiction over the underlying three laws is exercised by the senate agriculture , nutrition , and forestry committee ; the house education and labor committee ; and , to a limited extent ( relating to commodity assistance and section 32 issues ) , the house agriculture committee .

congress periodically reviews and reauthorizes expiring authorities under these laws .

the most recent reauthorization was in 2004 ( p.l .

108-265 ) ; the next reauthorization is scheduled for 2009 .

child nutrition and wic programs are operated by a wide variety of local public and private providers , and the degree of direct state involvement varies by program and state .

for example , in the wic program , state health agencies exercise substantial control ; in the school meal programs , local educational agencies ( leas ) and local "school food authorities" most often have the major role ; in a very few instances , the federal government ( fns ) takes the place of state agencies ( eg , where a state has chosen not to operate a specific program or where there is a state prohibition on aiding private schools ) .

at the state level , education , health , social services , and agriculture departments all have roles ; at a minimum , they are responsible for approving and overseeing local providers such as schools , summer program sponsors , and child care centers and day care homes , as well as making sure they receive the federal support they are due .

at the local level , program benefits are provided to more than 40 million children and infants , and some 2 million lower - income pregnant and post - partum women , through some 100,000 public and private schools and residential child care institutions , about 200,000 child care centers and family day care homes , approximately 30,000 summer program sites , and ( in the case of the wic program ) about 10,000 local health care clinics / sites operated by nearly 2,000 health agencies .

all programs are available in the 50 states and the district of columbia .

virtually all operate in puerto rico , guam , and the virgin islands ( and , in differing versions , in the northern marianas and american samoa ) , and there are no restrictions on eligibility related to citizenship or legal residence status .

in addition , wic - like benefits are available to overseas military personnel , and defense department overseas dependents schools participate in the school meal programs .

in the meal service programs like the school lunch and breakfast programs , summer programs , and assistance for child care centers and day care homes , federal aid is in the form of legislatively set subsidies ( "reimbursements" ) paid for each meal / snack served that meets federal nutrition guidelines .

most subsidies are cash payments to schools or other providers , but about 10% of the total value of all aid is in the form of federally donated food commodities .

although all meals / snacks served by participating providers are subsidized , those served free or at a reduced price to lower - income children are supported at higher rates .

all federal meal / snack subsidy rates are indexed annually ( each july ) for inflation , as are the income standards of eligibility for free and reduced - price meals / snacks .

however federal subsidies do not necessarily cover the full cost of the meals and snacks offered by providers , and states and localities contribute to cover program costs — as do childrens families ( by paying charges for nonfree or reduced - price meals / snacks ) .

required nonfederal cost sharing is relatively minimal states must expend at least an amount totaling some $200 million a year nationally in order to receive federal school lunch funds .

federal per - meal / snack child nutrition subsidies may cover local providers' administrative / operating costs , but separate direct federal payments for administrative / operating costs are limited to expense grants to state oversight agencies , a small set - aside of funds for state audits of child care sponsors , and special administrative payments to sponsors of summer programs and family day care homes .

under the wic program , federal appropriations pay the cost of specifically tailored food packages and include legislatively set amounts for costs of administrative and nutrition services .

other relevant crs reports include crs report rl33829 , domestic food assistance: the farm bill and other legislation in the 110 th congress and crs report rl33299 , child nutrition and wic legislation in the 108 th and 109 th congresses .

in addition , crs report rl33307 , child nutrition and wic programs: background and recent funding provides historical background .

extensive information about child nutrition and wic programs also may be found at the agriculture department's food and nutrition service website , http: / / fns.usda.gov .

the school lunch and school breakfast programs provide federal cash and commodity support for meals meeting minimum federally set nutrition standards .

the meals are served by public and private nonprofit elementary and secondary schools and residential child care institutions ( rccis ) that opt to enroll and guarantee to offer free or reduced price meals to eligible low income children .

both programs are "entitlement" programs , and both subsidize participating schools and rccis for all meals served that meet federal nutrition standards at specific , inflation - indexed rates for each meal ; food items not served as part of a meal meeting nutrition standards ( eg , a la carte offerings ) are not eligible for subsidies .

each program has a three - tiered system for cash per meal federal reimbursements to schools and rccis .

1 .

it allows children to receive free meals if they have family income below 130% of the federal poverty guidelines ( $27,580 for a four - person family in the 2008-2009 school year ) ; these meals receive the highest subsidy rate .

2 .

children may receive reduced price meals ( no more than 40 cents for a lunch or 30 cents for a breakfast ) if their family income is between 130% and 185% of the poverty guidelines ( between $27,580 and $39,220 for a four - person family in the 2008-2009 school year ) ; these meals receive a subsidy rate either 40 cents ( for lunches ) or 30 cents ( for breakfasts ) below the free meal rate .

3 .

a small per meal subsidy is provided for "full - price" or "paid" meals ( the price is set by the school or rcci ) served to children whose families do not apply , or whose family income does not qualify them , for free or reduced price meals .

children in temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) programs and the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( the snap , formerly the food stamp program ) may automatically qualify for free school meals .

information across these programs can be shared to facilitate this through direct certification and other means .

the school lunch program subsidizes lunches ( 5.1 billion in fy2007 ) to children in about 6,000 rccis and almost all schools ( 95,000 ) .

during fy2007 , average daily participation was 30.5 million students ( 61% of the 50 million children enrolled in participating schools and rccis ) ; of these , 49% received free lunches , and 10% ate reduced - price lunches ( table 1 ) .

the remainder were served full - price ( but still subsidized ) meals .

more than 90% of federal funding is used to subsidize free and reduced - price lunches served to low income children .

for the 2008-2009 school year , inflation - indexed per lunch federal subsidies ( cash payments , plus a required , and inflation - indexed , 21 cents a meal in entitlement commodity support ) range from 45 cents for full price lunches to $2.78 and $2.38 for free and reduced price lunches , respectively .

fy2007 federal school lunch costs ( including commodity assistance ) totaled some $8.7 billion ( table 1 ) .

the school breakfast program serves fewer students than does the school lunch program ; about 1.7 billion breakfasts in 80,000 schools ( and 6,000 rccis ) were subsidized in fy2007 .

average daily participation was 10.1 million children ( 23% of the 43 million students enrolled in participating schools and rccis ) .

unlike the school lunch program , the great majority received free or reduced price meals: 70% received free meals , and 10% purchased reduced price meals .

in the 2008-2009 school year , inflation - indexed per breakfast federal subsidies ( cash only ) range from 25 cents for full price meals to $1.40 and $1.10 for free and reduced price breakfasts , respectively .

fy2007 federal school breakfast funding totaled about $2.2 billion ( table 2 ) .

in addition to federal cash subsidies , participating schools receive donations of federally acquired food commodities .

schools are "entitled" to a specific , inflation - indexed value of federally provided commodities for each lunch they serve ( 20.75 cents a meal for the 2008-2009 school year ) ; they also may receive "bonus" commodities acquired by the agriculture department in support of the farm economy .

in recent years , the value of federal commodity aid to schools has totaled well over $1 billion a year , and , by law , commodity assistance must represent at least 12% of the total value ( cash + commodities ) of aid given under the school lunch program .

cash and commodity support to participating schools is based on the number and type of meals served ( eg , lunch or breakfast , free or full price ) .

however , once the aid is received by the school , it is used to support the overall school meal service budget , as determined appropriate by the school .

the wic program provides food assistance , nutrition risk screening , and related services ( eg , nutrition education and breastfeeding support , medical care referral ) to low - income pregnant and postpartum women and their infants , as well as to children up to age 5 from low - income families .

participants in the program generally must have family income at or below 185% of poverty , and must be judged to be nutritionally at risk .

nutrition risk is defined as detectable abnormal nutritional conditions ; documented nutritionally related medical conditions ; health impairing dietary deficiencies ; or conditions that predispose people to inadequate nutrition or nutritionally related medical problems .

most income - eligible applicants meet the wic program's nutrition risk criteria .

beneficiaries of the wic program receive monthly vouchers for the purchase of a "package" of specifically prescribed food items in participating retail stores ( or , in some cases , actual monthly food packages of supplemental foods directly provided by state agencies ) .

the range of permissible food items is set by federal regulation , although administering state agencies have some latitude in how federal standards are carried out ( eg , specifying "store" brands , decisions as to what types of infant formula are covered , what food may be provided for those with special dietary needs ) .

among the items that may be included are milk , cheese , eggs , infant formula , cereals , fruit or vegetable juices , and fresh fruits and vegetables .

the program requires that vouchers — or food packages — be tailored ( by food type and amount ) by category of recipient ( eg , infants , children ; pregnant , postpartum and nursing mothers ) .

in addition to food benefits , recipients also must receive nutrition education and breast - feeding support ( where called for ) and may receive other services like referral to medical care providers .

the federal cost of providing wic benefits varies widely depending on the recipient and the foods prescribed in recipients vouchers , as well as differences in retail prices ( vouchers are denominated in food amounts , not dollars ) and administrative and nutrition services expenses ( like those for nutrition risk screening , breastfeeding support , and nutrition education ) .

moreover , the programs food costs are significantly influenced by the degree to which states gain rebates from infant formula ( and , in some cases , juice or other ) manufacturers under a requirement to pursue "cost containment" strategies ; these rebates recently have totaled to over $1.8 billion a year nationwide and pay for the cost of serving a significant portion of the wic population .

in fy2007 , the national average federal cost of a wic food package ( after rebates ) was $39 a month for each participant .

the program also provides states with funding for administrative costs and nutrition services ( like nutrition education ) .

in fy2007 , the average monthly "nutrition services and administrative" ( "nsa" ) cost , including regular administrative expenses and nutrition risk assessments and nutrition education , was about $16 per case .

the wic program has categorical , income , and nutrition risk requirements for eligibility .

only pregnant and postpartum women , infants , and children under age 5 may participate .

as noted above , wic applicants must show evidence of health or nutrition risk , medically verified by a health professional , in order to qualify .

they also must have family income below 185% of the most recent annually indexed federal poverty guidelines ( $32,560 a year for a three person family for the period july 2008june 2009 ; state wic agencies may ( but virtually never ) set lower income eligibility cutoff points .

receipt of tanf , snap benefits ( formerly , food stamps ) , or medicaid assistance also can satisfy the wic programs income test , and states may consider pregnant women meeting the income test "presumptively" eligible until a nutritional risk evaluation is made .

in 2006 , 60% of wic enrollees had family income below the federal poverty guidelines , 9% of wic enrollees were cash welfare ( tanf ) recipients , 22% received food stamps , and 63% were covered by medicaid .

wic participants receive benefits for a specified period of time , and in some cases must be recertified during this period to show continuing need ( eg , pregnant women may continue to receive benefits throughout their pregnancy and for up to 6-12 months after childbirth ) .

although it is federally funded , the wic program actually is administered by some 2,000 state and local health agencies ( and more than 30 indian tribal organizations participating as separate grantees and treated like states ) .

over 10,000 local clinics / sites carry out the program .

state administrative responsibilities extend to certifying eligibility , distributing benefits , issuing benefits , redeeming vouchers , and approving retail stores for participation .

unlike most other federal nutrition assistance programs , the wic program is not an "entitlement" program ; it is "discretionary" and participation and benefits are limited by the amount of federal funding appropriated , whatever state supplementary funding is provided , and the extent of manufacturers rebates .

however , congress has historically provided funding at levels that meet participation and food cost requirements — so - called "full funding. .

in fy2007 , federal spending was $5.4 billion , and the program served a monthly average of 8.3 million women , infants , and children: 25% women , 27% infants , and 51% children .

in addition to the regular wic program ( which includes special vouchers for fruits and vegetables ) , annual agriculture department appropriations ( in a budget account separate from wic appropriations ) fund a small ( $20 million a year ) wic farmers ' market nutrition program under which wic applicants and recipients receive additional vouchers for the purchase of fresh produce at farmers' markets .

table 3 summarizes wic participation and federal spending .

spending is made up of food costs , just over 70% of the total in recent years , and nutrition services and administrative ( nsa ) expenses ( of which approximately two - thirds are typically for service activities like nutrition education and nutrition risk evaluations and one - third is for traditional administrative activities like eligibility determinations and issuing and redeeming vouchers ) .

in addition to the school - day - based lunch and breakfast programs , child nutrition laws include provisions for federal subsidies and commodity support for schools and other institutions / organizations offering meals and snacks to children in outside - of - school program settings .

this assistance is provided to ( 1 ) schools and other governmental institutions , ( 2 ) private for - profit and nonprofit day care centers , ( 3 ) family / group day care homes , and ( 4 ) nongovernmental institutions / organizations that offer outside - of - school programs for children .

in addition , day care centers for chronically impaired adults and elderly persons are eligible for assistance under the same general terms as centers caring for children .

federal support for day care , summer , and outside - of - school meal / snack programs totaled some $2.5 billion in entitlement funding ( including a small amount of commodities ) for fy2007 .

more than 5 million children ( and 100,000 adults ) participated .

child nutrition laws also support a range of smaller programs , initiatives , and activities .

states are entitled to federal grants to help cover administrative and oversight / monitoring costs associated with child nutrition programs .

the national amount each year is equal to about 1.5% of child nutrition cash support .

the majority of this money is allocated to states based on their share of spending on the covered programs ; about 15% is allocated under a discretionary formula granting each state additional amounts for the cacfp , commodity distribution , and "coordinated review" efforts .

in addition , states receive payments for their role in overseeing summer programs ( about 2.5% of their summer program aid ) .

states are free to apportion their federal administrative expense payments among child nutrition initiatives ( including commodity distribution activities ) as they see fit .

state administrative expense funding in fy2007 totaled to more than $160 million .

states receive grants for a fresh fruit and vegetable program , under which selected schools in each state get money to purchase and distribute fresh fruits and vegetables to all children in attendance ( regardless of family income ) .

money is distributed by a formula under which about half the funding is distributed equally to each state and the remainder is allocated by state population ; states select participating schools ( with an emphasis on those with a higher proportion of low - income children ) and set annual per student grant amounts ( between $50 and $75 ) .

funding is set by law at $40 million for the 2008-2009 school year , $65 million for the 2009-2010 school year , $101 million for the 2010-2011 school year , $150 million for the 2011-2012 school year , and inflation - indexed for later years .

schools and institutions like summer camps and child care facilities not otherwise participating in federally subsidized meal service programs , along with schools with split ( part - day ) sessions for kindergartners or pre - kindergartners where children do not have access to regular school meal programs , can participate in the special milk program .

under this program , they provide milk to all children at a reduced - price or free .

each half - pint served is federally subsidized at a slightly different rate , depending on whether it is served free or not , but the provision of free milk to needy children is not required .

in fy2007 , about 90 million half - pints were subsidized at about 15 cents each ( 7% were served free ) to roughly 500,000 children .

federal costs for this program typically run about $15 million a year .

under a coordinated review effort ( cre ) , the fns , in cooperation with state agencies , conducts periodic school compliance and accountability evaluations to improve management and identify administrative , subsidy claim , and meal quality problems .

this $5 million - a - year effort is the major ongoing initiative related to maintaining the integrity of child nutrition programs .

the agriculture department's economic research service ( ers ) and the fns conduct nutrition research , studies , surveys , and program evaluations ( typically totaling about $10 million a year ) .

a national food service management institute ( fsmi ) provides technical assistance , instruction , and materials related to nutrition and food service management ; it is funded at $4 million a year .

an information clearinghouse provides information to support community - sponsored food assistance initiatives , using funding of about $250,000 a year .

special fns projects — "team nutrition" nutrition education initiatives , a food safety project , technical assistance to program operators , food service training grants , aid with electronic food resource systems , "program integrity" efforts — are aimed at helping schools and other providers with nutrition education materials , assisting them to improve their meal service operations and the quality of meals , and ensuring that federal support is spent correctly ; they are typically funded at $15-$20 million a year .

