the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) , the 2009 stimulus package , contained several provisions affecting unemployment benefits .

this report addresses some of the more common questions about unemployment insurance in the 2009 stimulus package .

this report does not provide operational details of unemployment insurance programs such as regular unemployment compensation ( uc ) , extended benefits ( eb ) , emergency unemployment compensation ( euc08 ) , trade adjustment assistance ( taa ) programs , and disaster unemployment assistance ( dua ) .

arra provides for federal financing of several elements of the stimulus package .

for the euc08 program , arra continues 100% federal financing but changes the source of the federal financing .

for the eb program , arra temporarily replaces 50% state , 50% federal financing with 100% federal financing .

the following arra provisions will be 100% financed with general funds from the u.s. treasury: $ 25 week ly supplemental unemployment benefit payable from the week after state signature of an agreement with the u.s. labor secretary .

extension of emergency unemployment compensation benefits .

the euc08 program has been 100% federally financed since its creation in july 2008 .

arra changes the source of federal financing , however .

prior to february 17 , 2009 , euc08 benefits were financed from the extended unemployment account ( euca ) in the utf .

as a result of arra , euc08 benefits through expiration of the euc08 program will be financed from general revenues of the treasury .

the following arra provisions will be 100% financed by the federal government through the utf: $7 b illion in "incentive" payments for modernization of state unemployment programs .

the maximum incentive payment allowable for a state will be calculated using the methods used for reed act distributions , and does not need to be repaid .

the federal monies will be transferred from the fua in the utf to the state accounts in the utf upon dol certification that a state's unemployment program meets the requirements for the incentive transfers .

states will be responsible , however , for the immediate and long - term costs of any changes to state unemployment compensation programs .

$500 million transfer to states for administrative costs .

payments to states will be calculated using the methods prescribed for reed act distributions , and do not need to be repaid by states .

the federal monies will be transferred from the esaa in the utf to the state accounts in the utf within 30 days of arra's enactment .

the eb program will temporarily be 100% federally financed through the euca of the utf .

eb requires that states pay for 100% financing for eb benefits for unemployed former state and local government employees ; arra does not change this provision , so that states will continue to finance 100% of these "state and local" beneficiaries .

the federal government has always paid 100% of eb administrative costs , and arra does not change this .

the stimulus package also continues the temporary suspension of the waiting week requirement for federal funding until the week ending before may 30 , 2010 .

states will still finance regular uc through the state unemployment tax acts ( suta ) revenues .

the federal government will continue to pay for federal and state administration of uc programs .

uc benefits are an entitlement , and states are legally required to pay benefits even if the state account is insolvent .

some states may borrow funds from the fua within the utf to meet unemployment benefit obligations .

arra temporarily waives interest payments and the accrual of interest on federal advances to state unemployment funds .

the interest payments that come due beginning february 17 , 2009 , the date of enactment for the stimulus package , until december 31 , 2010 , are deemed to have been made by the state ( and are not capitalized in to the principal of the loan ) .

no interest on advances accrues during the period .

arra does not affect the underlying loan balance .

states will still owe the full principal of any outstanding loan .

if a state does not pay back funds within the prescribed amount of time or make good progress as determined by the u.s. labor secretary , the 5.4% federal tax credit to employers in the state would be reduced , effectively increasing in the federal unemployment tax on employers in that state .

