increased congressional interest in the patent system has reflected growing recognition of the role patents play in promoting innovation and economic growth .

in recent years , a number of bills have proposed changes to the patent system designed to address perceived deficiencies .

several of these bills would have altered the current system of "patent revocation proceedings" administered by the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) .

these proposals built upon several earlier laws , including the american inventors protection act of 1999 , that provided interested parties with a mechanism for challenging a patent outside of the federal court system .

the term "patent revocation proceeding" commonly refers to a legal procedure through which members of the public may challenge the validity of an issued patent .

patent revocation proceedings are administrative in nature and are conducted before the uspto .

current law provides for two types of patent revocation proceedings: an ex parte reexamination and inter partes reexamination .

the chief distinction between these two sorts of proceedings is the level of participation by the individual who requested the reexamination .

once the uspto decides to pursue an ex parte  reexamination , the requestor no longer participates in the proceedings .

in contrast , the requestor participates in an inter partes  reexamination throughout the duration of the proceedings .

reexamination proceedings were intended to serve several goals , including allowing firms to resolve patent disputes in a more timely and less costly manner than litigation in the federal courts , harnessing the technological and legal expertise of the uspto , and improving public confidence in the patent system .

some observers believe that these proceedings are underutilized due to shortcomings in their design .

among the expressed concerns over reexamination proceedings is that they are too slow , too susceptible to abuse by patent opponents , and not truly an effective substitute for litigation in the federal courts .

legislative proposals in the 111 th congress would address existing patent revocation proceedings and also establish a new , more expansive "post - grant review proceeding. .

proponents of reform assert that these changes would better fulfill the original purposes of reexamination , ultimately allowing more efficient resolution of patent disputes and improving patent quality .

on the other hand , concerned observers note that patent revocation proceedings may hold disdavantages .

in their view , these procedures may increase uncertainty about patent rights in the marketplace , be used strategically to harass patent proprietors , and strain uspto administrative capabilities .

proponents maintain that the design features of the different patent revocation proceedings endeavor to realize their potential advantages while minimizing their possible drawbacks .

this report introduces issues with respect to the design and implementation of patent revocation proceedings .

it begins by providing an overview of the basic workings and policy aspirations of the patent system .

the report then provides a more detailed review of ex parte and inter partes reexamination proceedings currently administered by the uspto .

next , the report reviews changes to patent revocation proceedings that were proposed in pending legislation .

the report closes by identifying a number of congressional issues and options with respect to patent revocation proceedings .

legislative interest in improving upon current patent revocation proceedings in part motivated the introduction of three bills in the 111 th congress .

these bills were h.r .

1260 ( introduced by congressman conyers on march 3 , 2009 ) , s. 515 ( introduced by senator leahy on march 3 , 2009 , and reported by senator leahy with amendments on april 2 , 2009 ) , and s. 610 ( introduced by senator kyl on march 17 , 2009 ) .

each of these bills was styled as the "patent reform act of 2009. .

with respect to existing patent revocation proceedings , s. 610 would entirely eliminate inter partes  reeexamination .

in contrast , h.r .

1260 and s. 515 would retain these proceedings .

each of the three bills would retain ex parte reexamination proceedings .

each of the bills would also introduce a new administrative procedure termed a "post - grant review proceeding" or "post - grant review procedures. .

the post - grant proceeding proposed by the three bills shares certain common features .

first , the maximum length of the proceeding was set to one year , with an extension by six months possible for good cause shown .

second , each post - grant proceeding would be administered by a newly established "patent trial and appeal board. .

third , any participant dissatisfied with the outcome would be able to bring an appeal to the federal circuit .

finally , with the exception of confidential material that has been sealed by the uspto , the file of this procedure would be made available to the public .

the following table identifies selected features with respect to each of these bills .

as this table demonstrates , patent revocation proceedings involve a number of parameters .

the particular choices made in selecting these parameters may reflect the following policy goals .

patents derive their value from the rights they confer to exploit proprietary technologies .

the increased focus on intellectual property in our information - based , knowledge - driven economy has arguably caused industry to raise its expectations with respect to the quality , timeliness , and efficiency of the granting of patents .

as the uspto currently employs approximately 6,000 patent examiners with varying degrees of experience , legal training , and technical education , maintaining consistency in patent grant determinations presents a challenging task for uspto management .

by recruiting members of the public to act as "private patent examiners," post - grant proceedings allow the uspto to confirm its earlier determinations regarding that subset of patents that prove to be of marketplace significance .

in this respect , it should be appreciated that the validity of only a small subset of issued patents is ever called into question .

for example , one commentator estimated that only about five percent of issued patents are litigated or licensed .

post - grant proceedings may therefore direct the attention of the uspto to those patents that industry believes to be of particular significance and arguable validity .

in addition , an administrative process for reassessing patentability determinations in a reliable , cost - effective , and timely manner could potentially allow members of the public to make commercial decisions with more certainty over the impact of patent rights .

by reducing costs to patent owners , it could also channel resources that innovative firms currently spend on defending their patent rights in the courts into further research and development .

the designers of a patent revocation proceeding may need to take into account a number of potentially conflicting policy goals .

a sufficiently robust , efficient , and predictable proceeding may attract individuals with a valid adverse interest to a patent .

in this respect , it should be recognized that patent validity adjudications potentially benefit the public even though they take place between the patent owner and the petitioner .

because such determinations may either confirm that the award of a patent was appropriate , or dedicate the previously patented subject matter to the public domain , members of the public may benefit when the validity of a patent is upheld or denied .

on the other hand , baseless or repetitive challenges potentially reduce the value of intellectual property ownership .

they may ultimately reduce the value of the innovation that results from the grant of the patent as well .

unmeritorious challenges may also strain uspto capabilities and divert administrative resources from more worthwhile tasks .

in view of these and other innovation policy concerns , congress possesses a range of options with respect to patent revocation proceedings .

if the current ex parte and inter partes  reexamination proceedings are deemed satisfactory , then no action need be taken .

if reform is believed to be desirable , making limited changes to the existing reexamination proceedings presents another option .

legislation might , for example , alter the estoppel provisions associated with inter partes  reexamination , expand the range of substantive patent law issues that could form the basis for the patent challenge , or provide for some form of discovery in these proceedings .

a third option , taken in part by h.r .

1260 , s. 515 , and s. 610 , is to establish a new revocation proceeding more robust than the two types of reexamination available under current law .

such a proceeding is adversarial in nature and may include discovery , estoppel effects , a broad range of patentability issues subject to review , and other features found in litigation in the federal courts .

this sort of proceeding may potentially form a more desired substitute for litigation in the federal courts .

however , as more litigation features are incorporated into patent revocation proceedings , they potentially grow more costly for the participants and more difficult for the uspto to administer .

as discussed earlier in this report , patent revocation proceedings are defined through a number of parameters .

in the event that reform is considered desirable , these features may be adjusted in view of particular policy goals .

for example , to avoid prolonged uncertainty over a patent's validity , h.r .

1260 , s. 515 , and s. 610 each establish a one - year time period , potentially extendable to 18 months , for the uspto to complete the proceeding .

other legislative strategies for achieving this goal exist .

legislation might set no fixed time limit upon the proceeding , for example , but rather provide for extension of the term of any patent involved in a revocation proceeding that exceed a certain time limit on a day - per - day basis .

arguably one of the more controversial features of the various patent revocation proceeding proposals is the determination of when such a proceeding could be brought .

some observers believe that revocation proceedings should be conducted as soon as possible during a patent's term .

they observe that patent owners commonly expend greater resources in developing and marketing an invention as the term of a patent progresses .

earlier resolution of validity challenges may decrease uncertainty and allow for better investment decisions .

prompt determinations may also benefit the public by increasing clarity over the precise scope of the patent right .

uncertainty over patent title may adversely affect the ability of start - up firms , as well as other enterprises that rely significantly upon their intellectual property rights , to obtain funding from investors .

these observers support a brief time limit on bringing a revocation proceeding .

on the other hand , some commentators believe that the value of many patents is not realized until later in their terms .

in particular , the developers of new pharmaceuticals , medical devices , and other regulated products often do not receive government permission to market these products until several years after they have procured a patent .

because many products fail to achieve government marketing approval , discerning which patents will be of marketplace significance in the future may be a difficult inquiry .

significant temporal restrictions may in effect remove certain patents on regulated products from post - grant proceedings altogether .

these observers further note that post - grant proceedings at the uspto have traditionally been available at any time during the term of the patent .

in addition , the validity of a patent may be challenged any time the patent is asserted during litigation .

these commentators do not favor any sort of time limit on bringing a patent revocation proceeding .

by establishing different time frames for initiating a patent revocation proceeding , the three bills in the 111 th congress balance these competing views in distinct ways .

patent revocation proceedings were among the notable intellectual property issues discussed in recent hearings before congress .

much of this discussion focused upon the experience of innovative industry with existing reexamination proceedings .

legislation proposing more expansive patent revocation proceedings may be viewed as attempting to achieve the goals of the earlier reexamination statutes: the creation of a predictable , cost - effective , and timely mechanism for resolving patent validity disputes while limiting harassment of the patent owner .

