the major federally funded community service and volunteer programs are authorized under two statutes: the national and community service act of 1990 ( ncsa ) and the domestic volunteer service act of 1973 ( dvsa ) .

in general , these programs are administered by the corporation for national and community service ( hereafter referred to as the corporation ) , an independent federal agency .

the ncsa is designed to address unmet human , educational , environmental , and public safety needs and to renew an ethic of civic responsibility by encouraging citizens to participate in national service programs .

the major programs authorized by ncsa include school - based and community - based service - learning programs , also known as learn and serve america ; national service trust programs , also known as americorps state and national grants ; and the national civilian community corps ( nccc ) .

the ncsa also authorizes the national service trust , which funds educational awards for community service participants .

the central purpose of the dvsa , which authorizes the volunteers in service to america ( vista ) program and the national senior volunteer corps , is to foster and expand voluntary service in communities while helping the vulnerable , the disadvantaged , the elderly , and the poor .

the national senior volunteer corps includes three main programs: the foster grandparents program , the senior companion program , and the retired and senior volunteer program ( rsvp ) .

prior to the enactment of p.l .

111-13 , ncsa and dvsa were last amended in 1993 by the national and community service trust act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-82 ) .

this act created ( 1 ) the corporation to administer ncsa and dvsa programs , ( 2 ) a new national service program referred to as americorps , ( 3 ) a national service trust to fund educational awards to individuals participating in americorps and other select community service programs , and ( 4 ) state commissions on national and community service to receive funding under ncsa .

authorization of appropriations for the ncsa and dvsa programs expired at the end of fy1996 .

these programs continued to be funded , however , through annual appropriations measures .

on march 11 , 2009 , the house committee on education and labor ordered reported , as amended , h.r .

1388 , the generations invigorating volunteerism and education ( give ) act , to amend and reauthorize ncsa and dvsa .

the bill was ordered to be reported by a vote of 34 to 3 .

on march 16 , 2009 , the house committee on education and labor reported , as amended , h.r .

1388 ( h.rept .

111-37 ) .

on march 18 , 2009 , the house passed h.r .

1388 , as amended , by a vote of 321 to 105 .

also , on march 18 , 2009 , the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions reported s. 277 , the serve america act , with an amendment in the nature of a substitute without a written report .

on march 26 , 2009 , the language of s. 277 , as amended , was inserted into h.r .

1388 , and passed the senate by a vote of 79 to 19 .

an amendment to amend the title to "the edward m. kennedy serve america act" was agreed to by unanimous consent .

on march 31 , 2009 , the house agreed to the senate version of h.r .

1388 by a vote of 275-149 .

the bill was signed into law on april 21 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-13 ) .

the focus of this report is on selected amendments p.l .

111-13 makes to ncsa and dvsa .

this report will not be updated .

some additional provisions in p.l .

111-13 apply to both ncsa and dvsa programs , though the amendments are to ncsa , and are discussed below .

section 121 ( f ) of p.l .

111-13 requires the corporation to develop a plan to establish the number of approved national service positions at 88,000 for fy2010 and to increase the number to specific levels each fiscal year .

by fy2017 , 250,000 approved positions are to be established .

an approved national service position is defined in statute as a position for which the corporation has approved the provision of a national service educational award .

programs in which members can receive an educational award include the americorps state and national program , the educational award only program , the national civilian community corps , the vista program , and the new serve america fellowships .

for fy2008 , there were an estimated 75,000 approved national service positions .

section 179 of p.l .

111-13 requires that the corporation establish , in consultation with grantees receiving assistance under ncsa and dvsa , performance measures for each grantee .

grantees are required to submit to the corporation corrective plans if they fail to meet the established levels of performance .

the corporation will reduce ( by at least 25% ) or terminate the grant of a grantee that continues to fail to meet performance levels after a period for correction .

section 179a of p.l .

111-13 establishes a partnership between the corporation and the national conference on citizenship to create a civic health assessment .

the partnership facilitates the establishment of a civic health assessment by selecting a set of civic health indicators , obtaining civic health data relating to the assessment , conducting related analyses , and reporting the data and analyses .

the partnership will , at least once a year , prepare a report that enables communities and states to assess their civic health , as measured on each of the indicators comprising the civic health assessment , and compare those measures with comparable measures of other communities and states .

section 189d of p.l .

111-13 requires that entities selecting individuals to serve in a position in which the individuals would receive a corporation grant - funded allowance , stipend , educational award , or salary conduct a criminal history check for such individuals .

an individual that is registered , or required to be registered , on a sex offender registry or has been convicted of murder is ineligible to serve .

p.l .

111-13 creates a new subtitle j of title i , which consolidates the training and technical assistance provisions that were contained throughout the prior law .

the corporation is required to provide technical assistance to the ncsa and dvsa programs .

priority is given to programs where services are needed most , where national service programs do not currently exist , or where the programs are too limited to meet community needs .

additionally , priority is given to programs that focus on service opportunities for underserved rural and urban areas or that seek to develop a service component that combines students , out - of - school youth , and older adults as participants to provide community services .

