september 25 , 2009 — exiled uighur activist rebiya kadeer , living in the united states , was denied a visa to visit taiwan .

september 11 , 2009 — former president chen shui - bian was given a life sentence on corruption charges .

august 19 , 2009 — taiwan's ministry of foreign affairs announced that taiwan would not seek full membership in the u.n. this year , but instead would seek to participate in the activities of u.n. specialized institutions , like the world meteorological organization and the world maritime organization .

august 7 , 2009 — over a period of several days , typhoon morakot slammed into taiwan , causing hundreds of millions of dollars in damage and leading to approximately 500 fatalities .

u.s. policy on taiwan , which is enshrined in the 1979 taiwan relations act ( the tra , p.l .

96-8 ) , remains rooted in a general notion of maintaining the "status quo" as it existed when the tra was enacted .

the united states has interpreted the "status quo" as the preservation of peace and stability in the taiwan strait until such time as the undecided issue of taiwan's political status can be resolved peacefully by agreement between taiwan and the prc .

some in the united states also see the "status quo" as the maintenance of a relative military , economic , and diplomatic balance between the two sides .

everything that has followed in u.s. policy toward taiwan since the tra's enactment has been bound up within this delicate balance .

but while u.s. policy has remained static , the circumstances it was designed to address have changed dramatically .

complex political changes have occurred in both taiwan and the prc .

the military balance is shifting inexorably in the prc's favor , there have been dramatic improvements in the prc's economic fortunes , and the two sides have increasingly connected economic interests .

these changes have resulted in periodic speculation about whether the current u.s. policy framework remains appropriate or should be revised .

issues involving taiwan's unresolved political status remain key features in other u.s. interactions with both taiwan and the prc .

they include complex policy trade - offs and questions such as: how far the united states should go in trying to accommodate prc sensitivities about taiwan without compromising u.s. principles supporting taiwan's democratic development ; how much the united states should try to pressure either china or taiwan or both to avoid provocative actions ; whether the united states should change its policy of not arbitrating or facilitating negotiations between taiwan and the prc in favor of a more direct , interventionist approach ; and whether the united states should conduct a reassessment of its taiwan policy in light of changing circumstances , and what the extent of such a possible reassessment should be .

once a u.s. world war ii ally , china's situation changed dramatically after the civil war victory of mao tse - tung in 1949 .

the reigning republic of china ( roc ) government , led by chiang kai - shek and his kuomintang ( kmt ) party , fled mainland china and moved to taiwan , an island off the south china coast .

for the next thirty years , the united states continued officially to recognize the roc government on taiwan while both regimes — the government on taiwan and the people's republic of china ( prc ) government on the mainland — claimed legitimacy as the sole legal government of the chinese people .

with these competing claims of sovereignty , official u.s. relations with the government on taiwan became a casualty of the 1979 decision to establish u.s. diplomatic relations with the prc government as the sole government of all china .

u.s. unofficial relations with taiwan since then have been built on the framework of the 1979 taiwan relations act ( p.l .

96-8 ) and further shaped by three u.s. - china communiqués .

under these agreements , the united states maintains its official relations with the prc while selling taiwan military weapons and having extensive economic , political , and security interests there .

absent formal diplomatic relations , the united states continues to maintain substantial economic and security relationships with taiwan , including the sale of defensive military weapons and services .

but continuing political and economic transformations in both the prc and taiwan since 1979 mean that u.s. policymakers are facing a different set of complex policy choices with each passing year .

this report focuses on current developments in taiwan , analyzing how those developments are affecting choices the united states makes about its policy toward taiwan specifically and toward the prc more broadly .

other crs reports provide more details about the myriad historical complexities of taiwan's current situation in u.s. policy , such as: historical background about how the roc on taiwan went from a u.s. ally to a government with no diplomatic u.s. relations , including the fundamentals governing u.s. policy toward taiwan today ( crs report rs22388 , taiwan's political status: historical background and its implications for u.s. policy ) ; the increase in u.s. - taiwan tensions under the former administration of president chen shui - bian ( crs report rl33684 , underlying strains in taiwan - u.s .

political relations ) ; the 2008 elections in taiwan ( crs report rs22853 , taiwan's 2008 presidential election , all by [author name scrubbed] ; as well as the subtle permutations of the "one - china" policy over three decades and its role in u.s. policy ( crs report rl30341 , china / taiwan: evolution of the "one china" policy — key statements from washington , beijing , and taipei ) and u.s. arms sales to taiwan ( crs report rl30957 , taiwan: major u.s. arms sales since 1990 ) , both by [author name scrubbed] .

given developments in u.s. relations with taiwan since 2001 , lawmakers who are concerned about current trends and the u.s. ability to meet future challenges may consider a number of various options for u.s. policy .

s. 1390 ( levin ) national defense authorization act for fy2010 .

section 1226 of the bill requires the department of defense to submit a report to congress , in both classified and unclassified versions , a report on taiwan's air force , including the number , type , age , and capabilities of its aircraft ; an assessment of the weapons platforms taiwan would need to provide for its self - defense in the face of a prc missile attack ; and a five - year plan for fulfilling u.s. obligations under the taiwan relations act to aid taiwan in controlling its own air space .

the committee on armed services introduced an original measure on july 2 , 2009 , with written report s.rept .

111-35 .

the senate took up consideration on july 14 , 2009 , and passed an amended bill by unanimous consent on july 23 , 2009 .

h.con.res .

18 ( linder ) expressing the sense of congress that the united states should resume normal diplomatic relations with taiwan .

the measure calls on the president to abandon the "one - china" policy , adopt a "one - china , one - taiwan" policy that recognizes taiwan sovereignty , and begin establishing normal diplomatic relations with taiwan .

the measure also calls on the president to aggressively support taiwan's membership in the u.n. and other international organizations for which statehood is a requirement .

the measure was introduced on january 9 , 2009 , and referred to the house foreign affairs committee .

h.con.res .

55 ( berkley ) recognizing the 30 th anniversary of the taiwan relations act .

the resolution reaffirms the unwavering u.s. commitment to the taiwan relations act , reaffirms strong u.s. support for taiwan's democratic development , and supports deepening u.s. - taiwan ties .

the measure was introduced on february 23 , 2009 , and referred to the house foreign affairs committee's subcommittee on asia and the pacific , which held mark - up on march 19 , 2009 .

the subcommittee forwarded the bill to the full committee , amended , by voice vote the same day .

09 / 25 / 09 — exiled uighur activist rebiya kadeer , living in the united states , was denied a visa to visit taiwan .

09 / 11 / 09 — former president chen shui - bian was given a life sentence on charges of corruption in public office .

08 / 19 / 09 — taiwan's ministry of foreign affairs announced that taiwan would not seek full membership in the u.n. this year , but instead would seek to participate in the activities of u.n. specialized institutions , like the world meteorological organization and the world maritime organization .

08 / 07 / 09 — over a period of several days , typhoon morakot slammed into the philippines , taiwan , and china , causing hundreds of millions of dollars in damage and numerous fatalities .

07 / 27 / 09 — prc president and communist party secretary hu jintao sent a congratulatory note to taiwan's newly elected kmt chairman ma ying - jeou .

07 / 26 / 09 — taiwan president ma ying - jeou was elected to the chairmanship of his political party , the nationalist party ( kmt ) .

07 / 21 / 09 — it was reported that taiwan and china plan to open semi - official tourism offices in each other's territories by the end of 2009 .

07 / 16 / 09 — the opening ceremony of the 2009 world games began , being hosted by taiwan .

07 / 01 / 09 — william stanton , a career u.s. diplomat , was announced to be the next director of the american institute in taiwan in taipei .

05 / 18 / 09 — for the first time since its ouster from the u.n. in 1971 , taiwan participated as an observer in the four - day 2009 world health assembly , the annual meeting of the world health organization ( who ) .

04 / 26 / 09 — the third round of cross - strait talks between taiwan and china began in nanjing , china .

03 / 18 / 09 — u.s. american institute in taiwan ( ait ) chairman ray burghardt said that the united states was "comfortable with what's happening" in taiwan - prc engagement .

the same day , former president chen shui - bian appeared at his final pre - trial hearing before going on trial for corruption , scheduled to begin march 26 , 2009 .

03 / 17 / 09 — the first luxury cruise ship ( ocean mystery ) to sail directly to taiwan from the prc ( shanghai ) arrived at keelung , reportedly carrying 1,600 prc tourists .

03 / 16 / 09 — in its first quadrennial report ( qdr ) , taiwan's ministry of defense said that taiwan would cut its military personnel from 275,000 to 215,000 over the next five years — part of a plan to create an all - volunteer force by december 2014 .

03 / 14 / 09 — the taiwan government urged the prc to jettison its "anti - secession" law .

the law , passed in march 2005 , justifies the use of force to prevent taiwan independence .

01 / 13 / 09 — world health organization officials sent a letter to the taiwan government stating that the island henceforth would be included in the international health regulations ( ihr ) , a set of legally binding rules governing international commitment to disease surveillance , alert , and response 01 / 07 / 09 — taiwan's cross - strait negotiator , chiang pin - kung , began a visit to four prc cities to discuss issues facing taiwan investors in the mainland .

12 / 12 / 08 — former taiwan president chen shui - bian was indicted on charges of corruption , having been arrested on november 12 , 2008 .

11 / 21 / 08 — on november 21 , 2008 , taiwan's lien chan , a former vice - president and premier , met with prc president hu jintao during the asian pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) meeting in peru .

it was said to be the highest - level meeting between the two sides in an international forum since 1949 .

10 / 03 / 08 — the defense security cooperation agency notified congress of the possible foreign military sale of six different types of defense articles and equipment , totaling approximately $6.4 billion .

09 / 08 / 08 — taiwan announced that it would cancel the live - fire exercise portion of its annual five - day military exercises , in deference to warming ties between taiwan and the prc .

09 / 08 / 08 — taiwan's foreign ministry announced it would seek closer participation in the 16-member pacific islands forum ( pif ) .

taiwan has taken part every year in the pif since joining in 1993 , but because of prc objections has been restricted to dialoguing only with its 6 diplomatic south pacific partners .

08 / 27 / 08 — the pentagon announced the sale of 58 harpoon missiles as well as related support , logistics , and training equipment to taiwan worth about $101 million .

08 / 19 / 08 — taiwan's special investigation unit ( siu ) announced it was inviting the taipei - based central bank of china ( cbc ) and the cabinet - level financial supervisory commission ( fsc ) to assist in investigating the source of $21 million in a swiss bank account in the name of former president chen shui - bian's daughter - in - law , huang jui - ching .

siu investigators said they were looking into possible irregularities in the second - phase financial reform initiated by president chen in 2004 as a potential source of the funds .

08 / 18 / 08 — prosecutors in taiwan named five suspects in an alleged high - level money laundering scheme involving former president chen shui - bian .

they included chen shui - bian ; his wife wu shu - jen ; chen's son chen chih - chung and his wife huang jui - ching ; and wu's brother wu ching - mao .

08 / 17 / 08 — tsai ing - wen , head of taiwan's dpp party , said the current political crisis had come about because the dpp put too much faith and trust in chen shui - bian .

08 / 14 / 08 — former taiwan president chen shui - bian held a press conference to resign from dpp membership .

he admitted failing fully to declare campaign funds and for wiring millions of dollars overseas , and apologized for causing "humiliation" and "irreparable damage" to the party .

08 / 14 / 08 — taiwan's ministry of foreign affairs ( mofa ) confirmed that the swiss confederation's department of justice sought assistance from taiwan about suspected money laundering by chen's daughter - in - law , huang jui - ching .

08 / 14 / 08 — taiwan submitted a proposal to the un secretariat via st. vincent and the solomon islands ( 2 of taiwan's diplomatic relationships ) , asking the un to consider permitting taiwan to have "meaningful participation" in the organization's specialized agencies .

08 / 13 / 08 — a spokesman for taiwan's presidential office said that this year's un bid would focus on "participation" in specialized un agencies .

08 / 12 / 08 — ait chairman ray burghardt gave a dinner for president ma in los angeles .

ma also met with members of congress .

08 / 12 / 08 — taiwan president ma yj left for state visits to paraguay and the dominican republic , returning on the 19 th .

he flew a commercial flight to the united states — a first for a taiwan president — and transited through la ( coming ) and through san francisco ( returning home ) .

07 / 27 / 08 — taiwan's sports affairs council ( sac — a cabinet - level council ) announced that several taiwan ministers would attend the 2008 olympic games at ioc invitation using national olympic committee id cards .

in the past , china's protests had led to the issuance of the less prestigious "guest card" for taiwan officials .

07 / 22 / 08 — taiwan's sef chairman , chiang pin - kung , was reported as having said he wants to study and promote the creation of a cross - strait comprehensive economic cooperation agreement ( ceca ) .

07 / 17 / 08 — taiwan's cabinet announced it would revise regulations limiting investment by taiwan companies in china , and that new measures would be put into place august 1 .

preliminary reports said that the current investment cap would be abolished for some companies and raised to 60% of net worth for other companies .

06 / 12 / 08 — the first cross - strait meetings in a decade began between china and taiwan in beijing at the diaoyutai state guest house , conducted by sef and arats .

the two sides reportedly agreed to set up permanent offices in each other's territory and to begin regular weekend direct charter flights .

05 / 26 / 08 — kmt chairman wu poh - hsiung visited china and met with prc party secretary hu jintao at the latter's invitation in the highest - level contact between the two sides of the taiwan strait .

05 / 20 / 08 — ma ying - jeou was inaugurated president of taiwan .

05 / 19 / 08 — tsai ing - wen , considered a moderate in the dpp party and a former vice - premier , was elected chairwoman of the party .

05 / 19 / 08 — the who rejected taiwan's bid for observer status .

03 / 22 / 08 — kmt candidate ma ying - jeou was elected president of taiwan , defeating the rival dpp ticket of frank hsieh .

crs report rs22853 , taiwan's 2008 presidential election , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33684 , underlying strains in taiwan - u.s .

political relations , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22388 , taiwan's political status: historical background and its implications for u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30957 , taiwan: major u.s. arms sales since 1990 , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl30341 , china / taiwan: evolution of the "one china" policy — key statements from washington , beijing , and taipei , by [author name scrubbed] .

