energy policy act of 2005 ( epact ) p.l .

109-58 .

the tax provisions are located in title xiii .

emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ) p.l .

110-343 .

the tax provisions are located in titles i , ii , and iii of division b , the energy improvement and extension act of 2008 .

american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) p.l .

111-5 .

conference report with full text of the act ( h.r .

1 , as passed , p.l .

111-5 ) and the joint explanatory statement .

the tax provisions are located in division b , title i .

this section lists and describes several resources that contain information about federal incentives available to support energy efficiency and renewable energy .

tax incentives assistance project ( tiap ) http: / / www.energytaxincentives.org / this website is sponsored by a number of government agencies , nonprofit groups , and other organizations .

it focuses solely on information about federal tax incentives .

information is organized into categories for consumers , businesses , and builders / manufacturers .

the site includes updates about enacted federal legislation and provides links to internal revenue service ( irs ) tax forms .

environmental protection agency ( epa ) energy star http: / / www.energystar.gov / index.cfm ? c=products.pr_tax_credits this website has a page on "federal tax credits for energy efficiency. .

the information on that page is organized into categories for consumers ( home improvements , cars , solar energy , fuel cells ) , home builders , appliance manufacturers , and commercial buildings .

the site includes a frequently asked questions ( faq ) section providing answers about energy efficiency tax credits .

department of energy ( doe ) financial opportunities http: / / www1.eere.energy.gov / financing / this website is focused mainly on information about matching funds , grants , and financing .

information is organized into categories for consumers , business / industry / universities , inventors ( small business ) , federal energy managers , states , and native american tribes .

the site includes a section on energy efficiency and consumer home financing .

u.s. department of energy alternative fuels and advanced vehicles data center ( afdc ) http: / / www.eere.energy.gov / afdc / this website presents information about incentives for alternative fuels ( renewable fuels and others ) and vehicles .

a key link provides access to "state and federal incentives and laws. .

incentives covered include grants , tax credits , loans , rebates , regulatory exemptions , fuel discounts , and technical assistance .

information on state incentives is made available through a national map and through summary tables organized by type of incentive , regulation , technology / fuel , and user .

the information about state incentives is updated after each state legislature's session ends .

information about federal incentives is updated after pertinent legislation is enacted into law .

another link provides access to "laws and incentives enactment history. .

u.s. department of energy ( doe ) clean cities financial opportunities http: / / www1.eere.energy.gov / cleancities / financial_opps.html this website presents information about incentives for alternative fuels and advanced technologies .

a link to "government sources" provides information about funding opportunities through federal grant - making agencies ( grants.gov ) , metropolitan planning organization ( mpo ) , the congestion mitigation and air quality ( cmaq ) program , and various epa programs .

a link to "solicitations" provides information about business funding opportunities that cover a variety of changing topics that have included plug - in hybrid vehicles , hydrogen vehicles , and transportation planning .

clean cities coordinators are available to help with funding applications .

department of housing and urban development ( hud ) energy efficient mortgages program http: / / www.hud.gov / offices / hsg / sfh / eem / energy - r.cfm hud's website provides information on energy efficient mortgages .

these mortgages can help homeowners finance the cost of adding energy - efficiency features to new or existing housing as part of their federal housing authority - insured home purchase or refinance .

alliance to save energy ( ase ) home and vehicle tax credits http: / / www.ase.org / content / article / detail / 2654 ase's website organizes information into categories on energy efficiency incentives for home improvements , hybrid vehicles , and solar energy .

the site includes details on eligible equipment , credit limits , and credit expiration dates .

this section covers websites that list and describe state and local incentives available to support energy efficiency and renewable energy .

database of state incentives for renewables and efficiency ( dsire ) http: / / www.dsireusa.org / dsire's website is sponsored by the interstate renewable energy council ( irec ) .

irec is a nonprofit organization focused on standards , guidelines , and other activities to support renewable energy .

this site contains information about various types of energy efficiency and renewable energy financial incentives provided by state and local governments and utility companies .

summary data is accessed through a national map — and several additional special topic maps — that are linked to data on each state .

alternatively , the data can be searched by technology ( solar , wind , geothermal ) , sector ( residential , commercial / industrial , government , utility ) , and incentive type ( tax credits , bonds , grants , loans ) , and eligible and implementing sectors .

the site is updated weekly .

also , the homepage includes a map - link to a list of federal incentives .

u.s. department of energy ( doe ) state activities and weatherization assistance http: / / www.eere.energy.gov / weatherization / doe's website on the weatherization assistance program has information about how to apply for weatherization funding assistance .

the site also has a "state activities" link , which provides information about state - level energy assistance programs .

the following are links to resources by type of renewable energy .

a number of crs reports provide information about federal energy efficiency and / or renewable energy incentives .

catalog of federal domestic assistance ( cfda ) http: / / www.cfda.gov / the cfda is the primary source of federal grants program information , although actual funding depends upon annual congressional budget appropriations .

the cfda is available on the internet .

many federal grants do not provide funding directly to individuals , but rather to states , local governments , universities , and tribal entities .

check the "applicant eligibility" section in the cfda program description to see who may apply .

individuals may be eligible to apply for funds after they have been distributed at the state and local level , through their state energy offices or other contact listed in the cfda program description .

grants.gov http: / / www.grants.gov federal grant funding opportunities are also posted on the website grants.gov .

grants.gov enables grant seekers to electronically find and apply for competitive grants from all federal agencies .

crs report rl34035 , grants work in a congressional office crs report rl32159 , how to develop and write a grant proposal crs report rl34012 , resources for grantseeker .

