federal employees with permanent appointments earn pension benefits under one of two retirement plans .

employees hired after 1983 participate in the federal employees' retirement system ( fers ) .

employees hired before 1984 participate in the civil service retirement system ( csrs ) unless they elected to transfer to the fers during open seasons held in 1987 and 1998 .

under both csrs and fers , federal employees who have served in the military can add their years of active - duty military service to their civilian service for purposes of retirement eligibility and pension benefits .

because both csrs and fers require employees to contribute toward their future pensions , an employee may be required to make a deposit to the civil service retirement and disability fund ( csrdf ) for military service to be credited toward a civil service retirement annuity .

the process by which the amount of the required deposit is determined is the main subject of this report .

congress has amended the laws that govern the conditions under which periods of military service can be credited toward a civil service pension several times over the years , mainly to coordinate civil service retirement benefits with benefits earned under social security .

the specific rules under which military service will be credited toward a civilian federal retirement annuity depend on the years in which the military service was performed , the date on which the employee was hired , and the retirement system in which the employee is enrolled .

for purposes of crediting military service toward a civil service pension , federal law differentiates between military service performed before 1957 and service performed after 1956 , federal employees hired before october 1 , 1982 , and those hired after september 30 , 1982 , and federal employees enrolled in csrs and those who are enrolled in fers .

when congress established the civil service retirement system in 1920 , it permitted veterans of active - duty military service who were hired as federal employees to have their military service counted for purposes of eligibility and benefits under csrs .

the statutes that allow military service to be credited toward a civil service retirement annuity have been amended several times over the years , mainly to coordinate civil service retirement benefits with benefits earned under social security .

most current federal employees were hired after september 30 , 1982 , and are enrolled in fers .

for such an employee to have his or her military service credited toward a fers annuity , he or she must make a deposit to the civil service retirement and disability fund equal to 3.0% of the total basic pay received while on active - duty military service .

interest is charged if the deposit is made more than two years after the date that the employee was hired .

deposits must be paid to the csrdf before the individual separates from federal employment .

