to qualify for medicaid , potential beneficiaries generally must be a member of a covered group and meet certain financial criteria .

although all poor ( i.e. , below 100% of the federal poverty level , fpl ) american children and pregnant woman are eligible for medicaid or the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , other populations' upper - income eligibility threshold for medicaid is often well below poverty .

in some cases , individuals are ineligible for medicaid regardless of their income .

some health reform proposals include provisions to expand traditional medicaid — to 100% of poverty , for example — regardless of whether one is a member of a covered group , such as children , pregnant women , the aged , and the disabled .

this report briefly describes two key aspects of current medicaid eligibility — ( 1 ) categorical eligibility ( i.e. , membership in a covered group ) and ( 2 ) income eligibility .

the report then discusses some policy and legislative considerations in expanding mandatory medicaid eligibility to 100% of poverty ( regardless of category ) through federal legislation .

under current law , for medicaid - covered populations , states receive federal funds at the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) , which averages 57% but ranges across states from 50% to 76% ; states are required to come up with the remaining share of program costs .

if this new poverty - related group were simply added as a mandatory group with no other changes , this would likely entail automatically increased federal and state spending , based on the number of new enrollees and the states' fmap , further straining federal and state budgets .

in response , states may consider other ways to reduce spending if necessary .

for example , they could cut provider payment rates , reduce enrollment by making the application and renewal processes for individuals more burdensome , or cut back on benefits offered for some or all groups .

to lower states' apparent financial burden attributable to the new group , there are a number of questions to answer: will the federal government cover ( 1 ) all of the costs of the new group ( 100% fmap ) , ( 2 ) some amount above the regular fmap but less than 100% , or ( 3 ) just the regular fmap ? .

if the federal government will pay a larger percentage than the regular fmap , will it be ( 1 ) temporary or ( 2 ) permanent ? .

if the federal government will pay a larger percentage than the regular fmap , will it be ( 1 ) for those below poverty who are newly eligible ( i.e. , not eligible under former rules ) , ( 2 ) for those below poverty who were eligible under former rules but are newly enrolled , and / or ( 3 ) for those below poverty who were already enrolled ? .

if the federal government will pay a larger percentage than the regular fmap , will the federal funding be ( 1 ) capped , perhaps as a separate program like chip , or ( 2 ) open - ended ? .

is the new eligibility group ( 1 ) wholly in place as of a certain date or ( 2 ) phased in over time ? .

will states face a maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement ( 1 ) for the dollars ( eg , must not spend less than what they spent on medicaid before a particular date ) and / or ( 2 ) for the people ( eg , if people would have been eligible under an already existing eligibility group , they might still be treated as enrolled through that pathway , especially if benefits to individuals or states differ as a result ) .

there are some additional considerations in adding a new mandatory eligibility group that may overlap with current eligibility groups , particularly along the following key dimensions .

according to analyses by the agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) , there were 39.6 million adults without health insurance in 2005 , of whom approximately 16% ( 6.1 million ) were eligible for medicaid , chip , or a solely state - financed program .

as shown in figure 1 , if medicaid eligibility had been expanded to cover nonaged adults up to 100% of poverty , then another 8.3 million uninsured adults would have been eligible in 2005 ; approximately 25.1 million uninsured adults ( 63% ) would still have been ineligible .

medicaid coverage is not provided for individuals in certain subgroups under 100% of poverty: parents ( 23 states currently at 100%+ fpl through section 1931 or an 1115 waiver ; all states cover some parents , with lowest eligibility level at 11% fpl ) childless adults ( 14 states currently at 100%+ fpl with an 1115 waiver ; without a waiver , no medicaid pathway exists for these individuals ) aged and disabled ( many are enrolled in medicare , except for the disabled in the two - year waiting period — 16 states currently at 100% fpl ; all states cover some aged and disabled , based on ssi receipt , which has a minimum upper - income eligibility threshold of 75% fpl ) certain non - citizens additionally , should uninsurance be a requirement for this pathway , in order to exclude individuals already enrolled in health insurance ( eg , aged and disabled in medicare , individuals with employer - sponsored health insurance ) ? .

what about those eligible for employer - sponsored health insurance ? .

will the federal government cover ( 1 ) all of the costs of the new group ( 100% fmap ) , ( 2 ) some amount above the regular fmap but less than 100% , or ( 3 ) just the regular fmap ? .

if the federal government will pay a larger percentage than the regular fmap , will it be ( 1 ) temporary or ( 2 ) permanent ? .

if the federal government will pay a larger percentage than the regular fmap , will it be ( 1 ) for those below poverty who are newly eligible ( i.e. , not eligible under prior rules ) , ( 2 ) for those below poverty who were eligible before but are newly enrolled , and / or ( 3 ) for those below poverty who were already enrolled ? .

if the federal government will pay a larger percentage than the regular fmap , will the federal funding be ( 1 ) capped or ( 2 ) open - ended ? .

is the new group ( 1 ) wholly in place as of a certain date or ( 2 ) phased in ? .

will the state face a maintenance of effort ( moe ) requirement ( 1 ) for the dollars ( eg , must not spend less than what they spent on medicaid before a particular date ) and / or ( 2 ) for the people ( eg , if individuals would have been eligible under an already existing eligibility pathway , states could be required to enroll them through that pathway , especially if the benefits to individuals or the financial impact on states differ for the new eligibility group ) .

eligibility .

 ( 1 ) a federal standard for counting income for the new group or state - based standards ? .

 ( 2 ) if state - based standards , how much flexibility to use income disregards ? .

 ( 3 ) allow states to deduct medical expenses from income for eligibility determinations ( i.e. , "spend down" ) or not ? .

 ( 4 ) assets test or not ? .

 ( 5 ) if additional individuals are made eligible , are provider payments and provider supply adequate to ensure beneficiaries' access to needed care ? .

benefits .

provide standard medicaid benefits already offered in each state or permit additional state flexibility ? .

cost - sharing .

generally only "nominal" amounts currently required or permit additional state flexibility ? .

section 1115 waivers .

 ( 1 ) is the new group's impact on budget neutrality specified in legislation or left to regulation ? .

 ( 2 ) for states already covering the group through a waiver , would their current flexibility ( a ) terminate , ( b ) last until the waiver's expiration but without ability to renew the waiver , or ( c ) last in perpetuity ? .

