this report analyzes recent laws that relate to the regulation of guns in the district of columbia ( dc or district ) , and congressional proposals that would further amend these laws .

the four main statutes or bills at issue are ( 1 ) federal provisions under the national firearms act of 1934 and the gun control act of 1968 ; ( 2 ) the d.c. firearms control regulation act of 1976 , as in effect prior to the supreme court's decision in district of columbia v. heller ; ( 3 ) the proposed second amendment enforcement act introduced in february 2011 ( h.r .

645 ) ; and ( 4 ) the district's legislation that permanently amends its gun laws — the firearms control amendment act of 2008 ( fcaa ) , and the inoperable pistol amendment act of 2008 ( ipaa ) .

congressional proposals to address the district's firearms laws often arise when the issue of voting rights for the district is before congress ; thus , it is worth noting another congressional proposal from the 111 th congress to amend the district's gun laws , title ii of s. 160 , which was the district of columbia house voting rights act of 2009 .

while title ii of s. 160 of the 111 th congress and h.r .

645 from the 112 th congress are substantially similar , this report will point out the differences where appropriate .

this report begins with an overview of the introduction of these bills and their status today .

it proceeds to analyze current dc law after the passage of the fcaa and the ipaa , and the effect that the congressional proposals would have on the district's firearms laws .

in doing so , the report traces the congressional proposals section by section .

much of the congressional activity on dc firearms laws occurred after the supreme court issued its decision in district of columbia v. heller .

in heller , the supreme court held , by a vote of 5-4 , that the second amendment protects an individual's right to possess a firearm , unconnected with service in a militia , and the use of such arm for traditionally lawful purposes , such as self - defense within the home .

the decision in heller affirmed the lower court's decision that declared unconstitutional three provisions of the district's firearms control regulation act: ( 1 ) dc code § [phone number scrubbed].02 ( a ) ( 4 ) , which generally barred the registration of handguns and thus effectively prohibited the possession of handguns in the district ; ( 2 ) dc code § 22-4504 ( a ) , which prohibited carrying a pistol without a license , insofar as that provision would prevent a registrant from moving a gun from one room to another within his or her home ; and ( 3 ) dc code § [phone number scrubbed].02 , which required that all lawfully owned firearms be kept unloaded and disassembled or bound by a trigger lock or similar device .

however , the supreme court's opinion did not address the district's license to carry requirement , making note of heller's concession that such a requirement would be permissible if enforced in a manner that is not arbitrary and capricious .

after the supreme court issued its decision , the dc council enacted emergency legislation to temporarily amend the city's gun laws to comply with the ruling in heller while considering permanent legislation .

the dc council enacted the firearms control emergency amendment act of 2008 , the first of several emergency enactments , and this attempt was met with criticism , as some felt that the changes did not comply with the decision in heller .

at the same time , perhaps in reaction to the court's decision or the district's first attempt to temporarily amend its gun laws , h.r .

6691 , the second amendment enforcement act , was introduced in the 110 th congress by representative travis childers .

the proposal appeared to overturn or loosen provisions of the district's existing gun laws ( i.e. , the dc code as it was prior to any of the city's emergency regulations ) .

the content of h.r .

6691 was subsequently adopted in the nature of a substitute into h.r .

6842 , which was passed in the house of representatives by a vote of 266-152 .

the senate did not pass h.r .

6842 , and the bill did not become law .

in the 111 th congress , senator john ensign had introduced s.amdt .

575 to s. 160 , the district of columbia voting rights act of 2009 .

this amendment , which also used the language of h.r .

6842 ( 110 th congress ) , was approved by the senate on february 26 , 2009 , and became title ii of s. 160 ( hereinafter title ii - s. 160 ) .

although s. 160 was passed in the senate by a vote of 61-37 , it was later reported that movement on this legislation was stalled .

as the house passed h.r .

6842 ( 110 th congress ) in september 2008 , the dc council continued to enact emergency legislation until permanent legislation could become effective .

language contained in the emergency acts later was encompassed in the permanent legislation .

in 2009 , the firearms control amendment act of 2008 ( fcaa ) and the inoperable pistol amendment act of 2008 ( ipaa ) were passed by the dc council and transmitted to congress for the requisite 60 days before becoming effective , respectively , on march 31 , 2009 , and may 20 , 2009 .

overall , the fcaa and ipaa not only amended firearms provisions of the dc code that were at issue in heller , but also provided a different range of restrictions on the regulation of firearms and firearm ownership .

it is worth noting that the district's new firearms amendments under the fcaa and ipaa were challenged and upheld in the united states district court for the district of columbia on march 26 , 2010 .

as discussed above , the language of title ii - s. 160 had been adopted from a bill ( h.r .

6842 ) introduced in the 110 th congress , which originated prior to the enactment of the two new dc acts .

the most recent congressional legislation , h.r .

645 , though it also seeks to overturn or loosen many of the district's gun provisions , takes into consideration the passage of these two new acts , the fcaa and ipaa .

sections 3-8 of h.r .

645 would amend firearms provisions in the dc code in substantially the same manner as title ii - s. 160 , by limiting the district's ability to promulgate rules regulating firearm possession , and repealing the district's registration scheme , among other things .

sections 9-13 would preserve certain provisions of ipaa , while section 14 would repeal other provisions of the ipaa and all of the fcaa .

the next provisions discussed were all amendments to the dc code pursuant to the enactment of the fcaa and ipaa .

these provisions would no longer exist under the congressional proposal because section 14 of h.r .

645 would repeal the two acts , "and any provision of law amended or repealed by either of such acts [would be] restored or revived as if such acts had not been enacted into law. .

the dc code's provisions that govern who may qualify to apply for a dealer's license , who is eligible to sell and transfer firearms to a dealer , and to whom a dealer can sell are dependent upon one's ability to obtain a registration certificate .

thus , anyone who wishes to obtain a dealer's license , or engage in purchasing or transferring a firearm , must meet the new requirements created by the fcaa ( discussed in " registration " ) , to obtain a registration certificate .

because h.r .

645 would repeal the district's registration scheme , it would allow any person who is not prohibited from possessing or receiving a firearm under federal or district law to qualify in applying for a dealer's license , selling or transferring ammunition or any firearm to a licensed dealer , or making such purchase from a licensed dealer of firearms .

the federal prohibitions are discussed in the next section .

furthermore , as noted in the discussion on " ammunition sales and registration ," duties such as reporting the loss , theft , or destruction of any firearms or ammunition in the dealer's inventory would be repealed .

the federal gca lists nine categories of persons who are prohibited from possessing , shipping , or receiving firearms .

they are ( 1 ) persons who have been convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment exceeding one year ; ( 2 ) persons who are fugitives ; ( 3 ) persons who are users of or addicted to any controlled substances ; ( 4 ) persons who have been adjudicated as a mental defective or who have been committed to a mental institution ; ( 5 ) persons who are unlawfully in the united states or admitted under a nonimmigrant visa ; ( 6 ) persons who have been dishonorably discharged from the armed forces ; ( 7 ) persons who have renounced u.s. citizenship ; ( 8 ) persons who are on notice of or are subject to a court order restraining them from harassing , stalking or threatening an intimate partner ; and ( 9 ) persons who have been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence .

among other federal regulations , it is unlawful for both licensed dealers and non - licensed persons to sell or transfer a firearm to another if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the purchaser falls within one of the nine categories above .

because the fcaa imposes new eligibility requirements before an applicant can be approved for a registration certificate ( see " registration " ) it follows that a non - licensed person or licensed dealer wishing to transfer firearms must meet not only what is required by federal law but also the additional eligibility requirements under the fcaa since anyone wishing to transfer firearms must be eligible to register a firearm under dc law .

under d.c. law , a non - licensed person may sell or transfer firearm or ammunition only to a licensed dealer .

in other words , a private sale between two non - licensed people must take place through a licensed dealer .

this would remain unchanged in h.r .

645 .

under h.r .

645 , it would still be unlawful for licensed dealers to make transfers to those prohibited from receiving or possessing a firearm under federal or dc law , but because the bill would essentially remove any registration requirement that is required by the dc code , it appears that the only disqualifications that would prohibit a transfer are those listed under federal law .

another amendment to dc law that would be affected by section 14 of h.r .

645 is the assault weapons ban created by the fcaa .

the fcaa created a new definition of "assault weapon" that includes a list of specific rifles , shotguns , and pistols and their variations , regardless of the manufacturer .

it also includes semiautomatic rifles , pistols , and shotguns based on the presence of a single military - type characteristic .

the definition of "assault weapon" also includes any shotgun with a revolving cylinder , except that it does not apply to "a weapon with an attached tubular device designed to accept , and capable of operating only with , .22 caliber rimfire ammunition. .

currently , the chief also has the power to designate as an assault weapon any firearm that he or she believes would reasonably pose the same threat as those weapons enumerated in the definition .

the definition of assault weapon does not include antique firearms or certain pistols sanctioned for olympic target shooting .

the fcaa also makes this new definition of "assault weapon" applicable in the assault weapon manufacturing strict liability act of 1990 .

thus , any manufacturer , importer , or dealer of a weapon deemed an "assault weapon" pursuant to this new definition can be held strictly liable in tort for all direct and consequential damage arising from bodily injury or death if either proximately results from the discharge of the assault weapon in the district of columbia .

these particular changes made by the fcaa would be repealed by section 14 of h.r .

645 .

the fcaa prohibits any person in the district from possessing , selling , or transferring any large capacity ammunition feeding device .

the meaning of "large capacity ammunition feeding device" includes a "magazine , belt , drum , feed strip or similar device that has a capacity of , or that can be readily restored or converted to accept , more than 10 rounds of ammunition. .

however , the term does not include "an attached tubular device designed to accept , and capable of operating only with , .22 caliber rimfire ammunition. .

thus , even though residents of dc are now allowed to register and possess semiautomatic firearms ( see " dc semiautomatic ban " ) , the fcaa prevents them from possessing large capacity ammunition feeding devices , which some semiautomatic firearms are capable of holding .

this provision would be repealed by section 14 of h.r .

645 .

under the brady handgun violence prevention act , which amended the gca to establish the national instant criminal background check system ( nics ) , a licensed dealer is generally prohibited from transferring a firearm to any other non - licensed person without running a background check by contacting nics .

the licensee may transfer the firearm if the system provides the licensee with a unique identification number , or if three business days have elapsed with no response from the system and the licensee has verified the identity of the transferee by examining valid identification documents that contain a photograph of the transferee .

generally , once the background check has been completed and the transferee approved , the licensee may transfer the firearm unless a state imposes a waiting period .

non - licensed persons are not required to perform a background check under federal law .

the dc code imposed a waiting period of 48 hours before a seller within the district can deliver a pistol or handgun .

under the ipaa , however , the waiting period for the transfer of a "firearm" is now 10 days .

firearm , as amended by the ipaa , means "any weapon regardless of operability , which will , or is designed or redesigned , made or remade , readily converted , restored or repaired or is intended to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosive" ( emphasis added ) .

thus , the ipaa makes the new waiting period apply to all firearms , not just pistols .

title ii - s. 160 would not have changed the waiting period , which would have remained applicable to the transfer of pistols , and not shotguns or rifles .

it should also be noted that if the ipaa is repealed under h.r .

645 , the waiting period to obtain a handgun would revert back to 48 hours .

the fcaa added new provisions with regard to microstamping .

the dc code had already prohibited the sale of a firearm that does not have imbedded in it an identification or serial number unique to the manufacturer or dealer of the firearm .

the fcaa now adds a new provision requiring that beginning january 1 , 2011 , "no licensee shall sell or offer for sale any semiautomatic pistol manufactured on or after january 1 , 2011 , that is not microstamp - ready as required by and in accordance with sec .

503. .

the fcaa creates two new sections , 503 and 504 .

new section 503 sets forth requirements that determine if a semiautomatic pistol is microstamp - ready , and it also contains provisions that require manufacturers to provide the chief with the make , model , and serial number of the semiautomatic pistol when presented with a code from a cartridge that was recovered as part of a legitimate law enforcement investigation .

new section 504 prohibits a pistol that is not on the california roster of handguns certified for sale ( california roster ) from being manufactured , sold , given , loaned , exposed for sale , transferred , or imported into the district of columbia as of january 1 , 2009 .

such a pistol is prohibited from being owned or possessed unless it was lawfully owned and registered prior to january 1 , 2009 .

furthermore , if a resident of dc lawfully owns a pistol not on the california roster , that individual can sell or transfer ownership only through a licensed firearms dealer ; or a licensed dealer who has such a pistol in its inventory prior to january 1 , 2009 , can only transfer it to another licensed firearms dealer .

the fcaa also requires the chief to review the california roster at least annually for any additions or deletions , and the chief is authorized to revise , by rule , the roster of handguns determined not to be unsafe .

under the ipaa , the district also makes unlawful the discharge of a firearm without a special written permit from the chief , except as permitted by law which includes legitimate self - defense .

it further allows the district to prohibit or restrict the possession of firearms on its property and any property under its control , and would similarly allow private persons owning property in the district to prohibit or restrict the possession of firearms on their property , except where law enforcement personnel is concerned .

these two new provisions would be also repealed if h.r .

645 became law .

