this report analyzes the language contained in § 1607 of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( recovery act ) , which provides that federal funds can be made available to a state by the federal government either after certification by a governor that such money will be requested and spent or after the adoption of a concurrent resolution by a state legislature .

this report evaluates the authority of state legislatures to , by concurrent resolution , provide for the acceptance of federal funds .

section 1607 may be a congressional response to statements by several state governors who indicated a disinclination to seek , or have entities in their state seek , and receive funds provided under the recovery act .

the act requires that , in order to be eligible for such funds , a governor must first either certify that such funds will be requested , or , if that does not occur within 45 days of enactment , then a state legislature may fulfill the same condition by passing a concurrent resolution ( which does not generally require a governor's signature ) .

specifically , § 1607 of the recovery act provides that: ( a ) certification by governor - not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this act , for funds provided to any state or agency thereof , the governor of the state shall certify that: ( 1 ) the state will request and use funds provided by this act ; and ( 2 ) the funds will be used to create jobs and promote economic growth .

 ( b ) acceptance by state legislature - if funds provided to any state in any division of this act are not accepted for use by the governor , then acceptance by the state legislature , by means of the adoption of a concurrent resolution , shall be sufficient to provide funding to such state .

 ( c ) distribution - after the adoption of a state legislature's concurrent resolution , funding to the state will be for distribution to local governments , councils of government , public entities , and public - private entities within the state either by formula or at the state's discretion .

the language of § 1607 contains significant ambiguities , and the terms used may not be easily reconciled with either other portions of the act or with existing statutory law .

section 1607 ( a ) , for instance , requires a governor to , within 45 days , "certify" that the state will , at some unspecified future time , request and use funds provided by this act to create jobs and promote economic growth .

the language does not specify to whom such certification shall be made ; nor does it specify whether , in making the certification , the state will be accepting all the funds that the state is eligible for under the act , or only some portion of the funds .

further , this subsection does not specify whether a governor's office will be the political entity requesting the funds at some time in the future , or whether such a request will come from a state agency , a local government , or other public or public - private entities within a state .

section 1607 ( b ) provides that if funds "in any division of the act" are not "accepted" for use by a governor , then it "shall be sufficient to provide funding to the state" for a state legislature to "accept[]" such funds by a concurrent resolution .

however , the term "concurrent resolution" is not defined , and not all states appear to have this legislative vehicle .

further , "accepting funds" is not a precise term of art , and it would appear to be a description of only a portion of the process usually used to distribute federal funds .

finally , it is not clear if the language which provides that a concurrent resolution shall "be sufficient" to provide funding to the state is intended only to fulfill the "certification" requirement of § 1607 ( a ) , or whether it is intended to be a waiver of all the requirements for receiving grant monies , such as submitting a grant application or providing supporting data or required assurances .

finally , section 1607 ( c ) provides that , after the adoption of a state legislature's concurrent resolution , funding to the state "will be for distribution to local governments , councils of government , public entities , and public private entities within the state either by formula or at the state's discretion. .

in general , federal funds are by distributed by formula or by discretionary grants , depending upon the criteria specified in federal law governing a particular grant program .

thus , it is not clear if this language is intended to direct state and local officials to accept and spend these monies , or merely to indicate that the normal grant process may move forward after a state's adoption of the specified concurrent resolution .

as noted , § 1607 ( a ) of the recovery act provides that in order to receive federal funds , "the governor of the state shall certify that: ( 1 ) the state will request and use funds provided by this act ; and ( 2 ) the funds will be used to create jobs and promote economic growth. .

under a broad interpretation of this language , one could argue that a governor would need to request and use all funds provided in this act .

under this interpretation , the language of § 1607 ( a ) should be read as follows ( added text in italics ) : ( a ) certification by governor - not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this act , for funds provided to any state or agency thereof , the governor of the state shall certify that: ( 1 ) the state will request and use all of the funds provided by this act for which the state is eligible ; and ( 2 ) the funds will be used to create jobs and promote economic growth .

it should be noted , however , that § 1607 ( b ) provides that a state legislature can take action "if funds provided to any state in any division of this act are not accepted for use by the governor. .

this would seem to strongly imply that a governor could reject some of the funds in the recovery act , while accepting others .

thus , a better interpretation of the language of § 1607 ( a ) would be as follows ( added text in italics ) : ( a ) certification by governor - not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this act , for funds provided to any state or agency thereof , the governor of the state shall certify that: ( 1 ) the state will request and use some or all of the funds provided by this act ; and ( 2 ) the funds will be used to create jobs and promote economic growth .

it should also be noted that this certification by the governor is neither a present request for , nor a present acceptance of , federal funds .

rather , it is merely an indication that the state "will" request and use funds .

since the use of the term "will" indicates an event that is going to occur in the future , a more accurate interpretation of § 1607 ( a ) would appear to be ( added text in italics ) : ( a ) certification by governor - not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this act , for funds provided to any state or agency thereof , the governor of the state shall certify that: ( 1 ) the state at some t ime in the future will request and use some or all of the funds provided by this act ; and ( 2 ) the funds will be used to create jobs and promote economic growth .

the final ambiguity is the use of the term "state. .

although the governor is the chief executive officer of a state , he is generally not the only officer vested with legislative power to apply for and accept grants .

that power may be distributed to various state and local officials , who are authorized to act on behalf of the state without approval of the governor .

thus , while the governor is required to certify that the "state" will request and use funds , it does not appear that the application for those funds need come from the governor in all instances .

consequently , the certification does not necessarily appear to be statement of a governor's intent to apply for funds .

rather , such certification would appear to be an acknowledgement by the governor that , based on available information , the governor , or other state or local officials are planning on applying for funds under the recovery act .

thus , a more accurate interpretation of § 1607 ( a ) would appear to be ( added text in italics ) : ( a ) certification by governor - not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this act , for funds provided to any state or agency thereof , the governor of the state shall certify that: ( 1 ) the governor , state or local officials at some t ime in the future will request and use some or all of the funds provided by this act ; and ( 2 ) the funds will be used to create jobs and promote economic growth .

a more difficult question is how to interpret § 1607 ( b ) of the recovery act .

although many of the terms and phrases used in that subsection are ambiguous , perhaps the most significant ambiguity is the meaning of the term "acceptance" and the phrase "shall be sufficient to provide funding. .

without considering the context of the rest of the recovery act , the "acceptance" language in §1607 ( b ) might at first be read to authorize the state legislature , by concurrent resolution , to accept the federal funds on behalf of the relevant state agency , and by doing so to waive all federal program requirements which would otherwise need to be followed for a state or local entity to apply for and receive federal funds .

it might even be argued that this language could be interpreted to direct state entities to spend such monies consistent with a state legislature's concurrent resolution .

if this "accept , waive and spend" interpretation is correct , then the language of § 1607 ( b ) might be read as follows ( added text in italics ) : ( b ) acceptance by state legislature - if funds provided to any state in any division of this act are not accepted for use by the governor , then acceptance by the state legislature , by means of the adoption of a concurrent resolution , shall be sufficient to provide funding to such state waive all federal program requirements , and direct that relevant state entities will accept and spend those funds .

as will be explored below , however , the more expansive "accept , waive and spend" interpretation is difficult to reconcile with the rest of the recovery act , with canons of statutory interpretation , or with constitutional doctrine .

a more likely interpretation of this language is that an "acceptance ... [which] shall be sufficient to provide funding" would only trigger the authority of federal agencies to offer , and upon application of the states , distribute federal funds , but would not otherwise reallocate power within the state .

under this narrow "certification" interpretation , "acceptance" by a state legislature by concurrent resolution under § 1607 ( b ) is merely the functional equivalent of the "certification" that can be made by a governor under §1607 ( a ) .

either of these actions would appear to be nothing more than preliminary conditions which must be met before a state becomes eligible to apply for and receive federal funds under the recovery act .

in effect , §1607 ( a ) gives a governor the opportunity to exercise a veto over receipt of federal funding under the act by failing to make such certification within 45 days , but then § 1607 ( b ) gives the state legislature the opportunity to act to negate the effect of the governor's veto .

if this interpretation were correct , then language of § 1607 ( b ) might be read as follows ( added text in italics ) : ( b ) acceptance by state legislature - if funds provided to any state in any division of this act are not accepted for use by the governor , then acceptance if the governor does not provide such certification in 45 day s regarding funds provided in any division of this act , then certification by the state legislature , by means of the adoption of a concurrent resolution , shall be sufficient to provide funding to such state meet the requirements of subsection ( a ) .

under this "certification" interpretation , § 1607 would not appear intended to reallocate power between the executive and legislative branches of state governments in applying for , accepting and spending federal grants .

rather , it merely provides a preliminary federal grant condition , which could be met by either certification by the governor or by a concurrent resolution by the state legislature .

after such certification has been made , federal funds may then be distributed under whatever other authority has been established for such funds in the rest of the recovery act or in federal law .

thus , under this narrow interpretation , even after certification by either the governor or state legislature , the governor would still have to apply for those federal funds which require an application from the governor's office .

conversely , if the governor chose not to apply for particular funds , then those funds would not be provided to the state .

similarly , other state and local officials with independent legal authority to apply for such funds would also have to submit grant applications and comply with any other such conditions as are required to gain access to those funds .

again , if those state or local officials choose not to apply for the funds , then the funds would not be provided to the state .

it should be noted that this interpretation closely mirrors language found on the website recovery.gov , which was established by the obama administration to explain the recovery act .

this website , which lists state certifications submitted , notes that "in order to receive funds from the arra , governors have 45 days to certify that they will first 'request and use' funds from the arra , and second use them to create jobs and promote economic growth .

if a governor does not accept funds allocated to his or her state before that window expires , the state's legislature then has the option of certifying those two conditions itself. .

while the terms of § 1607 ( c ) are less ambiguous , it might also be subject to varying interpretation .

for instance , one might argue that , in conjunction with § 1607 ( b ) , the language used might support the argument that a state legislature could , by concurrent resolution , direct state or local officials to spend the federal monies received .

for instance , one might argue that the state legislature would have the ability to direct state or local officials to apply for and spend discretionary grant money .

in this case , the language in question might be understood as if rewritten as follows: ( c ) distribution - after the adoption of a state legislature's concurrent resolution , funding to the state will be for distribution to local governments , councils of government , public entities , and public - private entities within the state either by formula or at the state's state legislature's discretion .

however , as discussed in the section regarding § 1607 ( b ) , it seems unlikely that the use of the term "state's" is intended to mean the state legislature .

the term "state" is used throughout § 1607 in contexts which clearly indicated that the term state is referring to entities which receive federal funds – i.e. , state or local agencies or officials .

as is discussed below , absent statutory context indicating otherwise , like terms in discrete sections of a statute are generally given the same meaning by a court .

if this language refers to state or local officials , however , then § 1607 provides that funding will be "at state or local official's" discretion .

in this case , the language in question might be rewritten as follows: ( c ) distribution - after the adoption of a state legislature's concurrent resolution , funding to the state will be for distribution to local governments , councils of government , public entities , and public - private entities within the state either by formula or at the state's state or local offic i al' s discretion .

under this reasoning , once a state legislature has authorized the distribution of funds , then it is up to the discretion of state or local officials as to whether to apply for such funds or not .

this would be consistent with the provisions in the recovery act which provide for discretionary grants .

although , as discussed below , the nature of discretionary grants is that they are not made until after application by state or local officials , because such applications help the federal agency establish what the level of funding will be .

since the § 1607 leaves "discretion" with state or local officials as to such funding , the state or local officials could use their discretion to choose not to apply for discretionary grants .

further , as discussed below , even if federal funds were allocated to a state by formula , it is not clear whether state or local officials would be obligated to spend it .

there is no language in §1607 ( c ) that appears to require that state or local officials spend federal funds once they are allocated .

it should also be noted that the distribution of federal funds by formula or discretionary grant are the two ways that federal grant funds are distributed .

thus , these are also the methods by which funds would flow under the recovery act after the governor has made his certification under § 1607 ( a ) .

while the absence of such language does not directly lead to an ambiguity in the statute , adding that information to § 1607 may clarify the meaning of the other sections .

thus , § 1607 ( c ) might best be interpreted as follows ( added text in italics ) : ( c ) distribution - after either the governor's certification or the adoption of a state legislature's concurrent resolution , funding to the state will be for distribution to local governments , councils of government , public entities , and public - private entities within the state either by formula or at the state's state or local official's discretion .

thus there appear to be two possible interpretation of the provisions of § 1607 .

as reworded , these interpretations would be as follows .

in reading statutes , there are a variety of rules and conventions , and presumptions that courts use to evaluate statutory language .

since there seems to be little legislative history available to shed light on which of these interpretations should be favored , it would appear that other tools of statutory interpretation should be utilized .

two of the more important canons of statutory construction applicable to this statutory provision are: 1 ) that a statute should be read as a harmonious whole , and 2 ) that statutory interpretations which lead to constitutionally doubtful results are disfavored .

section 1607 ( a ) of the recovery act provides that , in order for a state to be eligible for the federal funds in the recovery act , a governor must certify that ( 1 ) a state will request and use funds in the future , and ( 2 ) the funds will be used to create jobs and economic growth .

this language does not appear to bind a governor to request or accept any particular level of governmental funding , nor does it appear that the certification must be based on the governor's future acceptance of funds , as such request or acceptance can sometimes be made by other state officials or by local officials .

forty - five days after enactment of the recovery act , if a governor has not provided the necessary certification , then § 1607 ( b ) would appear to provide a state legislature the authority to step in to "accept" state funds by concurrent resolution , achieving the same result as would have been achieved by the certification .

however , it seems clear that such acceptance , while "sufficient" to trigger the availability of federal funds under the recovery act , does not free a state from any other conditions for receiving funds , such as filling out applications , justifying needs , and providing assurance of compliance with program requirements .

many of the interpretive problems with §1607 result from the ambiguity of the terms used .

however , if the statute were interpreted as if it had the following words inserted , the most likely interpretation of the language becomes clear ( added text in italics ) : a ) certification by governor - not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this act , for funds provided to any state or agency thereof , the governor of the state shall certify that: ( 1 ) the state governor , state or local officials at some time in the future will request and use some or all of the funds provided by this act ; and ( 2 ) the funds will be used to create jobs and promote economic growth .

 ( b ) acceptance by state legislature - if funds provided to any state in any division of this act are not accepted for use by the governor , then acceptance if the governor does not provide such certification in 45 day s regarding funds provided in any division of this act , then certification by the state legislature , by means of the adoption of a concurrent resolution , shall be sufficient to provide funding to such state meet the requirements of subsection ( a ) .

 ( c ) distribution - after either the governor's certification or the adoption of a state legislature's concurrent resolution , funding to the state will be for distribution to local governments , councils of government , public entities , and public - private entities within the state either by formula or at the state's state or local official's discretion .

under this interpretation , it does not appear likely that § 1607 was intended to significantly reallocate powers between a state legislature and a state executive branch .

thus , once either a governor's certification or the legislature's acceptance is made , § 1607 would have little or no apparent effect on the remaining power of a governor , state or local official to choose whether or not to seek and administer these funds .

the language of § 1607 ( b ) , while adding an additional requirement to the federal funding process , does not otherwise appear to supplant or replace existing federal requirements , nor does it appear to change the allocation of power within a state to make decisions regarding the application for , acceptance of and use of such federal funds .

any interpretation of this language which did provide authority to a state legislature , by concurrent resolution , to direct the acceptance and spending of federal monies would likely raise tenth amendment issues .

consequently , such an interpretation would be disfavored .

