broadband infrastructure refers to networks of deployed telecommunications equipment and technologies necessary to provide high - speed internet access and other advanced telecommunications services for private homes , businesses , commercial establishments , schools , and public institutions .

in the united states , broadband infrastructure is constructed , operated , and maintained primarily by the private sector , including telephone , cable , satellite , wireless , and other information technology companies .

currently deployed broadband technologies include cable modem , dsl ( copper wire ) , wireless systems ( mobile and fixed ) , fiber , and satellite .

although broadband is deployed by private sector providers , federal and state regulation of the telecommunications industry as well as government financial assistance programs can have a significant impact on private sector decisions to invest in and deploy broadband infrastructure , particularly in underserved and unserved areas of the nation .

the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) provided $7.2 billion primarily for broadband grant programs to be administered by two separate agencies: the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) of the department of commerce ( doc ) and the rural utilities service ( rus ) of the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) .

of the $7.2 billion total , the arra provided $4.7 billion to establish a broadband technology opportunities program ( btop ) at ntia , and $2.5 billion for broadband grant , loan , and loan / grant combination programs at rus .

the arra also directed the federal communications commission ( fcc ) to develop a national broadband strategy .

in comparison with previously existing federal broadband programs in the united states , the broadband grant and loan programs established and funded by p.l .

111-5 are unprecedented in scale and scope .

the impetus behind broadband provisions in the arra was two - fold: in the short term , to create jobs through the construction and deployment of broadband infrastructure , and in the long term , to address concerns over economic and societal impacts of inadequate broadband availability , access , and adoption , particularly in rural and lower - income areas of the nation .

the unprecedented scale and scope of the arra broadband programs , coupled with the short time frame for awarding grants , presents daunting challenges with respect to program implementation as well as congressional oversight .

in december 2008 , leadership in the house and senate , as well as the obama transition team , announced their intention to include a broadband component in the infrastructure portion of the economic stimulus package .

at the same time , numerous interested parties , including broadband equipment manufacturers ; large , mid - sized , and small wireline and wireless service providers ; satellite operators ; telecommunications unions ; consumer groups ; education groups ; public safety organizations ; think tanks ; and others unveiled a multitude of specific proposals for government support of broadband infrastructure .

the house and senate approved the conference report on h.r .

1 ( h.rept .

111-16 ) on february 13 , 2009 .

on february 17 , 2009 , president obama signed p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) .

broadband provisions of the arra provided a total of $7.2 billion , primarily for broadband grants .

the total consists of $4.7 billion to ntia / doc for a newly established broadband technology opportunities program ( btop ) and $2.5 billion to rus / usda broadband grant , loan , and loan / grant combination programs .

arra broadband programs encompass three distinct programs or activities: ( 1 ) grants , loans , and loan / grant combinations to expand broadband services and infrastructure ( ntia and rus ) ; ( 2 ) the state broadband data and development grant program ( ntia ) ; and ( 3 ) development of a national broadband plan ( fcc ) .

"broadband usa," the official web portal to apply for arra broadband funding , is located at http: / / broadbandusa.sc.egov.usda.gov / .

agency websites tracking the latest arra broadband program developments are located at ntia , rus , and the fcc .

the broadband technology opportunities program ( btop ) is newly authorized and established at ntia , while the broadband initiatives program ( bip ) significantly expands the scope and size of rus broadband loan and grant programs .

the arra gives ntia and rus considerable flexibility to implement the btop and bip .

according to the conference report: the conferees intend that the ntia has discretion in selecting the grant recipients that will best achieve the broad objectives of the program .

the conferees also intend that the ntia select grant recipients that it judges will best meet the broadband access needs of the area to be served , whether by a wireless provider , a wireline provider , or any provider offering to construct last - mile , middle - mile , or long haul facilities .

implementation decisions made by ntia and rus have a significant impact on how the program is shaped and targeted , and the extent to which the program meets the goals and purposes set forth by the arra .

on march 12 , 2009 , ntia and rus released a joint request for information ( rfi ) and notice of public meetings designed to gather public input into many of the implementation decisions which the agencies make as they develop rules and regulations for the program .

a series of public meetings were held in march 2009 .

the rfi solicited public comments from all interested parties on the following topics: the purposes of the btop program ; the role of the states ; eligible grant recipients ; the establishment of selection criteria for grant awards ; grant mechanics ; grants for expanding public computer center capacity ; grants for innovative programs to encourage sustainable adoption of broadband service ; broadband mapping ; financial contributions by grant applicants ; timely completion of proposals ; coordination between btop and the rus grant program ; how terms set out in relevant sections of the arra should be defined ; how the success of the btop program should be measured ; any other issues ntia should consider in creating the btop ; the most effective ways rus could offer broadband funds ; how rus and ntia can best align their activities ; how rus can evaluate whether a particular level of broadband access and service is needed to facilitate economic development ; how rus should consider priorities set out in the arra in selecting applications ; and what benchmarks should be used to determine the success of rus arra broadband activities .

below is a discussion of selected issues that were ultimately addressed in the first nofa that was released on july 1 , 2009 , and subsequently in the second nofa released on january 15 , 2010 .

the broadband programs in the arra , funded at $7.2 billion , are unprecedented in scope and scale compared with previously existing federal broadband assistance programs .

policy decisions made by ntia , rus , and the fcc could have major impacts on the implementation of the program and the extent to which it meets the goals set by congress for short - term job creation and long - term improvement of the nation's broadband infrastructure .

the arra broadband provisions are only one component in the nation's overall broadband strategy .

among issues which may be addressed as part of a national broadband strategy ( likely to be formulated by congress , the administration and the fcc's national broadband plan ) are universal service fund reform , spectrum policies to spur roll - out of wireless broadband services , and others .

as the 112 th congress continues to monitor broadband stimulus programs , while considering various additional options for encouraging broadband deployment and adoption , a key issue is how to strike a balance between providing federal assistance for unserved and underserved areas where the private sector may not be providing acceptable levels of broadband service , while at the same time minimizing any deleterious effects that government intervention in the marketplace may have on competition and private sector investment .

