the united states consumes about 186 billion gallons of light - duty road motor transportation fuel annually , most in the form of petroleum - based fuel ( i.e. , gasoline and diesel ) .

however , biofuels are a small , yet growing , component of u.s. fuel consumption , accounting for an estimated 10 billion gallons in 2008 , or 5% of total light - duty road motor transportation use by volume .

ethanol and biodiesel are the most common agriculture - based biofuels .

ethanol accounted for about 92% of agriculture - based biofuels consumption in 2008 , and biodiesel for 8% , on an energy - equivalent basis .

together with imports , u.s. ethanol consumption was 6.7 billion gallons in 2007 and 8.9 billion gallons in 2008 .

although a small volume compared with total liquid fuel consumption , it nevertheless displaced roughly 88 million barrels of oil in 2007 and 125 million barrels in 2008 , compared with oil imports of about 3.7 billion barrels .

this report focuses on "first generation" biofuels — that is , those currently in commercial production ( corn - starch ethanol and foreign - produced sugar cane ethanol ) .

"second generation" biofuels , primarily cellulosic biofuels , are not yet produced on a commercial scale in the united states .

historically , fossil - fuel - based energy has generally been less expensive to produce and use than energy from renewable sources .

however , since the late 1970s , u.s. policymakers at both the federal and state levels have enacted a variety of incentives , regulations , and programs to encourage the production and use of agriculture - based energy .

these programs have proven critical to the economic success of rural renewable energy production .

the benefits to rural economies and to the environment are not always clear and come with costs , leading to a lively debate between proponents and critics of government subsidies that underwrite agriculture - based renewable energy production .

proponents of government support for agriculture - based biofuels have cited national energy security , environmental benefits ( such as reductions in greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions to moderate climate change rates ) , and higher domestic demand for u.s. - produced farm products as viable justifications .

in addition , proponents argue that rural , agriculture - based energy production can enhance rural incomes and employment opportunities , while expanding the value added to u.s. agricultural commodities .

in contrast , petroleum industry critics of biofuels subsidies argue that technological advances in seismography , drilling , and extraction continue to expand the fossil - fuel resource base , which has traditionally been cheaper and more accessible than biofuels supplies .

other critics argue that current biofuels production strategies can only be economically competitive with existing fossil fuels in the absence of subsidies if significant improvements in existing technologies are made or new technologies are developed .

until such technological breakthroughs are achieved , critics contend that the subsidies distort energy market incentives and divert research funds from the development of other potential renewable energy sources , such as wind , solar , or geothermal , that offer potentially cleaner , more bountiful alternatives .

still others question the rationale behind policies that promote biofuels for energy security .

these critics question whether the united states could ever produce sufficient feedstock of either starches , sugars , or vegetable oils to permit biofuels production to meaningfully offset petroleum imports .

finally , there are those who argue that the focus on development of alternative energy sources undermines efforts to conserve and reduce the nations energy dependence .

the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) is the most significant government intervention in the ethanol industry .

the rfs mandates that increasing volumes of renewable fuels be blended with conventional fuels through 2022 .

in 2009 , 11.1 billion gallons of biofuels must be used , of which 10.5 billion gallons may be corn ethanol .

the rfs is discussed in detail below .

this report examines the role of government intervention and economic , trade , and environmental issues related to ethanol that are likely to be discussed in the 111 th congress .

ethanol will likely be central to discussions of renewable fuel issues during the 111 th congress .

this report's discussion of ethanol presupposes the continued dominance of the internal combustion engine and the current infrastructure for petroleum fuel extraction and refining and biofuels feedstock production and refining — as opposed to the major near - term market penetration of alternatives such as plug - in - electric automobiles .

the following highlights major topics of potential legislative interest that are discussed in this report .

u.s. ethanol production in 2008 exceeded 9.2 billion gallons per year ( bgpy ) , 42% above 2007 , following rapid increases during the past decade .

production in 2007 reached 6.5 bgpy , a 33% advance from 2006 ( see figure 1 ) .

production in 1998 was only 1.4 bgpy .

the united states also imports ethanol , increasing the supply by about 400 to 700 million gallons per year ( mgpy ) .

total supply in 2007 was 6.9 bgpy and 9.8 bgpy in 2008 .

since 2005 , the united states has surpassed brazil as the worlds leading producer of ethanol .

several events contributed to the historical growth of u.s. ethanol production: the energy crises of the early and late 1970s ; a partial exemption from the motor fuels excise tax ( legislated as part of the energy tax act of 1978 ) ; ethanols emergence as a gasoline oxygenate ; and provisions of the clean air act amendments of 1990 that favored oxygenate blending with gasoline .

ethanol production is projected to continue growing rapidly through at least 2015 on the strength of both the extension of existing government incentives and the possible addition of new ones .

these include the per - gallon blender's tax credit of $0.45 , the conventional biofuels rfs of 10.5 bgpy rising to 15 bgpy by 2015 , and a $0.54 per gallon tariff on most imported ethanol .

the economics underlying ethanol production include decisions concerning capital investment , plant location ( relative to feedstock supplies , population centers , and by - product markets ) , production technology , and product marketing and distribution , as well as federal and state production incentives and usage mandates .

demand for ethanol is dependent on regulatory mandates , its price relative to gasoline , and , until 2006 , its use as an oxygenate .

profitability for an ethanol refiner depends primarily on the cost of the main input , corn , relative to the value of ethanol ( adjusted for any applicable tax credits ) , and the value of co - products produced .

co - products are an important economic consideration for ethanol producers .

for each gallon of ethanol produced using the dry mill process , an average of 6.7 pounds of dried distillers grains ( ddg ) ( at 10% moisture ) is produced .

for every gallon of ethanol produced in a dry mill plant , about $0.25 of distillers dried grains and $0.006 of co 2 can be sold .

an examination of energy efficiency can help determine whether ethanol provides an improvement over gasoline or other fuels .

does it take more fossil fuel to produce a gallon of ethanol than the energy available when that gallon of ethanol is consumed ? .

the net energy balance ( neb ) of a fuel is a useful means of comparing different fuels for public policy purposes .

the neb is expressed as a ratio of the energy produced from a production process relative to the energy used in that production process .

an output / input ratio of 1.0 implies that energy output equals energy input .

the critical factors underlying ethanol's energy efficiency include ( 1 ) corn yields per acre ( higher yields for a given level of inputs improves ethanol's energy efficiency ) ; ( 2 ) the energy efficiency of corn production , including the energy embodied in inputs such as fuels , fertilizers , pesticides , seed corn , and cultivation practices ; ( 3 ) the energy efficiency of the corn - to - ethanol production process: clean burning natural gas is the primary processing fuel for most ethanol plants , but several plants ( including an increasing number of new plants ) use coal ; and ( 4 ) the energy value of corn by - products , which act as an offset by substituting for the energy needed to produce market counterparts .

over the past decade , technical improvements in the production of agricultural inputs ( particularly nitrogen fertilizer ) and ethanol , coupled with higher corn yields per acre and stable or lower input needs , appear to have raised ethanol's neb .

about 82% of the corn used for ethanol is processed by more efficient dry milling ( a grinding process ) and about 18% is processed by wet milling plants .

all new plants under construction or coming online are expected to dry mill corn into ethanol: thus the dry milling share will continue to rise for the foreseeable future .

a 2007 report by the national renewable energy laboratory ( nrel ) summarized recent reports on the neb for corn ethanol .

results varied widely , but most reports using similar assumptions found the neb for corn ethanol to be positive .

in 2004 , usda reported that , assuming best production practices and state of the art processing technology , the neb for corn ethanol ( based on 2001 data ) was a positive 1.67 — that is , 67% more energy was returned from a gallon of ethanol than was used in its production .

other researchers have found much lower neb values under less optimistic assumptions , leading to some dispute over corn - to - ethanol's representative neb .

a 2006 review of several major corn - to - ethanol neb analyses found that , when co - products are properly accounted for , the corn - to - ethanol process has a positive neb that is improving with changing technology .

this result was confirmed by another comprehensive study that found an neb of 1.25 for corn ethanol .

however , these studies clearly imply that inefficient processes for producing corn ( eg , excessive reliance on chemicals and fertilizer or bad tillage practices ) or for processing ethanol ( eg , coal - based processing ) , or extensive trucking of either the feedstock or the finished ethanol long distances to plant or consumer , can result in an neb significantly less than 1.0 .

in other words , not all ethanol production processes have a positive energy balance .

a few studies have concluded that corn ethanol does not have a positive neb ( that is , that it takes more fossil energy to produce a gallon of ethanol than it contains ) .

however , these studies were distinguished by much higher energy inputs in the agriculture , transport , refining , and distribution components of the ethanol manufacturing process than other studies .

lifecycle greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions are the aggregate quantity of ghg emissions ( including direct emissions and significant indirect emissions such as emissions from land use changes ) accounting for all stages of fuel and feedstock production and distribution , from feedstock generation or extraction through the distribution , delivery , and use of the finished fuel to the ultimate consumer .

many link ghg emissions to global climate change , so the relative emissions from different types of fuels are of great interest .

although the use of ethanol has been touted by proponents as reducing ghg emissions compared with conventional fuels , some contend that the benefits are nonexistent or minimal .

under the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa p.l .

110-140 , section 202 ) , ghg emissions reductions must be calculated by the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) using a methodology yet to be determined .

estimates for ghg reductions from ethanol vary widely depending on the methodology used .

as noted above , provisions in the eisa require the reduction of lifecycle emissions including "direct emissions and significant indirect emissions such as those from land use changes. .

for example , some studies have concluded that , if ethanol production displaces another crop that is then grown on newly cleared forest land ( such as a rainforest in brazil ) , the resulting ghg emissions could be substantial , and if high enough , could render the fuel ineligible under the rfs .

different methodologies will allot varying weights to these impacts and hence benefit different stakeholders .

epa is required to establish rules defining the methodology for measuring lifecycle ghg emissions under the rfs .

section 202 of eisa required epa to develop revised rfs regulations no later than one year after enactment ( december 19 , 2008 ) .

this deadline has passed , and a proposed rule is expected to be issued soon , followed by a comment period .

these rules will likely be the subject of intense debate because they will determine whether a fuel is eligible for the rfs .

congress granted wide latitude to epa in drafting the rules for calculating lifecycle ghg emissions .

depending on the outcome of epa's rulemaking , congress might revisit this issue .

most studies show a 10% to 20% reduction in ghg emissions for corn ethanol compared with gasoline .

estimates vary based on the system boundaries used , cultivation practices ( e.g .

minimum as opposed to normal tillage ) used to grow the corn , and the fuel used to process the corn into ethanol ( eg , natural gas versus coal ) .

these studies do not take into account indirect ghg emissions due to land use changes .

one controversial study ( based on direct and indirect lifecycle ghg emissions ) comparing vehicles powered by various sources claimed more health and environmental harm from e85 ethanol - powered vehicles than from battery - electric - powered vehicles ( from all alternative sources of electricity generation including coal with carbon sequestration ) .

eisa requires that corn ethanol produced in facilities that commence construction after enactment ( december 2007 ) must achieve at least a 20% reduction in lifecycle ghg emissions compared with gasoline .

this provision applies to roughly 4 billion gallons of capacity out of 13.7 billion gallons of current and under - construction plants .

enough grandfathered capacity currently exists to nearly fulfill the 15 billion gallon maximum ethanol mandate that becomes effective in 2015 under the rfs .

eisa also enables epa to reduce the ghg reduction requirements if it is determined that "generally such reduction is not commercially feasible for fuels made using a variety of feedstocks , technologies , and processes to meet the applicable reduction. .

ethanol industry proponents are calling for ghg emissions to be calculated using only significant indirect factors and to exclude international land - use effects until epa develops "objective and peer reviewed methodology" for their calculation .

distribution and absorption constraints may hinder the utilization of ethanol .

as the rfs progresses , greater volumes of advanced biofuels ( i.e. , cellulosic or non - corn - starch ethanol , biodiesel , or imported sugar ethanol ) would need to be used to fulfill the rising advanced biofuels mandate .

currently the infrastructure required to ship this volume of ethanol and the vehicles to consume it do not exist .

the federal government provides incentives and support for the ethanol industry though tax credits , research and development , grants and loan guarantees for plant construction , import tariffs , and perhaps most important , the rfs usage mandate , which was discussed above .

historically , federal subsidies have played an important role in encouraging investment in the u.s. ethanol industry .

the energy tax act of 1978 first established a partial exemption for ethanol fuel from federal fuel excise taxes .

the highway trust fund , funded by gasoline excise tax receipts , was reduced by the amount of the exemption so that increased ethanol use resulted in reduced funding for state transportation programs and highway projects .

in addition , dealers sometimes purchased exempted gasoline and then failed to blend it with ethanol , even though they paid the reduced excise tax .

in 2005 , a volumetric ethanol excise tax credit , paid out of the general fund , replaced the partial tax exemption and eliminated these problems .

the credit has no impact on the highway trust fund and is based on the volume of ethanol in the blended fuel , reducing the opportunities for fraud .

a discussion of this credit and other subsidies follows .

for more information on biofuels incentives , see crs report rl33572 , biofuels incentives: a summary of federal programs , by [author name scrubbed] .

the blender's tax credit , or volumetric ethanol excise tax credit , is an income tax credit based on the volume of ethanol blended with gasoline for sale or use .

for each gallon of ethanol blended , an income tax credit of $0.45 per gallon is available .

the credit was established by section 301 of the american jobs creation act of 2004 ( p.l .

108-357 ) .

the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) extended the credit through 2010 and reduced it from $0.51 per gallon to $0.45 per gallon beginning the first calendar year following calendar - year production exceeding 7.5 billion gallons .

since 2008 production exceeded this threshold , the tax credit reduction became effective in january 2009 .

credits under this program are estimated at $5 billion in 2008 .

the energy improvement and extension act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-343 , division b , section 203 ) limits the blender's credit to fuels that are to be consumed in the united states .

the credit is administered by the internal revenue service .

a small producer income tax credit ( 26 u.s.c .

40 ) of $0.10 per gallon for the first 15 million gallons of production is available to ethanol producers whose total output does not exceed 60 million gallons of ethanol per year .

the credit applies to the first 15 million gallons of a refiner's output .

based on the number of refiners with less than 60 million gallons output in 2008 , credits under this program applied to approximately 1.6 billion gallons in 2008 .

the small producers credit terminates on december 31 , 2010 .

this credit was established by the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-508 ) and is administered by the internal revenue service .

the alternative fuel infrastructure tax credit is available for the cost of installing alternative fueling equipment placed into service after december 31 , 2005 .

although not a credit for biofuels per se , it applies to retail pumps and other equipment used for e85 ethanol .

a maximum credit of 30% of the cost , not to exceed $30,000 , is available for equipment placed into service before january 1 , 2009 .

the economic stimulus package ( the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , p.l .

111-5 ) provides a temporary increase in the credit to 50% of the cost for equipment placed into service on or after december 31 , 2008 , and before january 1 , 2011 , not to exceed $50,000 .

fueling station owners who install qualified equipment at multiple sites are allowed to use the credit toward each location .

consumers who purchase residential fueling equipment may receive a tax credit of up to $1,000 , which increases to $2,000 for equipment placed into service after january 1 , 2009 , and before january 1 , 2011 .

the alternative fuel infrastructure tax credit is administered by the internal revenue service .

a $0.54 per gallon most - favored - nation tariff on most imported ethanol was extended through december 31 , 2010 , by a provision in the 2008 farm bill .

caribbean basin initiative countries are exempt from the ethanol duty up to a volume equal to 7% of total u.s. consumption .

imports of ethanol during recent years have been approximately 500 million gallons .

the tariff is administered by u.s. customs and border protection .

the business and industry ( b&i ) guaranteed loan program is a long - standing program authorized by section 310b of the consolidated farm and rural development act of 1972 ( p.l .

92-385 ) and administered by usda rural development .

the program is intended to improve , develop , or finance business , industry , and employment in rural areas .

biofuel projects , such as ethanol refineries , have frequently utilized the b&i program .

the percentage of guarantee , up to the maximum allowed , is to be negotiated between the lender and usda .

the guaranteed principal is limited to 80% for loans of $5 million or less , 70% for loans between $5 and $10 million , and 60% for loans exceeding $10 million .

a loan is limited to a maximum guarantee of $10 million .

an exception to this limit may be granted for loans of up to $25 million under certain circumstances .

fy2009 appropriations for the business and industry guaranteed loan program are $43 million , to support $993.0 million in loan authorizations — unchanged from fy2008 .

the repowering assistance program provides grants to biorefineries that use or convert to renewable biomass to reduce or eliminate fossil fuel use .

the program is authorized by the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) and is available to all refineries in existence at the date of enactment .

the program provides mandatory funding of $35 million for fy2009 that will remain available until the funds are exhausted .

the farm bill also authorizes additional funding of $15 million per year , from fy2009 through fy2012 , subject to appropriations .

no appropriations were authorized for fy2009 .

rules for implementation of the repowering assistance program are currently being developed by usda .

