natural gas markets in north america had a tumultuous year in 2008 .

this contrasted with the relative stability of 2007 .

in early 2008 , the market tightened and prices moved up .

in the summer , supply area spot prices went much higher than in the past , then decreased through the rest of the year to end lower than at the start of the year .

this report examines current conditions and trends in the u.s. natural gas markets .

key market elements examined include prices , consumption , production , imports , and infrastructure .

expectations about the future , as reflected in recent official forecasts , are also incorporated here .

natural gas remains an important and environmentally attractive energy source for the united states and supplied approximately 24% of total u.s. energy in 2008 .

domestic supply has recently increased significantly .

new developments in alaska increase the likelihood that a pipeline from the north slope will proceed , although uncertainty remains regarding this undertaking .

the natural gas industry continues to attract capital for new pipeline and storage infrastructure to link shifting loads and supply sources .

in 2008 , liquefied natural gas ( lng ) imports decreased 54% from the record levels of 2007 , decreasing already low utilization factors at import facilities .

the federal energy regulatory commission ( ferc ) approved two more major import terminals in 2008 .

given the generally adequate functioning of natural gas markets , congressional attention may address development of new supply sources ( such as deep shale gas ) , unexpected price volatility or behavior , or import and other supply issues .

in the longer term , industry pressure for increased access to public lands for exploration and production may continue as a policy concern .

this report reviews key factors likely to affect market outcomes .

these factors include weather , the economy , oil prices , and infrastructure development .

table a - 1 to table a - 6 ( in appendix a ) present selected highlight statistics that illustrate current market status .

briefly , important developments in natural gas markets during 2008 include the following: domestic natural gas production increased to 20.5 trillion cubic feet , the most since 1974 .

hurricanes gustav and ike reduced gulf of mexico production but did not affect market prices significantly .

there was an unusual price pattern in the first half of 2008 , with citygate ( delivered ) prices lower than henry hub spot prices .

citygate prices have seldom exceeded henry hub prices .

the natural gas spot price at henry hub peaked on july 3 , 2008 , at $13.32 per million btu and declined to under $6 by end of year .

during the 2007-2008 heating season ( october to march ) , average wellhead prices increased more than 30% , according to the u.s. energy information administration ( eia ) estimates .

natural gas for power has reduced seasonal variation in use because gas - for - power peaks in summer , versus the total natural gas use peak in winter .

the power generation sector used more natural gas than any other sector in 2008 and 2007 .

storage levels towards the end of the 2007-2008 heating season dropped below five year averages .

in the first storage report after the 2007-2008 heating season , working gas storage was at 1,234 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) – the lowest level since april 30 , 2004 .

however , as of december 2008 , working gas storage was at 2,840 bcf .

lng imports in 2008 dropped 54% from the 2007 record level of 77.1 billion cubic feet .

the future outlook is uncertain .

ferc approved 2 import facilities in 2008 , with an import capacity increase of 2 billion cubic feet per day .

natural gas infrastructure development continued to advance , with more pipeline and storage projects successfully completed in 2007 and more underway in 2008 .

industrial gas use had some growth in 2008 , continuing increases since 2006 .

unlike the global oil market , natural gas markets remain generally regional , with global trade in lng growing .

for the most part , north america has a continent - wide market that is integrated through a pipeline network that connects the lower - 48 states , the most populous provinces of canada , and parts of mexico .

prices throughout this integrated market are influenced by demand ( which may be influenced by weather , economic conditions , alternative fuel prices , and other factors ) , supply , and the capacity available to link supply sources and demand loads ( transmission and distribution systems ) .

the u.s. natural gas market is the major component of the north american natural gas market .

it accounts for about 81% of north american consumption and about 70% of north american supply .

the key price point in north america is henry hub .

henry hub is a major pipeline hub near erath , louisiana , that is used as the designated pricing and delivery point for the new york mercantile exchange ( nymex ) gas futures contracts and other transactions .

the price difference between other locations and henry hub is called the "basis differential. .

when there is spare capacity available to move natural gas from henry hub , or the gulf of mexico region in general , to the relevant price point area , the basis differential tends to be low , approximating the costs of fuel used to move the gas to the location .

when capacity availability is tight , basis differentials can grow because the driving force can become the value of the natural gas at the delivery point , rather than the cost of getting the natural gas to that point .

natural gas prices also incorporate costs for distributing the gas from the wholesale marketplace to retail customers .

these rates are generally determined by state regulators and involve both ( 1 ) the approval of costs and rates of return and ( 2 ) the allocation of costs among customer classes ( eg , residential , commercial , industrial firm , industrial interruptible ) .

although the north american natural gas market remains a distinct regional market , it is connecting to a global gas marketplace through international lng trade .

oil prices still affect u.s. natural gas prices and this evolving relationship is discussed later in this report .

the key elements of the market are prices , consumption , and supply .

this section provides highlights from recent market developments relating to these factors .

u.s. natural gas supply comes from domestic production , pipeline imports , imported lng , and net withdrawals from storage .

in a major shift , domestic supplies increased more than 7% between 2007 and 2008 .

total production for 2008 exceeded 20.5 trillion cubic feet , the most since 1974 .

net imports decreased in 2008 .

the dry gas production increased 7.8% to 20,571 billion cubic feet in 2008 , reflecting in part the increase in drilling activity in response to price increases , as indicated in the natural gas rig count .

the u.s. natural gas rig count has trended upward since 2002 .

in 2002 , the average monthly rig count was about 600 .

the count reached 1,606 in september 2008 , before decreasing to 1,366 late in the year .

recent news accounts report that natural gas rigs have declined about 45% since september 2008 , the most rapid decline since 2002 .

in 2008 , u.s. consumers received most of their supply , 91% , from domestic production .

net imports ( pipeline and lng ) decreased over 20% to 2,996 bcf in 2008 .

imports via pipeline from canada decreased 5% .

lng imports in 2008 decreased 54% from 2007 after increasing 32% , to a record level , between 2006 and 2007 .

 ( see table 2 . ) .

in 2008 , available lng supplies were sometimes bid away to european terminals for higher prices .

nevertheless , new u.s. lng infrastructure went into service in 2008 and still more received approvals from ferc .

to compete effectively for supply in the global lng market , natural gas prices at the u.s. delivery points would have to increase to attract lng deliveries .

location of import facilities is an important factor in the value of landed lng .

the united states appears more likely to be receiver - of - last - resort for lng shipments in the near - to - mid term than to outbid europeans , given the recent interruptions in russian supplies .

on the other hand , lack of storage in europe and asia may lead to continued u.s. receipts of lng , even at relatively low prices , because new lng export facilities serving the atlantic basin are expected to reach completion soon .

eia forecasts an increase of less than 20 bcf of lng for 2009 to 369 bcf .

in addition , an lng import facility in eastern canada largely focused on exporting to the united states was originally expected to enter service in 2008 , but remains under construction .

it may enter service in 2009 .

there are several trends under way in natural gas markets of interest to policy makers .

they include: strong lower - 48 onshore production a decrease in seasonal demand swings strong gas - for - power use changing international trade in lng continuing progress in natural gas infrastructure developmen .

given the major economic shock to the energy markets during 2008 , forecasts mean even less today than they usually do .

in its short term energy outlook , eia forecasts a 1% decrease in natural gas use for 2009 , relative to 2008 because of weak economic conditions .

a small increase in residential use will be offset by a larger decrease in commercial , industrial , and electric power demand .

eia forecasts increased u.s. production of less than 1% , primarily because of lower natural gas prices and decreased demands because of the economic downturn .

eia expects lng imports to increase 20% in 2009 , rebounding somewhat from the 42% drop in 2008 .

however , low summer demand in europe could mean the united states will receive more lng than forecast .

eia forecasts average henry hub prices to decrease roughly 35% in 2009 , to $5.62 per mmbtu , due to weak economic conditions , increased u.s. production , and lower demand .

eia's forecast of natural gas prices depends on certain assumptions embedded in the forecast .

these factors have uncertainty associated with them , as discussed next .

natural gas markets in north america continue to function well relative to other energy markets .

consumers and producers managed the tumultuous prices of 2008 without suffering major apparent damage .

this market appears to continue responding appropriately to price signals .

new pipelines and storage facilities have been built where price differentials have indicated need and value for these facilities .

current investment in lng import capacity may prove excessive for the 2008-2009 heating season .

there is the potential , given the higher prices in summer than in the heating season , that retail customers may face prices higher than spot prices because of risk management contracts signed by local gas utilities during the 2008 period of high prices .

weather and the overall economy remain important factors for natural gas demand and price levels .

these factors remain uncertain and beyond human forecasting capability .

appendix a .

selected statistics appendix b .

acronym .

