throughout the nation's history , the governors of the several states have filled most senate vacancies by the appointment of interim or temporary senators , whose terms continued until a special election could be held .

between 1789 and 1913 , when the 17 th amendment was ratified , the constitution's original provisions empowered governors to "make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the legislature , which shall then fill such vacancies. .

the 17 th amendment , which provided for direct election of the senate , also gave states the option of filling senate vacancies by election or by temporary gubernatorial appointment: when vacancies happen in the representation of any state in the senate , the executive authority of such state shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: provided , that the legislature of any state may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct .

gubernatorial appointment to fill senate vacancies has remained the prevailing practice from 1913 until the present day , with the executives of 41 states possessing essentially unrestricted appointment authority , provided the candidate meets constitutional requirements .

of senate appointments that have occurred since 1913 , the vast majority have been filled by temporary appointments , and the practice appears to have aroused little controversy during that 96-year period .

the presidential election of 2008 generated , directly and indirectly , the highest number of senate vacancies associated with a presidential transition in more than 60 years .

the election of incumbent senators as president and vice president , combined with subsequent cabinet appointments , resulted in four senate vacancies , in colorado , delaware , illinois and new york .

an additional vacancy occurred in massachusetts in 2009 and was followed by a highly publicized special election process .

controversies surrounding the replacement process , particularly in illinois , drew scrutiny and criticism of both the particular circumstances , and the temporary appointment process itself , leading to unsuccessful proposals to require all senate vacancies to be filled by special elections .

in contrast with 2008 , although three senate vacancies occurred within a few weeks in late 2012 and early 2013 , they generated little controversy .

this report reviews the constitutional origins of the appointments provision and its incorporation in the 17 th amendment .

it also examines and analyzes contemporary developments , including the disposition of recent vacancies and proposals to eliminate or restrict gubernatorial power to name temporary senators .

two senate vacancies occurred late in the 112 th congress , due to the death of senator daniel k. inouye of hawaii , and the resignation of senator jim demint of south carolina .

two more have occurred to date 113 th congress , due to the resignation of massachusetts senator john f. kerry and the death of new jersey senator frank r. lautenberg .

detailed information on these vacancies follows below in alphabetical order .

the constitutional convention of 1787 addressed the question of senate vacancies not long after it had approved the great , or connecticut , compromise , which settled on equality of state representation in the senate , and representation according to population in the house of representatives .

on july 24 , the delegates appointed five members to serve as the committee of detail ; the committee was charged with assembling all the points decided by that stage of the deliberations , arranging them , and presenting them to the convention for further refinement and discussion .

the committee's report , presented on august 6 , proposed that governors would fill senate vacancies if they occurred when the state legislature was not in session: article 5 , section 1 .

the senate of the united states shall be chosen by the legislatures of the several states .

each legislature shall choose two members .

vacancies may be supplied by the executive until the next meeting of the legislature ( emphasis added ) .

each member shall have one vote .

on august 9 , the delegates turned to article 5 ; edmund randolph of virginia , a member of the committee of detail , explained that the provision was thought ... necessary to prevent inconvenient chasms in the senate .

in some states the legislatures meet but once a year .

as the senate will have more power and consist of a smaller number than the other house , vacancies there will be of more consequence .

the executives might be safely entrusted , he thought , with the appointment for so short a time .

james wilson of pennsylvania countered by asserting that the state legislatures met frequently enough to deal with vacancies , that the measure removed appointment of the senators another step from popular election , and that it violated separation of powers by giving the executive power to appoint a legislator , no matter how brief the period .

oliver ellsworth of connecticut noted that "may" as used in the provision was not necessarily prescriptive , and that "[w]hen the legislative meeting happens to be near , the power will not be exerted. .

a motion to strike out executive appointment was voted down eight states to one , with one divided .

hugh williamson of north carolina then offered an amendment to change the language to read "vacancies shall be supplied by the executive unless other provision shall be made by the legislature," which was also rejected .

the committee on style and arrangement made minor alterations , and inserted the provision in article i , section 3 , paragraph ( clause ) 2 in its september 12 report .

the full convention made final changes and approved the provision on september 17 , and it was incorporated without debate into the constitution in the following form: ... and if vacancies happen by resignation , or otherwise , during the recess of the legislature of any state , the executive thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the legislature , which shall then fill such vacancies .

the appointments provision does not appear to have aroused much interest during the debate on ratification .

a review of available sources , including the federalist and proceedings of the state conventions that ratified the constitution , reveals almost no debate on the question .

for the next 124 years , governors appointed temporary senators according to the constitutional requirement with only minor controversy .

during this long period , 189 senators were appointed by state governors ; 20 of these appointments were contested , but only 8 were "excluded" by the senate .

the primary grounds for these contested appointments appear to have centered on whether vacancies happened during the recess of the legislature .

according to historian george haynes , throughout much of this time , "the senate refused to admit to its membership men who had been appointed by the governors of their several states when the legislature had had the opportunity to fill the vacancies , but had failed to do so by reason of deadlocks. .

aside from this recurring controversy , the appointment of temporary senators seems to have been otherwise unremarkable .

a random survey of various states during the period from 1789 through 1913 identifies an average of 3.3 senatorial appointments per state for the period , with individual totals dependent largely on the length of time the state had been in the union .

for instance , new hampshire , one of the original states , is recorded as having had eight appointed temporary senators during this period , while montana , admitted in 1889 , never had an appointment under the original constitutional provision .

for more than 70 years following ratification of the constitution , there was little interest in changing the original constitutional provisions governing senate elections and vacancies .

although an amendment providing for direct election was introduced as early as 1826 , few others followed , and by 1860 , only nine such proposals had been offered , all but one in the house .

satisfaction with the status quo began to erode , however , after the civil war , and support grew for a constitutional amendment that would provide direct popular election of the senate .

within a year of the 17 th amendment's ratification , two precedents concerning senate special elections and the power of governors to fill vacant seats by appointment were decided .

in 1913 , the governor of maryland issued a writ of special election to fill a senate vacancy .

the election was held , and a senator elected , but the governor had previously appointed a temporary replacement in 1912 , six months before the 17 th amendment was ratified .

the right of the elected senator to supplant the appointed one was challenged on the grounds that the governor had no legal right to issue the writ of election , because neither congress nor the maryland legislature had enacted legislation authorizing the special elections contemplated by the 17 th amendment .

the senate debated the issue , rejected this argument , and seated the elected senator .

in the second case , the governor of alabama sought to appoint an interim senator to fill a vacancy created in 1913 , after the 17 th amendment had been ratified .

the alabama legislature had not yet passed legislation providing for gubernatorial appointments , as provided in clause 2 of the amendment , and the senate declined to seat the appointee on the grounds that the governor could not exercise the appointment power unless so authorized by state law .

the senate historical office maintains records for senators appointed since 1913 , beginning with rienzi m. johnson of texas , although senator johnson's appointment on january 14 , 1913 , technically antedated the 17 th amendment , which was declared to be ratified on may 31 .

at the time of this writing , the senate's records currently identify 193 appointments to the office of u.s .

senator since that time , including the recent appointments of senators schatz , scott , cowan , and chiesa ; this includes 190 individuals , since three persons were appointed to fill senate vacancies twice .

of this figure , 14 appointees have been women: seven of these were the widows of incumbent senators who agreed to serve until a successor could be elected ; two were spouses of the governor who appointed them ; and one was the daughter of the governor who appointed her .

three men were appointed to fill vacancies created by the death of their fathers .

of the 193 appointments , 118 , or 61.1% , sought election , while the remainder served only until the special election .

sixty two , or 52.5% , of those who pursued election were successful , while 56 were defeated , often in the primary election .

the senate data exclude so - called "technical" resignations .

generally considered a separate class , these resignations occurred when a retiring senator resigned after the election of his or her successor , but before the expiration of the term .

the senator - elect would then be appointed to serve out the balance of the term by the state governor , and accrue the benefits of two months extra seniority .

this practice was ended in 1980 when the major parties agreed that senators - elect would no longer be able to derive seniority benefits through appointment as a result of technical resignations .

although complete data are not available , a study of senators appointed to fill vacancies between 1945 and 1979 found an even lower success rate in primary elections .

according to william d. morris and roger h. marz , writing in the political science journal publiu s , 41.7% of appointed senators who sought election in their own right during this period were defeated in the subsequent special primary election .

the electoral fate of appointed senators has long been the subject of investigation and speculation .

scholars have noted that appointed senators who have run for election in their own right have mixed electoral success , at best .

morris and marz concluded that ... appointed senators are a special class , at least insofar as their reception by the voters is concerned.... [they] are only half as likely to be successful in the election process , and more than one - fifth of them do not even win the nomination of their own party.... [t]hough they are constitutionally and statutorially full members of the senate in every formal sense of the body , their low survival rate in their first election suggests the mantle of office protecting "normal" incumbents does not fully cover the appointee .

at present , 45 states continue to provide for temporary appointments by their governors to fill senate vacancies .

four states require a special election to fill senate vacancies , while a fifth requires gubernatorial appointments to be approved by the legislature .

following controversies that arose in connection with appointments to fill senate vacancies in 2008 and 2009 , particularly with respect to the illinois senate vacancy , proposals to eliminate or curtail gubernatorial power to fill senate vacancies by appointment were introduced in a number of state legislatures .

according to the national council of state legislatures ( ncsl ) , bills affecting the governor's appointment authority as provided under the 17 th amendment were introduced in 12 states during 2009 , and 12 more since then .

only connecticut , massachusetts , and rhode island passed legislation revising senate vacancy procedures in their 2009 sessions , however .

two relevant bills were introduced in the connecticut general assembly in 2009 .

house bill hb 5829 was referred to committee and saw no further action , but senate bill sb 913 formed the basis for public law 09-170 , approved by governor m. jodi rell on june 25 , 2009 .

the act amended state law to eliminate gubernatorial authority to appoint temporary senators in most circumstances and to require a special election to fill senate vacancies .

if , however , the vacancy occurs after the municipal election in the year preceding the last year in the term of a senator , or after the municipal election in the last year of the term of a senator , then the governor nominates a candidate to fill the vacancy for the balance of the term .

the governor's nomination is subject to approval by a two - thirds vote of both chambers of the legislature .

rhode island in 2009 eliminated the governor's appointment authority , and provided expedited procedures for special elections .

controversies surrounding senate vacancies created directly or indirectly by the 2008 presidential elections 82 led to proposals in the 111 th congress to alter the current arrangements provided by the 17 th amendment .

these proposals fell into two categories , legislative and constitutional .

similar legislative activity did not , however occur in the 112 th congress .

the controversies surrounding appointments to fill senate vacancies that occurred in the context of the 2008 presidential election generated a considerable level of interest , including media analyses and commentaries , and legislative proposals for change on both the federal and state levels .

the death of senator kennedy , the massachusetts legislature's subsequent repeal of the state's "election - only" senate vacancy law , and the vigorously contested special election to succeed the senator , generated even greater public interest , given its prominence in the larger national political arena .

it seems apparent , however , that the substantial levels of interest in the states and at the federal level in the process — as opposed to individual special elections — subsided after 2010 .

for instance , the special election to fill the massachusetts senate vacancy caused by the resignation of senator john kerry generated modest national publicity and does not seem likely to stimulate revived interest in the process .

on the federal level , the question of reforming senate vacancy procedures appears to have been a short - lived phenomenon , at least for the present .

in the 111 th congress , h.r .

899 would have provided expedited special elections to fill senate vacancies , and s.j.res .

7 and h.j.res .

21 would have required that all senate vacancies be filled by special election .

the former faced the hurdles all bills must pass in the legislative process , plus the possibility that its constitutionality might be subject to challenge .

the latter two measures , as with all proposed constitutional amendments , faced the considerable obstacles to passage and ratification deliberately embedded in the constitution by the founders .

none of the three passed beyond the stage of investigation in committee .

