historically , transportation policy battle lines have often formed along regional rather than partisan alignments .

the regional character of transportation policy is evident in the debate over the need for an equitable distribution of federal highway aid among the states .

since 1982 , congress has included legislative provisions in every surface transportation reauthorization act to address these perceived funding distribution concerns through a variety of rate - of - return guarantee provisions .

for many years , some states ( mostly southern as well as some mid - western and certain fast growing western states ) have complained that they receive significantly less federal highway aid than their highway users pay in federal highway taxes to the highway account of the highway trust fund ( htf ) .

these states , referred to as donor states , argue that they are not getting their perceived fair share of federal - aid highway spending and have pressed for legislative remedies that would assure them a higher rate - of - return on their tax payments .

donee states , states that receive more federal highway aid than they pay in federal highway taxes , have not opposed equity provisions per se in recent years but have opposed any reduction in their own existing percent shares of total federal highway aid .

since the 1970s much of the debate has been data driven .

the data used to designate states as either donor or donee have been drawn from table fe - 221 of the federal highway administration's ( fhwa ) annual highway statistics publication , which estimates states' ratios of contributions to the htf to the federal highway funding that is made available to them each fiscal year .

data from the most recent ( fy2007 ) table fe - 221 is reproduced in table 1 of this report .

the current authorization , under the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) , expires september 30 , 2009 .

proposals for reauthorization are expected during the first session of the 111 th congress .

for an overview of reauthorization issues see crs report r40053 , surface transportation program reauthorization issues for the 111th congress .

following a background and overview discussion , this report provides a brief history of the donor - donee issue and its origins .

it also describes the existing programmatic rate - of - return guarantee mechanism , the equity bonus ( eb ) program .

the report then discusses issues related to the eb program and possible modifications that may be considered as part of the reauthorization debate .

finally , the report reviews a number of overarching issues related to the donor - donee state debate that could be of interest to congress during the upcoming reauthorization of safetea .

a number of characteristics of the federal - aid highway program ( fahp ) need to be kept in mind in a discussion of the donor - donee question .

first , the federal monies for highway project spending are not provided to states up front .

rather , when amounts are "distributed" to the states , it is only a notification of the availability of federal funds .

once a project is approved and the work is started , the states may submit vouchers to the fhwa for reimbursement for the project's costs as , or after , they are incurred .

second , the fahp is an umbrella term for nearly all the highway programs administered by the federal highway administration ( fhwa ) .

most of these programs can be described as being either formula ( apportioned ) programs , which constitute the vast majority of program funding , or discretionary ( allocated ) programs .

the formula programs apportion funds to the state departments of transportation ( state dots ) based on formulas set forth in legislation .

the discretionary programs are programs nominally under the control of the fhwa that were designed to provide funds to projects chosen through competition with other projects .

in recent years , however , most of the discretionary program funding has been earmarked by congress .

the distinction between formula and discretionary programs becomes especially significant in the process of creating equity programs , such as the current equity bonus program ( eb ) , that could make states' federal spending rates - of - return on their federal highway taxes more uniform .

it is difficult to conceive of how discretionary programs could be constructed to guarantee a designated percent return to states on their payments to the htf and still remain discretionary .

the formula programs were originally created , at least in part , to fulfill perceived policy needs .

some highway needs , such as roads on federal lands , border crossing infrastructure , trade corridors , and interstate system maintenance , have inherently federal aspects that would likely not be fully addressed if the federal - aid highway programs were predicated on a return to all states .

even advocates of devolving the fahp to the states have acknowledged some federal needs .

in addition , donor states themselves have in the past recognized the need for some states to get a larger than normal share of federal - aid funds .

during the debate that preceded passage of the intermodal surface transportation act of 1991 ( istea ; p.l .

102-240 ) , for example , donor states agreed that large sparsely populated states and some small states ( such as rhode island , vermont , and delaware ) should receive larger shares .

authorizers also thought that the sparsely populated "pass - though" states had insufficient state resources to build and maintain their parts of the national highway network , so they were given larger shares .

to deal with these problems in a way that retains these programmatic policy goals and at the same time achieves improvement in the uniformity of states' rates - of - return , congress has decided to include some programs in the equity programs ( such as the current eb ) and exclude others .

often referred to as the "scope," the list of programs ( as well as how large a percentage of the overall federal highway aid budget they total ) that are subject to the equity adjustments , has varied since the first equity program was introduced in 1982 .

the major formula programs were always within the scope of the equity guarantee .

which other programs were included changed under the various surface transportation authorization acts .

the scope of the equity program is important for a number of reasons .

first , under a guaranteed share mechanism , the more program dollars left outside the equity program's scope , the more likely that at least some donor states will not reach their minimum percentage return relative to the entire federal - aid highway program .

second , in general , the more inclusive the equity program's scope , the more costly the program .

third , earmarking of programs within the scope generally provides no new dollars to the state receiving the earmarks .

these earmarks simply allow members of congress to set project priorities .

earmarks of programs outside the scope actually provide more money to the state getting the earmark .

scope issues are discussed in detail in the " overarching issues for congress " section , later in this report .

the highway account of the htf is supported by revenue from a combination of a variety of fuel taxes ( 15.44 cents per gallon for gasoline , 21.44 cents per gallon for diesel and kerosene , and a variety of special fuels taxes , at differing rates ) as well as a number of truck taxes including , a heavy tire tax , a truck and trailer sales tax , and a heavy vehicle use tax .

revenues from the fuel taxes are also distributed to the mass transit account ( 2.86 cents per gallon ) and the unrelated leaking underground storage tank trust fund ( 0.1 cents per gallon ) .

all tire , truck and trailer , and heavy vehicle use tax revenues go solely to the highway account .

because the federal taxes on fuel are collected at the first point of distribution ( at the terminal "rack," usually at a refinery or a fuel tank farm ) rather than at the retail level , most of the revenue is collected from a small number of corporations ( often large oil companies or distributors that own fuel farms ) located in a relatively small number of places .

this means that the treasury has no way of knowing how much fuel tax should be attributed to each state .

fhwa has a process to estimate each states share of payments to the highway account .

in simplified form , the process of attributing each state's shares to the highway account is as follows: the treasury department provides the basic national revenue estimates for each kind of tax ( gasoline , diesel , special fuels , and truck - related sales , etc. ) .

the fhwa then examines state fuel tax data to produce estimates of on - highway gallons of fuel taxed in each state ( use is difficult to track as vehicles can gas up in one state and then travel in another ) .

each state's on - highway gallons are divided by national total gallons .

the resulting distribution is a representation of each state's share of national consumption , measured in gallons .

the treasury's estimates of total revenues received from highway users are then multiplied by the derived state shares of gallons to produce each state's estimated payments to the highway account of the htf .

the share of the various truck - related taxes are extrapolated from diesel fuel use in the states .

gathering and compiling the data takes time , usually over a year .

this means that the data underlying the state - by - state federal tax payments data is normally two years old when used to determine attribution .

a number of statistical issues have an impact on the rate - of - return guarantees .

the use of non - current data ( i.e. , revenue estimates from two years prior ) may skew the state donor - donee ratios and lead to conclusions about donor or donee status that are questionable .

also , state - by - state data may not always be completely accurate or up to date .

the economic cycle can also have an impact on revenues and the budgetary process that can lead to years when revenues and spending levels differ significantly from each other: this can have an impact on relative rates - of - return .

as mentioned above , the equity bonus and other equity adjustment proposals attempt to achieve a specified "share" return based on two year old payments data .

distribution equity , however , is almost always judged by table fe - 221 in the annual fhwa highway statistics report , which compares estimated dollars paid and apportionments and allocations received for the same fiscal year .

this statistical disconnect means that even an effective equity program will face criticism when the same year dollar - for - dollar return data are released .

in addition , the impact of proposed revenue changes on states' relative shares of payments to the htf are hard to predict over the life of the reauthorization .

these changes can shift some donor states to donee states , or vice versa , over the years .

the statistical shifts could also influence the calculation of program size under an equity guarantee .

the concern by states that federal spending might benefit other states' infrastructure more than theirs has a long history .

it was one of the formative forces that led to a federal policy of nonparticipation in road building during the century preceding passage of the federal aid road act of 1916 .

in 1808 , secretary of the treasury albert gallatin recommended that the federal government provide $20 million over a ten - year period for a national network of canals and roads .

the plan , however , was never funded .

among the factors that mitigated against the plan was the view by southern states , who generally opposed federal grants for roads and canals , that spending would benefit other regions more than the south .

the new england states , which had relatively good roads , opposed federal funding for roads , because they expected the money would be spent for roads outside new england .

anticipating these regional concerns , of the $20 million recommended in the report , gallatin proposed that only $16.6 million be designated for the network of roads and canals .

the remaining $3.4 million was to provide benefits to those "eastern and perhaps southern states," which are part of the union , but "are less immediately interested in those inland communications," provided for in the plan .

even with this incentive , the plan failed to gain sufficient support to be passed .

this could , however , be thought of as forerunner of the modern minimum guarantees within the context of the donor - donee debate .

the federal government's involvement in road building ebbed to nonparticipation until the 1890s and even then its participation was primarily technical and advisory .

consequently , since there was no federal program , there were no road issues similar to donor - donee issue until after the turn of the twentieth century when the "good roads" movement gained traction and interest groups began to encourage legislation for federal spending on roads .

a forerunner of the modern donor - donee argument emerged during the debate on the federal aid road act of 1916 ( 39 stat .

355 ; hereafter referred to as the 1916 act ) .

the 1916 act established the first federal aid to roads on a programmatic basis .

an opponent of the act , senator lippitt of rhode island , presented a table to his senate colleagues showing the share of highway spending each state would receive out of each $25 million of road aid provided , in comparison to the share of every $25 million in federal income and corporate tax revenues each states citizens paid .

his table indicated that 12 states ( except for california , all in the northeast and upper midwest ) , would receive shares of the road aid that were less than the share that they contributed in taxes .

according to his table , three states: massachusetts , new york , and pennsylvania would together contribute more than 50% of the tax revenue but receive only between 11% and 12% of the road spending .

senator lippitt's table , however , did not forestall passage of the bill .

the highway revenue act of 1956 ( 70 stat .

387 ) established the htf .

the impetus was the construction of the interstate system ( is ) .

because the rate and timing of construction would vary greatly from state - to - state , the construction of the interstate system did not lend itself well to arguments in support of an equal rate of return on highway tax payments .

nothing equivalent to the modern donor - donee debate emerged as a major point of contention during the discussions that preceded the passage of the 1956 act .

the federal - state intergovernmental relations conflicts focused more on issues of state or federal preeminence in highway policy , as well as , state concerns that increases in the federal fuel taxes would have a crowding - out effect on states' ability to raise revenues through their own fuel taxes .

the passage of the 1956 act did , however , eventually have an impact on the evolution of the donor - donee issue , because the htf made it possible to eventually attribute the flows of revenues from states' highway users to the fund .

for the most part , however , although the argument regarding a fair return on tax payments did not disappear entirely after the passage of the 1916 act , it did not surface as a major issue until after the first publication of table fe - 221 in the 1972 edition of the fhwa's annual highway statistics .

the table's publication provided a statistical source that supported concerns about the state "fair share" issue that persist to this day .

table fe - 221 , "comparison of estimated state payments into and receipts from the highway trust fund , and federal - aid apportionments," published for each state , presented in side - by - side format not only the state payments to and receipts from the htf , but also the ratio of aggregate payments to receipts for fiscal year 1957 through june 30 , 1973 .

the receipt of federal aid for each dollar paid to the highway trust fund varied greatly from state to state .

alaska appeared to fare best and north carolina worst at $8.34 and $0.52 , respectively .

during the 1970s , significant construction was still underway on the interstate highway system , and the degree of effort required continued to vary significantly from state to state .

this may have , in the minds of some , provided a reasonable justification for the disparity among state rates - of - return .

by the early 1980s , however , the interstate system was nearing completion .

at the same time , a general perception that u.s. roads and bridges had deteriorated coincided with growing support for increased spending on transportation infrastructure , in part , as an economic stimulus measure .

the surface transportation assistance act of 1982 ( staa ; p.l .

97-424 ) included the first attempt to mitigate the dissatisfaction of donor states by providing that each state would receive a minimum core program allocation of 85% of its estimated highway tax payments to the highway account of the htf ( staa established the mass transit account ) .

between staa and safetea all surface transportation reauthorization bills included equity provision modifications changing the rate - of - return guarantee percentages and scope of the various equity programs .

for a detailed legislative history of these changes , see appendix a .

the persistence of the donor - donee debate in the reauthorization of federal surface transportation programs is a reflection of the differing views and expressed needs of the many stakeholders in federal highway spending policy and the difficulty in addressing these differences .

since 1982 , all reauthorization bills have had some form of equity adjustment designed to even out distribution of funds to the states .

as mentioned earlier , historically this was achieved by providing large amounts of money to all states but relatively more to the donor states .

the current problem of the sufficiency of the htf could make this historical solution less feasible .

a recent forecast by the congressional budget office projected that if spending on highways and highway safety were held at safetea levels , over the next seven years ( fy2010-fy2016 ) , adjusted for inflation , the highway account of the htf would need an additional $64.7 billion ( or about $9 billion per year ) in new tax revenues or general fund transfers to remain solvent .

given the condition of the highway account , as well as the constrained overall budgetary environment , there are two major underlying issues regarding the eb program: whether an equity program the size of the eb can be funded and , if so , where will the funding come from .

if highway user tax revenues are insufficient and trust fund tax increases are considered out of the question , the expected source would be the treasury general fund .

however , injecting significant amounts of general fund monies into the federal - aid highway programs undercuts the basic rationale for a federal highway spending rate - of - return guarantee based on attribution of highway user tax payments by state .

president barack obama's fiscal year 2010 budget outline proposes to make the entire dot budget discretionary for scorekeeping purposes .

the impact of the proposal is uncertain .

in any case , equity guarantees operated prior to passage of tea - 21 which created the so - called firewall protections and funding guarantees , and could continue to do so .

some observers , have expressed concern that that the scorekeeping change would allow appropriators to lower the obligation limitation and replace contract authority with regular appropriations , which could lead to more general fund spending on highways .

although much of the reauthorization debate has focused on the state - by - state estimates of funding flows under the various bills and amendments proposed , there are broad policy implications of the equity guarantee proposals , including the appropriate federal role vis - a - vis the states , program purpose , possible implications for mass transit , as well as a number of other budgetary issues .

the federal - state partnership in surface transportation has been a fundamental element of federal highway policy since the passage of the 1916 act ( 39 stat .

355 ) , although the nature and extent has changed over time .

under the act , funding was apportioned by formula to the state highway departments , which were responsible for the construction and maintenance of the federal aid highways .

the state and federal governments were seen as equal partners and this was , in part , the rationale for the 50% federal match for highway construction projects .

with the passage of the federal aid - highway and federal - aid revenue acts of 1956 ( 70 stat .

374 and 70 stat 387 ) , authorizations for the interstate highway system were greatly increased over a 13 year period .

it also established the federal match for interstate construction at 90% .

the revenue title of the act established the htf and raised the gas and other transportation taxes to support it .

these taxes were to revert back to their original rates in fy1973 , the estimated completion date for the interstate system .

however , although the obligations for the interstate system as a percent of total obligations supported by the trust fund began to decline after 1967 , increasing obligations for non - interstate highway programs more than made up for the difference .

in addition , with the encouragement of the states , as well as construction and other interest groups , the federal match for the major non - interstate programs was increased from 50% to 70% in 1970 , to 75% in 1978 , and to 80% in 1992 .

over time the relative financial commitment for the federal - aid system has shifted away from the states and toward the federal government .

while the federal financial role was increasing , states were pressing for increased flexibility to move their formula apportionments among the programs , or to transit , thereby , significantly increasing state control over their spending choices under the fahp .

the case can be made that by the enactment of safetea , while the federal financial role had increased significantly , through higher spending and increased federal share , state control over spending decisions was also increasing .

in addition , the eb distribution itself , which averaged roughly $8 billion per year during safetea , dilutes the impact of the program apportionment formula factors , which were originally designed , at least in part , to help achieve federal program goals .

these trends , the enhanced federal financial role , increased state authority over spending decisions , as well as calls during the current reauthorization debate for an increased guaranteed rate of return on a wider scope of fahp programs , raises important policy questions .

at what point does the federal role in decision making become so limited that it might make sense to convert the fahp to a revenue - sharing or a block grant program ? .

some would argue that point has already been reached , especially as federal administrative , labor , and environmental requirements do add to most states' project costs .

on the other hand , some would argue that despite state complaints concerning the costs of complying with the federal highway program requirements and donor state displeasure with their rates of return , the existing federal highway programs are still seen by many as serving a national purpose and continue to be very popular with most state dots .

for most years under the last two authorization bills ( tea - 21 and safetea , fy1998-fy2009 ) more htf highway account funding was being spent than was flowing in through revenues .

because of this , on a dollar - in / dollar - out basis , almost all states have become donee states ( i.e .

the excess of spending over revenues has pulled most donor states' ratio to near or above 1.0 ) .

as was mentioned earlier , donor state advocates began to argue against the dollar - in / dollar - out method for determining donor - donee status .

they argued that , instead of using dollars , each state's percentage share of tax payments to the highway account should be compared to the states percentage share of total highway funding distribution ( percentage - in / percentage - out ) .

this method of calculation allows most donor states to continue to argue that they still are not getting their fair share while in dollar terms most have been getting nearly as much or more than they have been paying into the highway account each year .

among the supporters of the percentage - in / percentage - out method are those who argue that inequitable distribution of highway fund is a reason to eliminate the federal highway program and devolve its responsibilities and financing to the states .

some observers within the transportation community argue that the percentage - in / percentage - out statistical method is questionable and are especially critical of applying percentage - in / percentage - out ratios against spending totals to project a dollar figure that a donor state should be receiving , noting that the projection has no connection to the budget process .

also , the case can be made that the percentage - in / percentage - out calculation makes the donor - donee controversy self - perpetuating .

under this calculation here will always be donor states unless the distribution of every cent of federal spending is based on 100% rate - of - return on state payments to the highway account of the htf .

over the first 50 years of the life of the htf significant amounts of money have been transferred from the treasury's general fund to the htf .

although much of the transferred funding reflected federal interest payments on the htf's unexpended balances ( theses transfers ended in 1998 ) , the interest was paid by revenues provided by the general taxpayers , and not directly by highway user fees .

some other funds have been transferred to the htf for a variety of reasons , including the impact of compensating the htf for lower ethanol tax rates .

given the sufficiency problems faced by the htf , general fund support for the fahp ( similar to that which is in place for federal transit administration authorization ) is one of the options likely to be considered .

the use of general funds are problematic for the basic donor - donee argument which is based on return of user fees and taxes paid by highway users .

as was mentioned earlier , the pattern of the flow of revenue from the taxpayers in the states to the general fund is different from and has nothing to do with highway user taxes and fees .

for example , some long - term htf donee states such as new york , massachusetts , and connecticut are donor states when it comes to general fund expenditures .

the larger the general fund contribution to the htf , the harder it is to argue that states should get a return based on their highway users payments to the highway account .

in september 2008 congress approved the appropriation of $8.017 billion of general fund revenues to the highway account of htf ( p.l .

110-318 ) .

this transfer is equal to roughly 20% of fy2009 funding for highways .

within the context of the donor - donee debate , how general fund money is to be credited could become a significant issue .

should general fund money be treated as if it were highway taxes and credited on that basis across all states or should general fund money be treated differently , perhaps being credited according to state shares of general fund revenues ? .

the american recovery and investment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) provided for $27.5 billion in funding from the treasury general fund to be apportioned and distributed through existing federal - aid highway programs .

the version that originally passed the house would have apportioned funds to the states based on their shares of the fy2008 obligation limitation .

this method would have reflected the equity bonus distribution in its totals .

the version that originally passed in the senate would have simply apportioned the stimulus highway funds according to the stp formulas .

as such , the senate bill would not have reflected an equity bonus distribution .

as was mentioned earlier , some have questioned the appropriateness of applying shares based on highway tax payments to the spending of general fund - based stimulus spending .

in the end , p.l .

111-5 split the difference .

after funding a number of set asides , 50% of the remaining funds were to be apportioned according to the house method and 50% according to the senate method .

the surge of general fund money as stimulus funding could also increase the likelihood of a reexamination of the donor - donee calculation methodology .

an issue that may be seen as being a corollary to the federal role issue is whether a high rate of return percentage , such as 95% , coupled with a similarly broad program scope could constrain a federal programmatic response to federal needs as they arise .

some federal programs , such as the federal lands highways programs , are accepted as being federal in nature and not lending themselves to equal distribution across 50 states .

for some programs there is less of a consensus .

as was mentioned earlier , having a 95% or higher guaranteed rate of return and a similar percentage scope would leave little room for targeted federal programs outside the eb .

given the combination of the impact of the eb distribution on apportionments and program flexibility that allows states to flex much of their core program funding among these programs or to transit , the case can be made that programs that are directed toward transportation infrastructure needs that are inherently federal in nature should be outside the scope of the eb .

perhaps an option would be congress to redefine scope in a way that only programs that serve what are clearly federal purposes could be outside the scope of the eb .

these programs could be designated in law as being inherently federal .

any other programs whether formula or discretionary would be retained within the scope of the eb .

the eb debate would then be focused on a more clearly defined concept of scope .

doing this would require a broad consensus among both donor and donee state members of congress .

donor state advocates would probably be concerned that programs defined as being federal in nature could add up over time to the detriment of donor state rates of return .

the issue is whether the need for equity is greater than needs that are inherently federal .

substantial earmarking of federal - aid highway funds is a relatively recent phenomenon .

until the late 1980s , earmarks amounted to about 1% of authorized federal - aid highway spending .

in safetea , almost $22 billion or roughly 11% of the $199.5 billion total contract authority in title i ( the highway construction title ) of the bill was earmarked .

the issue of earmarking within and outside the scope of the eb surfaced quickly as an issue after the passage of safetea .

these safetea earmarks were broadly described as being either "below" or "above the line. .

it is important to keep in mind that the terms above and below the line , described in this report , are not legal or official budget terms and have no formal meaning to the fhwa , but are informal terms that emerged during the surface transportation reauthorization debate .

below the line refers to earmarks in programs that are subject to provisions of the eb program .

these programs are listed in safetea section 1104 ( a ) ( 2 ) .

above the line refers to funded programs and activities that are not listed in section 1104 ( a ) ( 2 ) and therefore not subject to the eb .

the only below the line earmark program in safetea is the high priority project program ( hpp ) .

it is , however , by far the largest of the earmarked programs in the act .

safetea provided almost $15 billion under the hpp .

hpp earmarks allow members of congress to define their project priorities through the authorization process to their state dots .

hpp earmarks , however , do not add money to a state's total below the line funding ( i.e. , the total of core formula funds plus total hpp funds ) .

this seemingly counterintuitive situation occurs because the below the line funding is subject to the eb program .

as has been mentioned earlier , under the eb , funds are distributed across the formula programs under a complex calculation that is designed to assure that all states get a certain minimum share of the below the line funding .

because the total funding under the line is fixed in the authorization bill , this leads to the situation where states that do not get many hpp earmarks tend to receive , in a relative sense , larger distributions from the eb program while states that get a high value of hpp earmarks tend to receive relatively smaller eb distributions ( or no eb distribution ) .

this means that the total amount received by a state under the line tends to be roughly the same whether or not they receive high or low dollar totals of hpp funds .

a further implication of this situation is that the more of a state's total below the line funding is derived from hpp funds the less funding is ultimately available to the state for the federal - aid highway core formula programs , upon which the state dots depend to fulfill their state transportation improvement plans .

in safetea the major earmarked programs above the line are the national corridor infrastructure improvement program ( $1.9 billion ) , projects of national and regional significance ( $1.8 billion ) , and transportation improvements ( $2.5 billion in contrast to the below the line earmarks , these earmarks have no direct impact on the core formula programs' share of the below the line funding and are viewed as providing additional funding to the state dots .

should policymakers decide to allow earmarking in the upcoming reauthorization legislation , what programs and how much funding should be above or below the line could be an issue .

money forgone due to penalties , such as the penalty for transferring highway bridge program funds , that are , at least in theory , imposed prior to distribution of the eb tend to , in effect , be replaced with eb funds .

what the penalty takes away , the eb gives back .

congress could also consider eliminating the counteracting impact of the eb distribution on the fahp penalty provisions perhaps by imposing the penalties after the distribution of the eb funding .

this could affect some states guaranteed percentage share , however .

although the minimum guarantee / equity remedy debate during the current surface transportation reauthorization debate in congress has focused exclusively on a guaranteed rate of return on payments to the highway account , some have argued that a similar guarantee should be applied to payments to the mass transit account of the htf .

the mass transit account is credited with the revenues from 2.86 cents of the 18.4 cents federal fuel tax ( 0.1 cents per gallon of this amount is also directed to the unrelated leaking underground storage trust fund ) .

roughly 80% of the federal transit administration's funding comes from the mass transit account , with the remaining funding provided by treasury general funds .

the distribution of nearly all of these funds is , by formula and by earmark , from the federal government to the individual transit authorities ( i.e. , it differs from the highway programs which are funded through the state dots ) .

from a state perspective , the program set - up tends to favor states that have large cities with existing fixed guideway type transit systems ( heavy rail , light rail , dedicated bus lanes ) .

rural states and states with bus dependent transit tend to get less .

the top five states receiving federal transit funding ( as of fy2007 ) , california , new york , new jersey , illinois , and pennsylvania , received 53% of total transit obligations .

some transit donor states see their tax payments as subsidizing the urbanized states and argue that they have transit needs themselves that are unmet .

they also argue that fta programs unfairly underfund bus - only transit systems in general and that the need for public transportation in rural areas is , in particular , mostly ignored by the current funding distribution .

supporters of the fta programs can make a number of arguments in defense of the uneven geographic distribution of transit funding .

the main argument is one of program national purpose .

under the statement of policies , findings , and purposes in 49 u.s.c .

1501 , the focus is clearly on urban mass transportation with a goal to "efficiently maximize mobility of individuals and goods in and through urbanized areas and minimize transportation - related fuel consumption and air pollution. .

for transit systems to be efficient they need to serve areas of concentrated population .

a mass transit 95% guaranteed rate of return would shift large amounts of funding to less densely populated areas where the number of people served would be low and the costs per passenger mile would be high ( i.e .

would lead to inefficiencies ) .

some would also argue that the support for a transit minimum guarantee is really based on the assumption by states that they could flex a significant portion of their transit funding to highway programs .

transit donee states may argue that a transit guaranteed rate of return would punish the urban areas that have taken the initiative to build , in some cases before significant federal funding was available , transit systems that are in line with federal policy goals of enhancing urban mobility , reducing fuel consumption , and improving air quality .

finally , transit interests argue that the role of cities as economic centers means that urban mobility benefits not just the cities but the nation as a whole .

the transit minimum guarantee debate has not garnered wide - spread support during the current reauthorization cycles but it would not be surprising for some form of transit equity provision to be at issue in the next reauthorization cycle .

the big losers could be california and new york .

interestingly , some states that view themselves as highway donor states are major beneficiaries of the transit program .

for example , should california and new jersey support a donor state position on payments to the highway account of the htf , they could be in the position of having to oppose a transit minimum guarantee or risk a loss of much more transit funding than they gained through the highway program guarantee .

in addition , such a major shift in funding would probably require a major rewriting of the federal transit programs for the programs to make sense as a whole .

it would also overturn what many see as the great compromise of 1982 under which the transit account of the htf was created .

transit dependent states supported an expanded highway program in return .

one approach to the donor - donee controversy that attracted attention during the debate prior to passage of tea - 21 , but that has not yet garnered much interest in the current reauthorization debate , would be to simply devolve most of the federal highway program role to the states .

the transportation empowerment act ( h.r .

1470 and s. 667 , 105 th congress ) , sponsored by former senator connie mack of florida and former representative john kasich of ohio , would have devolved much of the federal highway program role to the states .

only a program for maintaining the interstate system , federal lands highways , national security highways , emergency relief , and a proposed infrastructure special assistance fund would have remained federal .

a four year phase out of 12 cents of the federal gas tax would have corresponded with the declining federal role .

states would have had the option of replacing the declining federal taxes with gas tax increases of their own .

states would then have had the freedom to spend , or not spend , on their own roads and transit systems as they saw fit .

although this proposal garnered some support from advocates of a reduced federal role in transportation , it did not obtain broad support from many governors , state legislatures , or state dots , many of whom were wary of the political implications of pushing large replacement gas tax increases through their state legislatures , and at the same time keeping these funds dedicated to transportation .

despite the failure of devolution proposals to be enacted , some would make the case that the closer the eb guarantee gets to 100% , the more sense devolution to the states makes .

they would argue that as the guaranteed rate of return increases , the fhwa's role becomes more like a tax collector for the states .

the need for and efficiency of the federal government as middleman comes into question .

at this time , however , there appears to be limited interest at the state or federal level for any radical change in the federal role in the highway program .

on the other hand , some argue that , given the nature of the practical politics required to pass surface transportation reauthorization bills , the perceived inequitable nature of the funding distribution relative to payments to the htf is intractable .

from this view , some argue that devolution is the solution to both the rate - of - return inequity in particular and the donor - donee issue as a whole .

appendix a .

legislative history surface transportation assistance act of 1982 ( staa ) staa ( p.l .

94-424 ) authorized a significant increase in funding for the federal - aid highway system for fy1983-fy1986 and included a provision designed to mitigate the dissatisfaction of donor states by providing that each state would receive a minimum allocation ( also known as the minimum guarantee ) from the core fhwa programs .

specifically , the bill ordered the fhwa to allocate among the states sufficient funds to assure that each state's total apportionments from the core highway and safety programs ( interstate highway substitution , primary , secondary , interstate , urban , bridge replacement and rehabilitation , hazard elimination , and rail - highway crossings , and section 203 of the highway safety act of 1973 ) would not be less than 85% of the percentage of estimated tax payments each state paid into the highway account of the htf .

these "equity adjustment" allocations could be obligated to the core highway programs .

surface transportation and uniform relocation assistance act of 1987 ( sturaa ) sturaa ( p.l .

100-17 ) authorized the federal - aid highway program for fy1987-1991 , retaining the 85% minimum allocation , but altering the basis of its calculation .

the act revised the calculation to include the allocated ( sometimes referred to as discretionary ) programs , with the exception of federal lands programs and safety programs .

for fy1987 and fy1988 emergency relief funds and interstate construction discretionary funds were not included in the calculation .

the act continued the minimum allocation provision established by staa .

with the exception of the changes in the treatment of the minimum guarantees , the formulas for allocation of funds under staa and sturaa remained the same .

minor changes were made in the criteria for awarding discretionary program grants .

emergency relief and federal lands highways grants continued to be distributed on a project - by - project and needs basis , respectively .

intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ) istea ( p.l .

102-240 ) reauthorized surface transportation programs , including federal - aid highway programs , for fy1992-fy1997 , making major changes in the overall program structure , program formulas , minimum allocation , and other provisions that could impact the state donor - donee ratios .

to a great extent , the changes were an outgrowth of the fact that the remaining unfinished portions of the interstate system would be completed under istea .

the act also enunciated a broader vision of the mission of federal highway programs to include air quality , alternative transportation , and historic preservation .

istea retained the three formula programs that provided funding for the interstate system ( interstate construction , interstate maintenance , and interstate highway substitution ) as well as the bridge replacement and rehabilitation program .

the other formula programs , such as , the primary system , secondary system , urban system , and urban transportation planning , were replaced by the national highway system program , the surface transportation program , and the congestion mitigation and air quality program .

the distribution criteria for projects under the discretionary programs remained the same except that the interstate construction program ( renamed the interstate discretionary program ) was changed to be at the discretion of the u.s. department of transportation ( usdot ) and the interstate 4r ( for resurfacing , restoring , rehabilitation , and reconstructing lanes on the interstate system ) program funds were now a set - aside within the new national highway system program .

equity adjustment provisions istea included five provisions , with separate funding , designed to assure a more equitable distribution of federal funds to the states .

the 90% guarantees the act raised the minimum allocation to 90% of estimated state contributions to the highway account of the htf ( although narrowing its calculation to the core formula programs , scenic byways , safety belt and motorcycle safety grants ) .

the act also included a new minimum payments guarantee ( of a broader scope than the minimum allocation discussed above ) that assured that each state's apportionments ( for the core formula programs ) for the fiscal year and allocations ( to the discretionary programs ) from the previous year would be at least 90% of its estimated state contributions ( i.e. , calculated from all programs except special projects ) .

donor state bonus for each fiscal year , donor states were identified by comparing projected contributions to the htf with the apportionments to be received that year by each state .

under the donor state bonus , starting with the state with the lowest return , each state was brought up to the level of the state with the next highest level of return .

this was repeated successively for each state until the istea authorized program amount was exhausted .

hold harmless this provision set a specific percentage that each state was to receive from the core formula highway programs plus federal lands highway programs , minimum allocation , donor state bonus , and interstate reimbursement .

each state received an addition to its regular apportionments to raise its total to the set percentage .

reimbursement for interstate segments istea authorized $2 billion for fy1996 and fy1997 to reimburse each state for the costs to them of building segments of the interstate system without federal assistance prior to or during the early days of the interstate construction program .

despite all of the above provisions significant gaps remained among states on their share return on contributions to the htf .

as reauthorization of istea approached , dissatisfaction with the effectiveness of the equity provisions led to challenges to the istea program paradigm .

transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ) the reauthorization debate that preceded passage of tea - 21 ( p.l .

105-178 ) included a wide range of views on the donor - donee state issue and is worth reviewing because all the major underlying arguments that had emerged over time , reemerged during the tea - 21 debate .

significant characteristics of the debate included a greater , primarily regional role and virtually no role for party affiliation .

also in play were different philosophies of the appropriate role of the federal government vis - a - vis the states , differing views of whether the completion of the interstate highway system should trigger a reduction in federal involvement in highway construction ; how national highway needs criteria can fit a return - on - the - tax - dollar view , and the influence of a large increase in gas tax revenue to the htf on program structure .

regional conflict over funding under istea , southern and mid - western states made up most donor states while northeastern , pacific coast , and large sparsely populated western states made up most of the donee states .

in general , donee states were satisfied with the distribution under istea and supported the "istea works" legislation that , in general , adhered to the istea funding formulas .

most of the donor states joined "step - 21," a coalition whose centerpiece proposal was a guarantee that each state receive at least a 95% return on its estimated contribution to the highway account of the htf .

the dominance of regional differences over party affiliation was reflected on the senate committee on environment and public works , where the republican committee leadership supported the donee friendly "istea works" bill while a republican colleague , sponsored the streamlined transportation efficiency program for the 21 st century ( step 21 ) which included the 95 cents on the dollar guarantee , as well as program formula changes supported by donor states .

devolution what most observers considered a more radical approach was the transportation empowerment act , sponsored by senator connie mack of florida and representative john kasich of ohio .

this bill would have devolved much of the federal highway program role to the states .

only a program for maintaining the interstate system and federal lands highways would have remained federal .

a four year phase out of 12 cents of the federal gas tax would have corresponded with the declining federal role .

states would have had the option of replacing the declining federal taxes with gas tax increases of their own .

states would then have had the freedom to spend , or not spend , on their own roads as they saw fit .

although this proposal garnered some support from advocates of a reduced federal role , it did not obtain broad support from many governors , state legislatures , or state departments of transportation , many of whom were wary of the political implications of pushing large replacement gas tax increases through their state legislatures , and at the same time keeping these funds programmed for highways .

tea - 21 equity provision changes the equity changes that followed the debate and were included in tea - 21 were more limited than most would have expected early in the reauthorization debate .

the main reason for this was the large increase ( roughly 40% ) in overall funding levels .

still there were equity provisions that were included in the hope that they would narrow the donor - donee divide .

minimum guarantee the tea - 21 minimum guarantee had three components: guaranteed base share tea - 21 guaranteed each state a percentage share ( set forth in a table in 23 u.s.c .

105 ) of the total program , defined as all the apportioned programs: interstate maintenance program ( im ) , national highway system program ( nhs ) , surface transportation program ( stp ) , highway bridge replacement and rehabilitation program ( hbrrp ) , congestion mitigation and air quality program ( cmaq ) , metropolitan planning , recreational trails program , appalachian development highway system program and minimum guarantee , as well as high priority projects .

minimum 90.5% share on contributions all states were guaranteed at least 90.5% return ( up just 0.5% over istea ) on their share of tax contributions to the highway account of the htf ( based on the most recent year for which the data are available  generally from two fiscal years before ) .

using ohio as an example , of total fy2001 highway account contributions , ohio's percentage share contributions amounted to 3.7578% .

ohio was guaranteed 90.5% of its share of estimated fy2001 contributions and was thus guaranteed a minimum share of 3.4008% of the fy2003 apportionments ( i.e. , the core formula programs ) , plus high priority projects and the minimum guarantee itself .

if the above base share was less than a 90.5% return to a state then the share was adjusted upward until the 90.5% share was reached .

the money to raise shares to 90.5% was provided by "squeezing" down the percentages ( but not the total amounts ) of those states that were above the minimum .

minimum state payment each state was guaranteed that as part of the minimum guarantee it would receive at least $1 million in minimum guarantee funds .

it is important to keep in mind that the tea - 21 minimum guarantee was a compromise provision .

it was constructed in such a way as to give money to all states in the process of bringing the donor states up to the 90.5% minimum guarantee .

each state received the $1 million minimum .

then , the lowest percent share of any state or the district of columbia ( generally the district ) was used to extrapolate the total program funding ( as defined under minimum guarantee ) needed for the district to retain its total program percentage .

for example , using fy2003 , because the district's program level percent share of 0.3860% was lower than the district's percentage of total apportionments ( roughly 0.5% ) , high priority projects , and $1 million guarantee , and because no money could be taken back , the only way to achieve the district's 0.3860 % was to raise the national total .

to achieve that percentage for the district , a total fy2003 program size of $27.76 billion was needed .

the total minimum guarantee program funding needed to achieve this total was over $6 billion .

ironically , the degree of the district's donor status meant more money for all states ( in absolute , not relative terms ) .

minimum guarantee distribution each year , the first $2.8 billion of minimum guarantee funds were administered as stp funds ( see stp discussion below ) except that set - asides for transportation enhancements , safety construction , and certain population - based sub - state allocations did not benefit from this distribution .

any minimum guarantee funds above $2.8 million were distributed to the five core programs: stp , interstate maintenance ( im ) ; highway bridge replacement and rehabilitation program ( hbrrp ) ; national highway system ( nhs ) ; congestion mitigation and air quality improvement ( cmaq ) .

the distributions to the states were based on the ratio of each core program's apportionment to the total apportionment of all five programs for each state .

program formula changes tea - 21 also included formula changes that were perceived as benefitting donor states .

interstate maintenance program tea - 21 reduced the weight given each state's share of total interstate highway system lane miles and total state share of interstate system vehicle miles traveled to 1 / 3 each and created a third weighed category that provided the final 1 / 3 be distributed based on each state's percent share of annual contributions to the htf attributable to commercial vehicles .

this final weighted third was expected to benefit donor states .

surface transportation program stp's apportionment formula under tea - 21 was weighted 35% to estimated state share of tax payments paid into the highway account of the htf .

this also was expected to benefit donor states .

state share of total lane miles of federal - aid highways ( 25% ) and share of total vehicle miles traveled on federal - aid highways ( 40% ) were the other weighted attributes in the stp apportionment formula .

national highway system program tea - 21's nhs apportionment formula was weighted at 30% of a state's share of diesel fuel used on highways .

some observers expected that this would also benefit donor states .

the resolution of the tea - 21 donor - donee debate in the end , what many observers had predicted would be a major battle between donor and donee states was resolved relatively amicably .

this occurred despite the donor states only being able to achieve a 0.5% increase in the minimum guarantee percentage and formula changes , which some predicted would have little impact on donor state returns on the tax revenues these states paid to the highway account of the htf .

some even argued that donor states would have been better off if tea - 21 had retained the istea formulas .

in the case of tea - 21 , what alleviated the concerns of step - 21 and other donor state advocates was the amount of money available during tea - 21's lifetime .

by shifting , in 1997 , revenues generated by the 4.3 cent deficit reduction gas tax to the htf , congress was able to provide large increases in highway funding for all states .

the extra money made the donor - donee debate less urgent to the donor states .

as the tea - 21 authorization neared its expiration ( fy2003 ) , however , the donor - donee state issue resurfaced .

tea - 21 created a so - called "firewall" around the highway account to prevent highway account funds being used for non - highway purposes .

it also required that spending from the highway account approximately equal the revenues flowing into the account on an annualized basis .

to make sure that annual spending and revenues were roughly equal each year , the act provided for revenue aligned budget authority ( raba ) to be distributed proportionally across all states to maintain a balance of spending and revenue flows .

although these changes did not affect the operation of the tea - 21 minimum guarantee they did have an overall impact on the availability of funds to support the minimum guarantee program , which was funded on a "such sums as necessary" basis .

appendix b .

how fhwa calculates the equity bonus apportionmen .

