the nation's budget situation is challenging .

in fiscal year ( fy ) 2008 , the budget deficit reached $455 billion or 3.2% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) , up from $161 billion or 1.2% of gdp in fy2007 .

new deficit projections provide a picture of what the united states faces over the next decade .

in february 2009 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) projected that the deficit in fy2009 will reach more than $1.4 trillion , which includes the deficit impact of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; h.r .

1 , p.l .

111-5 ) .

between fy2010 and fy2019 , cumulative deficits could reach as high as $10 trillion .

cbo projects deficits in each fiscal year of this period .

these deficits are largely a result of federal financial intervention and fiscal stimulus legislation designed to alleviate the credit crunch and to bolster the economy .

current economic conditions have also led to increases in outlays for certain government social programs and declines in revenue collections , leading to further deterioration in the budget balance .

economists generally agree that when an economy is in recession , running deficits by increasing government spending or cutting taxes can stimulate growth .

however , once growth returns , they advise paying down debt .

though the economy is currently in recession and running deficits may be appropriate , the accumulated deficits will increase federal debt held by the public and will generally increase the portion of the budget devoted to future interest payments .

larger deficits today and in the future would add additional pressure to the long - term budget outlook , hampering the ability of congress and the president to address other priorities like healthcare and entitlement reform .

this report will define deficits and will explain the appropriate way to measure them .

it will also describe how current economic conditions and federal financial interventions have increased the deficit over time .

deficits can serve as a powerful instrument of fiscal policy .

differences between revenues and outlays determine whether or not the budget is in surplus or deficit , which often serves as a measure of the federal government's fiscal health .

annual budget deficits or surpluses determine , over time , the level of federal debt and affect the amount of annual interest paid to finance the debt .

occasional deficits , in and of themselves , are not necessarily problematic .

deficit spending allows governments to smooth outlays and taxes to shield taxpayers and program beneficiaries from abrupt economic shocks .

persistent deficits , on the other hand , lead to growing accumulations of federal debt that may lead to higher interest payments , tax increases , or spending cuts .

changes in economic conditions can cause movements in outlays ( spending ) or revenues and can lead to changes in the budgetary outlook .

these can occur simultaneously or as a result of each other .

economic growth can stimulate employment and individual income , generally reducing certain types of spending and increasing revenue levels .

during a recession reductions in consumption and increased reliance on government programs have the opposite effect .

for example , in a strong economy , new jobs are often created .

if the unemployed become employed and earn higher incomes , additional tax revenue would be generated .

in contrast , in a weak economy , people may lose their jobs , which could lower tax revenue and increase government expenditures on programs such as unemployment insurance and food stamps .

economists refer to these changes as automatic stabilizers .

policy changes by the federal government to change spending or revenue levels ( i.e. , through the creation of new programs or through tax cuts ) would also affect the size of the deficit .

the dollar value of the budget deficit ( or surplus ) , however , may give a partial and potentially misleading picture of the government's true fiscal condition .

deficits and debt levels are often measured as a percentage of gdp , rather than in dollar amounts .

measurement of deficits and debt as a percentage of gdp provides adjustments for inflation and relates the size of the deficit or debt to the size of the economy .

the deficit in fy2008 was $455 billion , or 3.2% of gdp , sharply higher than the fy2007 deficit of $162 billion ( 1.2% of gdp ) .

in january 2009 , cbo projected that the deficit would reach nearly $1.2 trillion ( 8.3% of gdp ) in fy2009 , which did not include the effects of the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) .

at the request of speaker of the house nancy pelosi and house budget committee chairman spratt , cbo released three alternative budget scenarios in february 2009 .

under all of the scenarios , cbo projected a deficit of $1.4 trillion in fy2009 , with the majority of the deficit increase from the january to february projections occurring as a result of arra .

cbo also projected the continuation of deficits well into the future .

this budgetary outlook is largely attributed to the effects of the economy as well as the significant federal financial interventions and stimulus legislation already passed by congress .

additional actions may increase the deficit further .

cbo also projects that the recession , probably the longest and deepest since world war ii ( wwii ) , will likely last well into 2009 .

the current condition of the economy will likely result in increases in outlays for mandatory programs , such as food stamps and unemployment benefits , also known as "automatic stabilizers," and increases in the deficit .

revenue collection is also projected to be lower largely due to declines in personal incomes and corporate profits .

the deficit impact of these increases in outlays and decreases in revenues is accounted for in the cbo baseline .

the projected deficit for fy2009 is high relative to historic standards .

the deficit reached its peak in 1943 at 30.3% of gdp .

after wwii , deficits remained relatively low until the mid - 1980s .

in fy1985 , the deficit reached 6.0% of gdp .

if the deficit in fy2009 reaches the projected level , it will likely be the highest deficit as a percentage of gdp since fy1946 .

deficits that exceed growth in the economy are not sustainable in the long - run .

to eventually reduce the deficit would require less spending , increased taxes , faster than average economic growth , or a combination of these things .

over the long - term , entitlement spending , especially as it relates to rising health care costs , is projected to increase rapidly .

the nation's aging population , combined with rising health care costs per beneficiary , seems likely to keep federal health costs rising faster than per capita gdp .

cbo has concluded that "under any plausible scenario , the federal budget is on an unsustainable path," over the long run .

the government accountability office and the office of management and budget reach similar conclusions .

according to cbo projections , keeping future federal outlays at 20% of gdp , approximately its current share , and leaving fiscal policies unchanged would require drastic reductions in all spending other than that for medicare , social security , and medicaid .

a former cbo acting director stated that , "by 2030 ... spending for those programs [medicare , social security , and medicaid] is projected to reach roughly 15 percent of gdp... .

if that increase happened ... , the rest of the budget would have to be cut by more than half" to keep overall spending close to its current level .

the administration indicated similar concerns about the outlook for the budget over the long term in the president's fy2009 budget .

in january 2001 , cbo projected budget surpluses through fy2011 , the entire 10-year projection window .

however , in each fiscal year completed since that time , federal spending has accounted for approximately a fifth of the economy ( as measured by gross domestic product — gdp ) and federal revenues have ranged between just under a sixth and just over a fifth of gdp , resulting in budget deficits .

table a - 1 shows the differences between the 2001 baseline cbo projections and the actual budget balance between fy2001 and fy2008 by attributing the deficit increases to the legislative , economic , and technical categories .

in addition to the direct effect of new legislation on the budget , some determinants of spending and revenues are not directly controlled by congress .

as discussed earlier , changing economic conditions can affect spending and revenue levels through automatic stabilizers as well as shifting the size of the tax base .

after legislative changes and the estimated effects of the economy are accounted for , the remaining difference between the original projection and actual results is classified as a technical change .

as explained previously , these changes occur because cbo's projections of revenues and mandatory spending are also based on other technical assumptions unrelated to the state of the economy , creating differences between the actual results and original assumptions .

some technical changes are the result of legislative changes .

the cost of the legislative changes are ex ante projections of their cost ( as scored by cbo and the joint committee on taxation ) made at the time the policy was enacted .

if policies turned out to be more ( less ) expensive than the official score , this would appear in the table as a negative ( positive ) technical change .

cbo projected an fy2008 budget surplus of $635 billion under the policies in place in january 2001 .

the actual budget deficit was $455 billion , a difference of more than $1 trillion between the projection and the actual outcome .

the fy2008 deficit marked the greatest difference to date between the surplus projections and the actual result .

deficit responses to legislative changes legislative changes have resulted in lower revenues and increased spending because , as expected , policy has changed since cbo made its projection in 2001 .

overall , legislative changes accounted for almost three - quarters of the cumulative shift from surplus to deficit over the past eight years .

the legislative changes that increased the deficit the most were the tax cuts ( the largest of which were p.l .

107-16 and p.l .

108-27 ) , the increase in military and related spending in iraq and afghanistan , and the recent economic stimulus and recovery legislation ( p.l .

110-185 , p.l .

110-289 , and p.l .

110-185 ) .

tax cuts accounted for nearly half of all legislative changes and military spending accounted for about 30% , with the remaining being caused by higher mandatory and non - military discretionary spending ( including the 2008 stimulus ) for the total increase in the deficit between 2001 and 2008 .

comparing legislative changes to the baseline surplus projection made in 2001 demonstrates that , even if there had been no economic downturn or any other projection error , legislative changes alone would still have caused a budget deficit in each year from 2003 to 2008 .

the contribution of legislative changes to deficit has grown each year since 2001 .

because economic and technical changes became smaller , the overall deficit declined between 2004 and 2007 .

the deficit rose in 2008 primarily due to legislative changes , which were responsible for 92% of the increase in the deficit in that year .

these legislative changes helped move federal revenues as a share of gross domestic product ( gdp ) from a 50-year high in 2000 to a 45-year low in 2004 .

the subsequent rise in revenues brought revenues slightly above the 50-year average share of gdp in 2007 .

meanwhile , federal spending as a share of gdp rose from its lowest level in 35 years in 2000 to a level about equal to the 50-year average in 2004 , where it remained in 2007 .

in 2008 , as a share of gdp , revenues fell to their lowest levels since 2005 , while spending reached its highest level since 1994 .

legislation enacted in 2008 , including tarp and investments in other economic recovery programs , are projected to cause increases in the deficit in future fiscal years .

of course , an estimate of how much higher spending contributed to the shift to deficit depends on one's baseline definition of spending under current policy .

because discretionary spending is largely determined on an annual basis and not bound by previous year law , there is no obvious definition of current policy for discretionary spending .

cbo's mandated definition of current policy is that discretionary spending grows at the same rate as inflation .

many analysts have criticized this definition as being too low because it would have consistently under - predicted spending historically .

if a higher rate of spending growth ( i.e. , a rate equal to gdp growth ) was assumed to represent current policy , then cbo's original estimates of future surpluses in 2001 would have been smaller , and higher spending would have subsequently accounted for a smaller proportion of the shift to deficit .

deficit responses to economic conditions economic conditions also affected revenues and spending , contributing to changes in the deficit since cbo's 2001 projection through "automatic stabilizers," higher than expected inflation , and lower than expected interest rates .

these are shown as economic changes in the table .

the economic recession of 2001 was an important cause of the deficit in 2002 and 2003 .

beginning in 2004 , economic conditions had little effect on the shift to deficit .

towards the end of 2008 , deteriorating economic conditions began affecting the deficit once again , however the full magnitude will likely be felt in later years .

between 2002 and 2008 , economic changes accounted for about 4% of the shift to deficit .

deficit responses to technical changes technical changes peaked as a cause of the shift to deficit at $259 billion in 2003 , and have declined somewhat since then .

for the last eight years overall , technical changes accounted for just over one - fifth of the shift from surplus to deficit .

large economic and technical changes point to the significant uncertainty behind budget projections , even over short periods of time .

for example , holding policy constant , the 2001 surplus was $72 billion smaller ( $37 billion due to economic changes , $35 billion due to technical changes ) than cbo's projection made only nine months earlier .

some technical changes are the result of legislative changes .

there has been recent discussion of whether the 2007 deficit was smaller than anticipated because the tax cuts partly "paid for themselves" through higher economic growth , an effect that was not included in their original score .

table a - 1 suggests otherwise — although the 2007 deficit was smaller than anticipated in projections made in 2004 and 2005 , when cbo was extremely pessimistic about future revenues , the deficit was much larger than anticipated in projections made before 2004 .

the 2001 projection of the state of the economy in 2007 — made before the tax cuts were enacted — turned out to be extremely close to the actual state of the economy in 2007 .

in other words , the actual performance of the economy after the tax cuts was almost identical to how cbo expected the economy to perform had there been no tax cuts .

for example , cbo projected in 2001 that economic growth ( without tax cuts ) would average 3.1% between 2003 and 2008 ( on a fiscal year basis ) ; actual growth in those years equaled 3.0% .

furthermore , there were extremely large technical revisions from 2002 to 2006 , mostly because tax revenue turned out to be lower than expected ( after taking the tax cuts into account ) each year .

if anything , this would suggest that tax cuts cost more in reality than the original score had anticipated , rather than less .

