the federal government responded to the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks and the subsequent anthrax attacks with increased focus on and funding for biodefense .

a key consideration in this response was addressing capacity shortages for diagnostic , clinical , and research laboratories .

since 2001 , the department of defense ( dod ) , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , the department of health and human services ( hhs ) , and the department of agriculture ( usda ) have increased or are in the process of increasing their laboratory capacity for the study of dangerous pathogens .

because stringent protocols and engineering are used to contain the most dangerous pathogens , these facilities are often referred to as high - containment laboratories .

high - containment laboratories play a critical role in the biodefense effort , offering the hope of better responses to a biological attack and a better understanding of the bioterrorism threat .

however , they could also increase the risk of a biological attack by being a source of materials or training .

in addition to increasing laboratory capacity , the federal government invested in research to develop countermeasures , diagnostics , and detectors for dangerous pathogens potentially usable in a terrorist attack .

one group has calculated that congressionally appropriated funding for civilian biodefense increased from $690 million in fy2001 to $5.4 billion in fy2008 .

much of this funding supports academic and industrial researchers and laboratories that handle these dangerous pathogens .

the influx of funds and researchers has exacerbated existing concerns about aging laboratory infrastructure and limited research and diagnostic laboratory capacity .

non - federal entities have also expanded or constructed additional high - containment laboratories .

in addition to the threat of bioterrorism , an increasing awareness of the threat posed by emerging and re - emerging diseases has led to the proliferation of high - containment laboratories internationally , as the technologies used are widely available .

the increase in high - containment laboratory capacity has raised new policy questions and increased focus on existing ones .

how much laboratory capacity is enough ? .

what is the necessary federal investment ? .

should laboratories be consolidated or dispersed ? .

what is the optimal size and type of high - containment laboratory ? .

with multiple agencies expanding high - containment laboratory capacity , is a plan coordinating these efforts necessary ? .

does increasing laboratory capacity and the number of trained scientists increase the risk of accidents and / or opportunities for purposeful misuse ? .

what is an acceptable balance between the benefits these laboratories provide and the risks they pose ? .

policymakers have become increasingly interested in the expansion of these facilities following reports of accidents , regulatory noncompliance , and recent examples of community resistance to the laboratories .

the commission on the prevention of weapons of mass destruction proliferation and terrorism recommended tightening government oversight of high - containment laboratories .

these laboratories may also be regulated by state and local laws , regulations , and ordinances .

this report focuses on the federal government's regulation of high containment laboratories .

it explains the concepts of biosecurity and biosafety , including the mechanisms by which the federal government oversees their implementation ; describes the proliferation of high - containment laboratories ; discusses issues facing federal policymakers ; and identifies policy options for congressional consideration .

biosecurity and biosafety are closely related .

their definitions vary from source to source and sometimes overlap .

in this report , biosecurity refers to steps taken to secure pathogens or biological materials from theft , unauthorized access , or illegal use , while biosafety refers to mechanisms or practices employed to lower the risk of unintentional infection in the laboratory or environmental release from the laboratory .

while biosecurity and biosafety are clearly related closely , their practices and oversight mechanisms have mainly developed independently .

the number of bsl - 3 and bsl - 4 laboratories is generally believed to have increased in recent years .

while the number of bsl - 3 laboratories is not known , the total amount of planned or existent bsl - 4 space in the united states has increased by an estimated twelve - fold since 2004 .

this expansion of high - containment laboratory space resulted from federal construction , increased federal funding of research and development activities requiring high - containment laboratories , and a greater focus on public health and diagnostic laboratory capacity .

the expansion of high - containment laboratories has raised several issues for policymakers .

these include how to determine the appropriate capacity to meet national needs , whether oversight of facilities or personnel need to be increased , balancing the desire for additional laboratory capacity with its accompanying increase in risk , possible international ramifications , and local concerns .

in addressing these issues policymakers have several options .

interested congressional policymakers could deem current efforts sufficient and no further action is warranted .

several expert panels are examining these issues currently and congress could defer additional action until their reports are complete and their recommendations heard .

alternatively , congress could decide to step up current oversight of facilities , pathogens , or personnel , or to take other actions .

the 111 th congress has begun to consider some of these issues .

legislation addressing the select agent program and the questions raised by the expansion of high - containment laboratory capacity have been introduced into both chambers .

h.r .

1225 and s. 485 would extend the authorization of the select agent program through 2013 or 2014 respectively and expand the criteria considered by cdc and usda when determining if pathogens are select agents .

the bills would require the national academy of sciences to review the select agent program and recommend improvements .

the hhs secretary would be required to develop minimum biosafety and biosecurity training that would be mandatory to gain access to select agents .

additionally , the hhs secretary would be required to issue guidance on improvements to the current select agent monitoring and inventory procedures .

these bills would also require the hhs secretary , in consultation with the usda secretary , to report to congress an evaluation of sufficiency of current and planned capacity ; how laboratory capacity and lessons learned could be best shared across the biodefense and infectious disease communities ; how to improve and streamline guidance on laboratory infrastructure , commissioning , and maintenance ; and ways to improve personnel training .

finally , the hhs secretary is directed , in coordination with the usda secretary , to establish the biological laboratory incident reporting system , through which laboratory personnel could voluntarily report biosafety or biosecurity incidents .

the laboratory surge capacity preparedness act ( h.r .

1150 ) would authorize dhs to award competitive grants to regional biocontainment laboratories for their operation and maintenance costs .

this bill would also require the dhs secretary , in consultation with the hhs secretary , to provide a report to congress .

this report would detail activities undertaken to integrate the rbl network and describe whether additional bsl - 3 laboratory surge capacity is needed to effectively respond to a biodefense or emerging infectious disease emergency .

regardless of u.s. domestic efforts , biocontainment technologies are widely dispersed around the globe and used by many scientists in many countries .

absent international harmonization , the threat of a high - containment laboratory being the source of a bioterror weapon may be only partially addressed by solely domestic policy changes .

a key challenge for congressional policymakers is to define the goal of enhanced oversight of high - containment laboratories .

the choice of goal may affect the relative importance of the issues of concern and thus the choice of policies to address them .

for example , focusing on a registry of existing high - containment laboratory capacity may have benefits for planning , coordination , and efficiency of use but provide relatively limited security benefits .

similarly , a rigorous oversight program including facility and personnel licensure , mandatory training , and restricted construction of new facilities may provide security benefits at the cost of regulatory burden , increased federal expenditures , and impeded scientific progress in countermeasure research , bioforensics , and public health .

when weighing potential policy options to address these complex policy issues , policymakers may have to reconcile many competing and potentially conflicting national needs .

