many years of debate about unauthorized immigration to the united states culminated in the enactment of the immigration reform and control act ( irca ) of 1986 .

that year , there were an estimated 3.2 million unauthorized aliens in the country .

irca coupled legalization programs for certain segments of the unauthorized population with provisions to deter future unauthorized immigration by reducing the magnet of employment .

these latter provisions reflected a belief , widely held then and now , that most unauthorized aliens enter and remain in the united states in order to work .

to reduce the job magnet , irca amended the immigration and nationality act ( ina ) to add a new section 274a , which makes it unlawful to knowingly hire , recruit , or refer for a fee , or continue to employ , an unauthorized alien , and requires all employers to examine documents presented by new hires to verify identity and work authorization and to complete and retain employment eligibility verification ( i - 9 ) forms .

the irca provisions did not have the effect of curtailing future illegal immigration .

after falling to an estimated 1.9 million in 1988 as eligible unauthorized aliens legalized their status , the unauthorized population began to grow .

by the early 1990s , it had surpassed pre - irca levels .

the i - 9 process was effectively undermined by the ready availability of genuine - looking fraudulent documents .

ten years after the enactment of irca , congress attempted to strengthen the employment verification process as part of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 ( iirira ) .

iirira directed the attorney general to conduct three largely voluntary pilot programs for electronic employment eligibility confirmation .

after examining documents and completing i - 9 forms as required under ina section 274a , employers participating in a pilot program would seek to confirm the identity and employment eligibility of their new hires .

iirira tasked the attorney general with establishing a confirmation system to respond to inquiries made by participants in these pilot programs "at any time through a toll - free telephone line or other toll - free electronic media concerning an individual's identity and whether the individual is authorized to be employed. .

the former immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) within the u.s. department of justice had initial responsibility for administering the employment eligibility confirmation pilot programs .

in 2003 , dhs assumed this responsibility .

the basic pilot progra m , the first of the three iirira employment verification pilots to be implemented and the only one still in operation , began in november 1997 in the five states with the largest unauthorized alien populations at the time .

in december 2004 , in accordance with p.l .

108-156 , the program became available nationwide , although it remained primarily voluntary .

the basic pilot program has changed over the years .

since july 2005 , it has been entirely internet - based .

it is administered by dhs's u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) .

the basic pilot program was briefly renamed the employment eligibility verification ( eev ) program by the administration of george w. bush , and was again renamed e - verify by that administration in august 2007 .

iirira , as originally enacted , directed the attorney general to terminate the basic pilot program four years after going into effect , unless congress provided otherwise .

congress has extended the life of the basic pilot program / e - verify multiple times .

most recently , it extended e - verify until september 30 , 2018 , as part of the consolidated appropriations act , 2018 .

although the unauthorized alien resident population has declined in size since its 2007 high point of an estimated 12 million , it remains substantial .

according to a preliminary estimate by the pew research center , unauthorized alien residents in the united states numbered about 11.3 million in 2016 .

the pew research center has also estimated that there were some 8.0 million unauthorized workers in the civilian labor force in 2014 .

policymakers have considered an expansion of electronic employment verification — whether though e - verify or a new system — as a key option for addressing unauthorized employment .

in weighing proposals that may emerge on electronic employment eligibility verification , policymakers may want to consider potential impacts on the key issues of unauthorized employment ; verification system accuracy , efficiency , and capacity ; discrimination ; employer compliance ; privacy ; and verification system usability and employer burden .

the policy issues discussed here may be especially important to consider in the context of proposals to require all employers to conduct electronic employment eligibility verification .

a mandatory system could arguably make it possible to identify many more unauthorized workers .

at the same time , under such a system , any inaccuracies , inefficiencies , or privacy breaches that occurred could affect much larger numbers of employees and employers .

employer compliance under a mandatory system would seem to be a salient issue , especially since it has direct implications for other issues , notably discrimination .

employer burden may be another important consideration .

it may be that a mandatory system would require new strategies to address these issues .

