the veterans health administration ( vha ) of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) operates the nation's largest health care delivery system with about 222,000 employees supporting its mission .

it is also the largest provider of health care education and training for medical residents and other health care trainees in the united states .

in fy2008 , vha provided medical care to approximately 5.6 million unique patients and spent approximately $43.5 billion for medical care and research .

a coalition of veterans' service organizations ( vsos ) has been calling on congress to provide vha with a budget which is "sufficient , timely , and predictable. .

they have asserted that vha has underestimated its budget in the past .

for instance , according to the government accountability office ( gao ) , due to "unrealistic assumptions about the impact of some of [vha's] policies , inaccurate calculations , and insufficient data for useful budget projections," in june 2005 the george w. bush administration submitted a $975 million supplemental vha appropriations request to congress , and in july of that same year the president submitted an additional $1.977 billion supplemental vha appropriations request to congress .

congress has generally not enacted the va budget by the beginning of the fiscal year .

in most of the past 20 years ( fy1989 to fy2009 ) va received its annual appropriation prior to the beginning of the fiscal year only on four occasions — in fy1989 , fy1995 , fy1997 , and fy2009 ( see the appendix ) .

according vsos , these delays in the enactment of the budget have exacerbated operational challenges — such as delaying capital expenditures , delaying recruitment , restricting acquisitions , limiting maintenance — faced by vha network directors .

moreover , former vha officials have testified about operational difficulties they faced during their tenures due to the uncertainty of funding .

to mitigate these issues , vso's have proposed that congress change the funding process for vha to an advance appropriation .

this report discusses issues regarding authorization of an advanced appropriation for certain medical care accounts of vha .

to provide some context to the discussion of these issues , the first section of this report provides background on funding categories for federal programs as well as how they relate to the federal budget .

it also reiterates the reasons that have been put forth by vsos as a rationale to fund vha under an advance appropriation , and the accounts that would be affected by an advance appropriation proposal .

lastly this section describes the approach used by vha to construct the budget estimates that are critical to the determination of the funding level under an advance appropriation .

the second section of this report discusses the definition of an advance appropriation and provides examples of federal programs that are currently funded under an advance appropriation or have been in the past .

the third section outlines the two broad issues that congress confronts in considering proposal to establish and implement an advance appropriation: ( 1 ) authorization issues , and ( 2 ) implementation issues .

this report concludes with a section that provides some options congress may opt to consider either independently or in conjunction with an advance appropriation proposal .

to provide some context on funding va health care programs under an advance appropriation it is essential to understand the funding categories for federal programs , and how they relate to the federal budget .

one of the most basic characterizations of federal spending involves two separate categories , discretionary spending and direct spending .

discretionary spending is provided in , and controlled by , annual appropriations acts under the jurisdiction of the house and senate appropriations committees .

direct spending , also referred to as mandatory spending , is controlled by substantive legislation under the jurisdiction of the various house and senate legislative committees .

in most instances , the substantive law that creates direct spending also includes the financing mechanism for it , often a "permanent appropriation" that provides funds automatically each year without the need for any further legislative action ( eg , social security and medicare ) , or that provides funds automatically each year over a fixed , multi - year period ( eg , the periodic farm bill and highway bill ) .

in some cases , a direct spending program does not have its own financing mechanism and requires financing through an annual appropriations act ( eg , veterans compensation and pensions ) ; in these cases , however , the level of direct spending effectively is controlled in the substantive legislation , not the annual appropriations act .

the annual budget resolution establishes a framework for the consideration of all legislation with a budgetary impact , including annual appropriations acts ( regular , supplemental , and continuing ) and direct spending measures , as well as revenue and debt - related measures .

different enforcement procedures are used with respect to annual appropriations acts and direct spending measures .

the key enforcement tool applicable to the former is the "section 302 ( b ) " spending allocations , named after the pertinent section of the congressional budget act of 1974 , and the point of order that may be raised against measures that violate the allocations .

under this tool , the appropriations committee in each chamber divides its allocation of total discretionary spending for the fiscal year made under the budget resolution among its 12 subcommittees ; the cost of each appropriations act then is compared to the section 302 ( b ) spending allocation assigned to the pertinent subcommittee to determine if the act adheres to the spending levels under the budget resolution .

other enforcement tools apply to the consideration of direct spending measures , including "section 302 ( a ) " allocations of total direct spending to committees ( unlike the appropriations committees , the legislative committees do not subdivide their total allocations by subcommittee ) , the optional budget reconciliation process , and house and senate "pay - as - you - go" ( paygo ) rules , among others .

funding for the department of veterans affairs entails both discretionary spending and direct spending .

in fy2008 , for example , the department's total spending of approximately $88 billion consisted of about $43 billion in discretionary spending and $44 billion in direct spending .

most of the department's discretionary spending involves medical care while most direct spending involves compensation and benefits .

for more than a decade vsos have been repeatedly calling for "assured funding" or "guaranteed" or "mandatory" funding for va health care .

although each of these terms has a different definition , in general , the vso community has proposed moving funding for va health care from a discretionary appropriation to a mandatory appropriation .

vsos claim that both the sufficiency of funding for veterans' health care as well as the timeliness and predictability of such funding would be addressed by funding va health care under a mandatory appropriation .

the independent budget has stated that: for almost two decades , the dysfunctional budget and appropriations process for veterans' health care has prevented va officials from efficiently managing and planning for the future of veterans' health - care programs and services .

not knowing when or what level of funding it will receive from year to year — or whether congress will approve or oppose administration policy proposals directly affecting the budget — severely impairs va's ability to recruit and retain staff , contract for services , procure equipment and supplies , and perform planning and administrative functions .

although legislation was introduced in previous congresses to provide funding for va health care under a mandatory appropriation , such proposals did not win widespread support among the authorization or appropriations committees .

also pay - as - you - go ( paygo ) budget rules adopted by congress required offsets for any new direct spending program ( see previous section on spending categories in the federal budget and enforcement procedures ) .

furthermore , some budget analysts had pointed out that a switch to a mandatory appropriation would: create incentives for undue expansion of the vha ; not be consistent with the longer term objectives of reforming the overall health care system ; and boost federal spending at a time when other increases in federal healthcare spending would yield greater benefits .

the analysts have also pointed out that converting vha into a mandatory appropriation "would not entirely insulate it from budgetary pressures .

congress could cut the per - person funding amount or exclude certain groups of veterans from the formula used for computing annual funding. .

during the110 th congress both the house and senate veterans' affairs committees held hearings to examine such proposals and heard from witnesses who testified for and against mandatory funding proposals for va health care .

since mandatory funding proposals were not finding enough momentum to move forward , vsos put forth a proposal in 2008 to provide advance appropriations for va health care .

in the 111 th congress , the veterans health care budget reform and transparency act of 2009 ( h.r .

1016 and a companion version s. 423 ) has been introduced .

under h.r .

1016 and s. 423 , the following accounts that fund vha — medical services , medical support and compliance , and medical facilities ( see description of these accounts below ) — would be funded as an advance appropriation beginning with fy2011 .

the funding would be under a discretionary budget authority , and the legislation calls for a study by the comptroller general ( that is , the government accountability office ) on the adequacy and accuracy of the budget projections based on vha's enrollee health care projection model ( see a discussion of the model below ) .

while crs does not take a position on the legislation , the succeeding sections discuss some possible issues concerning such a proposal , and offer options congress may consider concerning the vha funding process .

prior to discussing the proposal for advance appropriations , it is essential to discuss the current appropriations process for va health care programs .

the vha is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue .

although the appropriations account structure has been subject to change from year to year , the appropriation accounts used to support the vha traditionally include medical care , medical and prosthetic research , and medical administration .

in addition , congress also appropriates funds for construction of medical facilities through a larger appropriations account for construction for all va facilities .

in fy2004 , "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," congress changed the vha's appropriations structure .

the department of veterans affairs and housing and urban development and independent agencies appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 , h.rept .

108-401 ) , funded vha through four accounts: ( 1 ) medical services , ( 2 ) medical administration , ( 3 ) medical facilities , and ( 4 ) medical and prosthetic research .

in fy2009 , the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) renamed the medical administration account as the medical support and compliance account .

to understand some of the implications of advanced appropriations discussed later in this report it is important to understand what each of these accounts currently fund .

usually , an appropriations act makes budget authority available beginning on october 1 of the fiscal year ( fy ) for which the appropriations act is passed ( "budget year" ) .

however , there are three types of appropriations that don't follow this pattern .

they are: advance appropriations , advance funding and forward funding .

these terms are defined below .

an advance appropriation means appropriation of new budget authority that becomes available one or more fiscal years beyond the fiscal year for which the appropriations act was passed ( that is beyond the budget year ) .

for example , if the following language appeared in an appropriations act for fy2010 , it would provide an advance appropriation for fy2011: "for medical services , $30,854,000,000 to become available on october 1 , 2010 ( the start of the fy2011 ) . .

under the current scoring guidelines , new budget authority for an advance appropriation is scored in the fiscal year in which the funds become available for obligation .

in this example , you would record the budget authority in fy2011 .

advance funding is budget authority provided in an appropriation act to obligate and disburse ( outlay ) in the current fy funds from a succeeding year's appropriation .

advance funding is a means to avoid making supplemental requests late in the fiscal year for certain entitlement programs in cases where the appropriations for the current year prove to be insufficient .

forward funding is budget authority that is made available for obligation beginning in the last quarter of the fy for the financing of ongoing activities ( usually grant programs ) during the next fy .

this funding is used mostly for education programs , so that obligations for grants can be made prior to the beginning of the next school yea .

there are two broad issues related to advance funding for some accounts of vha .

the first issue is a budget enforcement issue related to current budget enforcement procedures in congress , and the second relates to issues that may arise if such a proposal were to be implemented .

there are some options that might help congress in deciding on the long - term financing of va health care .

one option would be for congress to provide oversight and direction to vha to modify its ehcpm so that it could provide better predictability for vha funding in future years .

vha would have to develop analytic tools for measuring demand for health care , treatment capacity , and the fixed and variable costs associated with delivering care .

furthermore , forecasting the effects of va policy and external influences on demand requires routine collection of data on veterans' employment , health insurance , health status , and overall health care utilization .

these modifications could provide vha and congress with better estimates of funding needs , and thereby allow congress to make informed policy decisions .

another option might be to create an independent entity modeled along the lines of the medicare payment advisory commission ( medpac ) .

creation of such an entity could bring transparency to vha's funding process and would create credibility , particularly among key constituent groups .

medpac was established by the balanced budget act of 1997 ( p.l .

105-33 ) to advise congress on issues affecting the medicare program .

the commission's statutory mandate includes advising congress on payments to private health plans participating in medicare and providers in medicare's traditional fee - for - service program .

furthermore , medpac is also tasked with analyzing access to care , quality of care , and other issues affecting medicare .

the commission meets publicly to discuss medicare issues and policy questions and to develop and approve its reports and recommendations to the congress .

such a program for vha might independently analyze issues facing vha and advise congress on funding for both short - and long - term issues affecting health care for veterans .

this could in turn provide an added layer of transparency and accountability to vha's budget process .

