some members of the european union ( eu ) initially viewed the financial crisis as a purely american phenomenon .

that view has changed as economic activity in the eu declined at a fast pace over a short period of time .

making matters worse , global trade declined sharply following the financial crisis , eroding prospects for european exports providing a safety valve for domestic industries that are cutting output .

in addition , public protests , sparked by rising rates of unemployment and concerns over the growing financial and economic turmoil , increased the political stakes for eu governments and their leaders .

the global economic crisis has strained the ties that bind together the members of the eu and presented a significant challenge to the ideals of solidarity and common interests .

in addition , the longer it takes to regain economic growth , the greater are the prospects that international pressure will mount against those governments that are perceived as not carrying their share of the responsibility for stimulating their economies to an extent that is commensurate with the size of their economy .

according to dennis blair , director of u.s. national intelligence , the global financial crisis and its geopolitical implications pose , "the primary near - term security concern of the united states. .

in addition , he said , "the longer it takes for the [economic] recovery to begin , the greater the likelihood of serious damage to u.s. strategic interests .

roughly a quarter of the countries in the world have already experienced low - level instability such as government changes because of the current slowdown. .

various eu governments expended public resources to rescue failing banks , in addition to protecting depositors and utilizing monetary and fiscal tools to support banks , to unfreeze credit markets , and to stimulate economic growth .

these efforts have born modest progress so far .

the economic recession and the financial crisis had become reinforcing events , which were forcing eu governments to forge policy responses to both crises .

as the loss of real and financial wealth persisted eu governments worked both independently and in concert to address the immediate requirements of protecting financial institutions and improving access to credit by households and businesses .

the differential effects of the economic downturn , however , have divided the wealthier countries of the eurozone from the poorer countries within the eu and in east europe and has compounded efforts to respond to the financial crisis and the economic recession .

at the g - 20 summit in pittsburgh in september 2009 , the participants agreed to coordinate their actions on a number of financial reform issues .

as the financial crisis has eased , however , coordination has proved to be more elusive .

eu banks have been slower than u.s. banks to meet higher capital standards and less forthcoming in detailing their financial condition .

the united states , britain , and continental european regulators also have forged different policies regarding the issue of executive compensation .

eu finance ministers also disagree over strict new regulations that would have imposed restrictions on american hedge funds operating in europe .

u.s. treasury secretary geithner has called the new rules protectionist .

the measure would have barred foreign hedge funds from operating in europe unless standards similar to those that are enforced in europe were enforced in the home countries .

british , in particular , has opposed the rules that are favored by the french and the germans , in part because nearly 80% of european hedge funds operate out of britain and are a major source of income .

for the united states and the members of the european union the stakes are high .

over the short run , both the eu and the united states attempted to stop the downward spiral in the financial system , improve the financial architecture , and restore balanced economic growth .

over the long run , they likely will search for a regulatory scheme that provides for greater stability while not inadvertently offering advantages to any one country .

the financial crisis and the economic downturn had become global events and dominated the attention of policymakers .

governments that expended considerable resources utilizing fiscal and monetary policy tools to stabilize the financial system and to provide a boost to their economies may yet be required to be more inventive in providing more stimulus to their economies and face political unrest in domestic populations .

eu members have been concerned over the impact the financial crisis and the economic recession have had on the economies of east europe and prospects for political instability as well as future prospects for market reforms .

worsening economic conditions in east european countries could compound the current problems facing financial institutions in eu members .

while mutual necessity dictated a more unified position among eu members and led to increased efforts to aid east european economies , some observers are concerned over the long - term prospects of the east european economies .

governments elsewhere in europe , such as iceland and latvia , collapsed as a result of public protests over the way their governments handled their economies during the crisis , and the international monetary fund issued emergency loans to hungary ( $15.7 billion ) and ukraine ( $16.4 billion ) .

in addition , the imf has issued loans to belarus ( 2.48 billion ) , bosnia and herzegovina ( $1.52 billion ) , iceland ( $2.1 billion ) , latvia ( $2.35 billion ) , moldova ( $118.2 million ) , poland ( $20.58 billion ) , romania ( $17.1 billion ) , and serbia ( $4.0 billion ) .

the world bank in a joint effort with the european bank for reconstruction and development and the european investment bank announced on february 27 , 2009 , that they were providing $31 billion over two years to assist ailing banks and businesses in eastern and central europe .

east european countries have experienced a sharp depreciation in their currencies relative to the euro and the economic crisis is causing their government deficits to rise , undermining the efforts of some of the countries to join the eurozone .

banks in the eu have nearly $1.5 trillion in assets potentially at risk in central and eastern europe .

the data in table 1 include the exposure of the major western european banks for east european countries and the russian federation .

despite this exposure to banks in eastern europe , eu leaders , at a meeting on march 1 , 2009 , reportedly could not agree on a common approach to the financial crisis and rejected a call by hungary for financial support for eastern europe .

even the east european participants could not bridge their differences and present a unified approach to the eu .

some east european countries pushed for substantial financial assistance from the eu , while other countries expressed little interest in receiving financial assistance .

the crisis has underscored the growing interdependence between financial markets and between the u.s. and european economies .

as such , the synchronized nature of the current economic downturn probably means that neither the united states nor the eu is likely to emerge from the financial crisis or the economic downturn alone .

the united states and the eu share a mutual interest in developing a sound financial architecture to improve supervision and regulation of individual institutions and of international markets .

this issue includes developing the organization and structures within national economies that can provide oversight of the different segments of the highly complex financial system .

this oversight is viewed by many as critical to the future of the financial system because financial markets generally are considered to play an indispensible role in allocating capital and facilitating economic activity .

congress and the obama administration are considering a number of proposals to restructure the supervisory and regulatory responsibilities over the broad - based financial sector within the united states .

at the same time , such international organizations , as the g - 20 , the financial stability forum , the international monetary fund , the organization for economic cooperation and development , and the bank for international settlements have offered their own prescriptions for the international financial markets .

the cause and effects of the current financial crisis likely will be debated for years to come .

this report does not attempt to provide a complete explanation of the causes of the financial crisis , since other crs reports address these issues .

while different individuals and organizations view the crisis from different perspectives , one way to view the crisis is as a series of policy events proceeding through four periods where the policy responses differed .

the periods are not necessarily discretely identifiable , because they overlap with other periods , or the policy responses have been repeated as the financial crisis has persisted .

this has been especially true as the financial crisis has deepened over time and as the economic downturn and the financial crisis have become reinforcing events , compounding efforts to resolve either crisis .

the first phase of the crisis represents the early build - up to the crisis in which policymakers responded in an ad hoc manner to assist individually troubled banks and financial institutions .

in the second phase , national governments , primarily through central banks , moved to address issues of liquidity that arose from wide - spread concerns over the viability of the financial system , rather than the more narrow concerns of individual institutions .

in the third phase , government finance ministries adopted policies to address issues of solvency as banks and other financial firms attempted to deleverage their positions by reducing their holdings of troubled assets and as credit markets essentially shut down .

in the fourth phase , governments , through finance ministries and legislative bodies , shifted to address growing concerns over the economic downturn that has worsened the financial crisis .

according to reports by the international monetary fund ( imf ) and the european central bank ( ecb ) , many of the factors that led to the financial crisis in the united states created a similar crisis in europe .

essentially low interest rates and an expansion of financial and investment opportunities that arose from aggressive credit expansion , growing complexity in mortgage securitization , and loosening in underwriting standards combined with expanded linkages among national financial centers to spur a broad expansion in credit and economic growth .

this rapid rate of growth pushed up the values of equities , commodities , and real estate .

over time , the combination of higher commodity prices and rising housing costs pinched consumers' budgets , and they began reducing their expenditures .

one consequence of this drop in consumer spending was a slowdown in economic activity and , eventually , a contraction in the prices of housing .

in turn , the decline in the prices of housing led to a large - scale downgrade in the ratings of subprime mortgage - backed securities and the closing of a number of hedge funds with subprime exposure .

concerns over the pricing of risk in the market for subprime mortgage - backed securities spread to other financial markets , including to structured securities more generally and the interbank money market .

problems spread quickly throughout the financial sector to include financial guarantors as the markets turned increasingly dysfunctional over fears of under valued assets .

the first phase of the financial crisis is identified with a loss of confidence in credit markets that was associated with a downturn in the u.s. housing market caused primarily by rising defaults in subprime mortgages .

in this stage , eu governments generally responded on a case - by - case basis , without a role for the broader community .

a sharp downturn in mortgage markets generally would be expected to have a negative impact on parts of the economy , but the current financial crisis quickly evolved into a more general liquidity crisis that spread well beyond the sub - prime mortgage market .

initially , only highly leveraged banks , investment firms , and other financial services providers seemed to be affected by the credit problems .

during this phase in the united states , the federal deposit insurance corporation took control of indymac bank .

the financial crisis that began in the united states as a result of a downturn in residential property values quickly spread to european banks through effects felt in the market for asset - backed commercial paper ( abcp ) .

european banks were either directly holding the securities or they were holding them indirectly through conduits and structured investment vehicles with similar holdings .

as the abcp market collapsed , banks holding such securities were forced to step in with additional funding , which squeezed liquidity in the global financial market through the interbank market .

over time , banks and other financial firms found that it was impossible to price the value of assets that were being used to back commercial paper .

during this phase , the british government nationalized housing lender northern rock and bradford & bingley , a mortgage lender .

belgium , france , and luxembourg governments and shareholders provided capital to dexia , the world's largest lender to municipalities , and belgian , dutch , and luxembourg governments injected $16.4 billion into banking and insurance company fortis to head off the first major bank crisis in the euro area .

in the second phase , policy shifted from an ad hoc focus on the fate of individual firms to concerns over troubled markets as central banks intervened to lower interest rates , to provide liquidity , and to provide foreign currency .

in the united states , as generally is the case in most countries , the federal reserve , or the central bank , holds a monopoly over the conduct of monetary policy , mainly as a means of keeping such policy - making independent from political pressure .

normally , it is not the role of the central bank to be the main provider of liquidity , but that role falls to the central banks as lenders of last resort during periods of financial crisis .

in addition , central banks generally share regulatory and supervisory responsibilities , including providing assistance to individual firms or helping banks deleverage , with a number of different agencies that are more directly accountable to elected officials and are subject to change .

during this phase , governments attempted to stabilize the financial markets by expanding insurance on guarantees for depositors and , in some cases , guarantees for banks .

central banks also engaged in direct injections of capital to support the balance sheets of banks and removed some distressed assets from banks by acquiring the assets .

efforts to acquire distressed assets from the banks , however , raised questions concerning the value of the assets , since , in most cases , the value of the assets had fallen below the value indicated on the balance sheets of the banks .

the bank for international settlements ( bis ) indicates that governments in europe varied their responses to the financial crisis , as indicated in table 3 .

in addition , the bis indicates that there are considerable differences in the design and implementation of the rescue efforts and in the way foreign depositors are treated in the case of a bank failure .

in this phase , iceland was especially hard hit by the financial crisis , with major icelandic banks completely shutting down for a period of time .

on november 19 , 2008 , iceland and the international monetary fund ( imf ) finalized an agreement on an economic stabilization program supported by a $2.1 billion two - year standby arrangement from the imf .

following the imf decision , denmark , finland , norway , and sweden agreed to provide an additional $2.5 billion .

on january 26 , 2009 , public protests against the icelandic government's handling of the crisis and the economy caused iceland's prime minister haarde to resign and the coalition government to fall .

in the third phase , the lack of confidence in credit markets and a lack of liquidity also sparked concerns over the adequacy of capital provisions of financial institutions and concerns over the solvency of banks and other financial firms .

during this phase , financial firms attempted to deleverage by reducing the amount of troubled assets they held on their balance sheets .

at the same time , the stocks of most financial firms in the united states and in europe dropped markedly , and the value of their assets deteriorated , which weakened the financial position of an even larger number of firms .

in this phase , intervention by central banks continued , but national governments also began to intervene , typically through their respective treasury departments , to take control of insolvent banks or otherwise to provide financial assistance .

the u.s. congress passed the troubled assets relief program as part of the emergency economic stabilization act ( p.l .

110-343 ) initially intended to acquire up to $700 billion in troubled mortgage - related securities .

as the financial crisis persisted , u.s. treasury secretary geithner announced on february 9 , 2009 , that the financial stability plan that was being prepared at that time by the treasury department provided a "full arsenal of financial tools and the resources commensurate" to stress test banks ; to provide for a public - private investment fund ; to provide funds for consumer and business lending ; and to ensure greater transparency , accountability , and monitoring of banks .

in the fourth phase , as the problems in credit markets persisted , the financial crisis spread to those activities in the real economy that are highly reliant on credit markets , and it reinforced concerns over the adequacy of capital provisions .

furthermore , the slowdown in economic growth weakened the capital position of financial institutions so that the financial crisis and the economic downturn have become negatively reinforcing .

governments have responded in this phase of the crisis by adopting macroeconomic stimulus measures to blunt the effects of the economic recession .

in february 2008 , congress passed p.l .

110-185 , the economic stimulus act of 2008 to provide rebates to individuals on their income taxes in order to provide a fiscal boost to the u.s. economy .

then in july 2008 , congress adopted , and president bush signed , p.l .

110-289 , the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 to provide an additional fiscal stimulus to the u.s. economy .

in february 2009 , as the u.s. economy continued to post large monthly losses in jobs , congress adopted , and president obama signed , a compromise measure of h.r .

1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 to provide an additional fiscal stimulus to the u.s. economy .

the british , french , and german governments also announced fiscal stimulus packages .

various central banks announced additional cuts in key interest rates as another effort to stimulate economic growth .

on march 5 , 2009 , the european central bank and the bank of england announced a cut in key interest rates by 0.5% to 1.5% and 0.5% , respectively , approaching the federal reserve rate of 0.25% .

in addition , the bank of england announced a quantitative easing in monetary policy , or increasing the money supply , by $150 billion over three months to stimulate economic growth .

the financial crisis has underscored the growing interdependence between financial centers and has tested the ability of eu members to cooperate in developing an eu - wide response .

the financial interdependence between the united states and the european union means that the eu and the united states share common concerns over the global impact of the financial crisis and the economic downturn .

it also means that they both support and hope to benefit from efforts by national governments to stimulate their economies .

such stimulus measures , however , could become a source of friction if some of the larger economies are viewed as not carrying their share of the burden for a global recovery by providing stimulus measures that are commensurate with the size of their economy .

the eu and the united states also share common concerns over the stability of east european countries .

these common concerns eventually worked to spur eu members to forge a common consensus regarding the necessity of providing financial assistance to east european countries .

some observers are concerned , however , that the financial crisis and the economic downturn may erode economic conditions in the east european economies , with possible implications for negative effects on the economies in europe and the united states .

in addition to these concerns , the united states and the eu members share common concerns over the organization of financial markets domestically and abroad and seek to improve supervision and regulation of individual institutions and of international markets .

extensive cross - border banking activities by a number of eu countries has demonstrated that serious problems in one country can have a substantial impact on the financial system elsewhere , while governments may face potentially large liabilities that are associated with branches in another country .

one solution that is being considered is in developing the organizational structures within national economies that can provide oversight of the different segments of the highly complex financial system .

such oversight is viewed by many as critical , because financial markets are generally considered to play an indispensible role in allocating capital and facilitating economic activity .

some observers argue , however , that the complexity of the financial system has outstripped the ability of national regulators to oversee effectively .

the financial crisis also has revealed extensive interdependency across financial market segments both within many of the advanced national financial markets and across national borders .

as a result , the united states and members of the eu share mutual interests in solving both the financial crisis and the economic recession , because the two crises have become negatively reinforcing events .

eu leaders are also especially concerned over the impact the economic crisis is having on the political stability and commitment to market reforms among the emerging economies of eastern europe .

eu leaders are supporting a number of efforts to provide assistance to european economies , but they may have to expend considerably more resources if the economic crisis persists for an extended period of time .

the international nature of financial markets and capital flows likely means that efforts to address the current situation and to prevent future crisis require a coordinated response between the united states and the eu .

a coordinated response likely will need to address such issues as financial market regulation , oversight of financial firms and institutions , greater transparency , and the role of independent credit rating and auditing institutions .

significant differences remain , however , among eu members and between some eu members and the united states over issues of financial supervision and regulation that could significantly complicate future efforts to craft a coordinated approach to supervising financial market at an international level .

some eu members favor a strong central authority that can monitor financial markets , while others favor strong national authorities with a weaker role for an international body .

eu members recognize that economic integration means that financial and economic crises can spill across national borders , but their efforts to implement a coordinated response are being hampered by very real differences in the impact the economic recession is having on individual eu members .

the financial crisis also raises important questions about how a nation can protect its depositors from financial crisis elsewhere and about the level of financial sector debt that is manageable without risking system - wide failure .

in addition , the failure of a number of large banks raises questions about bank supervision , primarily about how national governments should supervise foreign financial firms that are operating within their borders .

this issue raises questions about how countries can protect their depositors when foreign - owned firms attempt to withdraw deposits from one market in order to offset losses in another .

one approach focuses on broad levels of cooperation between national governments with each government addressing the crisis from its own perspective and in its own limited way .

for a number of governments in europe this approach is appealing , because their economies and their banks have felt little direct effect from the crisis .

an alternative approach argues in favor of a more integrated and coordinated response from national governments and central banks .

this approach argues that a coordinated systemic approach is necessary , because financial markets in the united states and europe have become highly integrated as a result of cross - border investment by banks , securities brokers , and other financial firms .

as a result of this integration , economic and financial developments that affect national economies are difficult to contain and are quickly transmitted across national borders , as attested to by the financial crisis of 2008 .

as financial firms react to a financial crisis in one area , their actions can spill over to other areas as they withdraw assets from foreign markets to shore up their domestic operations .

for instance , as icelandic banks began to default , britain used an anti - terrorism law to seize the deposits of the banks to prevent the banks from shifting funds from britain to iceland .

banks and financial firms in europe have felt the repercussions of the u.s. financial crisis as u.s. firms operating in europe and as european firms operating in the united states have adjusted their operations in response to the crisis .

the financial crisis also raises questions about the cost and benefits of branch banking across national borders where banks can grow to be so large that disruptions in the financial market can cause defaults that outstrip the resources of national central banks to address .

such branch banking across national borders has significantly expanded financial opportunities for individual investors and firms alike and is unlikely to disappear as a result of the current financial crisis .

nevertheless , if some financial institutions are deemed to be too big to fail , financial regulators and national governments likely will need to address the issue of who and how such institutions should be supervised when their operations span national borders and they are engaged in a vast array of banking and investment operations .

the european economic recovery plan calls for eu members to contribute an amount equal to 1.5% of their respective gdp to stimulate economic growth .

some observers argue , however , that the size of an economic stimulus package should be sufficient to address the size and nature of the relevant economic crisis , instead of being determined as a certain percentage of gdp .

the nature of the current economic recession may well call for a larger stimulus package than that dictated by a pre - set percentage of a country's gdp .

the ability of individual countries to provide a large economic stimulus , however , may be inhibited by actions they already have taken and by concerns over providing the right balance between sometimes competing goals of implementing policies that have a large and lasting impact but that do not threaten the long - term stability in national finances .

so far , members of the european union have struggled to implement a coordinated response to the economic crises .

in the current context , many argue that an export - led recovery strategy is not an option .

efforts to promote exports or to discourage imports likely will not provide a significant boost to economic growth in any one country and could lead to retaliation by other countries depending on the costs and benefits of implementing such a strategy .

the slowdown in economic activity has reduced exports world - wide and banks are balking at providing trade financing to small and medium firms .

the financial crisis also has weakened some of the traditional mechanisms through which monetary policy is transmitted .

a number of eu countries already have used monetary expansion and cuts in interest rates to provide liquidity during the financial crisis and may have limited ability to provide for additional fiscal measures to stimulate their economies .

furthermore , some eu members disagree over how best to implement a coordinated economic stimulus plan , due in part to deep philosophical differences among eu members over the conduct of macroeconomic policies .

another important factor that is affecting the eu's response to the economic recession is the need to develop new policies in a manner that meshes with the carefully crafted and highly negotiated directives that already exist within the eu framework .

these directives act as guiding principles for eu members .

in particular , the call for economic stimulus has created a conflict for some eu members who are politically and philosophically committed to the goals of the growth and stability pact and with the development goals of the lisbon strategy .

arguably , these agreements have helped stabilize economic conditions in europe by bringing down the overall rate of price inflation and by reducing government budget deficits .

in addition to the lisbon strategy , eu members likely will consider proposals to examine financial supervision and regulation within the context of the eu's directive on financial services and the financial services action plan ( fsap ) when it engages in negotiations with the united states and the g20 later in 2009 .

the european union is a political and economic union of 27 member states , formally established in 1993 by the treaty of maastricht out of existing structures that had evolved in steps since the 1950s .

the eu has worked to develop a single economic market through a standardized system of laws which apply across all member states and which provide the freedom of movement of people , goods , services and capital .

this process of economic integration is complicated by a dual system that gives the members of the eu significant independence within the eu and broad discretion to interpret and implement eu directives .

the eu maintains common trade , agricultural , and fisheries policies , and a regional development policy .

eu economic integration is compounded further by sixteen member states , collectively known as the eurozone , which have adopted the euro as a common currency and operate as a bloc within the eu .

major institutions and bodies of the eu include the european commission , the european parliament , the council of the european union , the european council , the european court of justice , and the european central bank ( ecb ) .

through various directives , the eu has moved to increase financial integration within the union to make the monetary union represented by the eurozone operate more efficiently and the help the eu members realize the full potential of the eu .

within the eu , the european commission operates as the executive branch and is responsible for proposing legislation , implementing decisions , upholding the union's treaties , and the general day - to - day running of the union .

the commission operates as a cabinet government , with one commissioner from each member .

one of the 27 is the commission president ( currently josé manuel barroso ) appointed by the european council , with the approval of the european parliament , for a term of five years .

relative to the financial sector , the eu process provides for each member to have its own institutional and legal framework , which complicates efforts to coordinate financial policies .

within the eu , there are a number of bodies that bring together the supervisors , finance ministers , and central bankers of the eu members .

within the european council , the economic and financial affairs council ( ecofin ) is one of the oldest bodies with the council .

ecofin's responsibilities include economic policy coordination , economic surveillance , monitoring of budget policy and preparation of the eu's budget .

the key bodies in the eu banking sector include the following: european banking committee .

the committee consists of representatives of the ministries of finance of the eu members and advises the eu commission on policy issues related to banking activities and on proposals in the banking area .

committee of european banking supervision .

the committee is comprised of representatives of supervisory authorities and central banks and coordinates on regulatory and supervisory convergence .

european central bank .

the ecb's main role is financial stability and monitoring in cooperation with national central banks and supervisory agencies .

banking supervision committee .

this committee brings together national central banks , banking supervisory authorities , and the ecb .

it monitors and assesses developments in the euro area , analyses the impact of regulatory and supervisory requirements on financial system stability , and it promotes cooperation and exchange of information between central banks and supervisory authorities on issues of common interest .

economic and financial committee .

the committee includes representatives of ministries of finance , the european commission , the ecb , and central banks to promote high - level assessments of developments in financial markets .

financial stability table .

this body meets twice a year to discuss financial stability issues .

financial services committee .

this committee is composed of representatives of the ministries of finance and the european commission and discusses and provides guidance on cross - sector strategic and policy issues .

the euro area countries initially sketched out a broad response to the financial crisis .

since then , their response to bank foreclosures and to subsequent issues has been characterized by some as somewhat disjointed .

the financial crisis and economic downturn have exposed deep fissures within the eu and even within the euro area countries over the policy course to follow .

as a first response to the financial crisis , eu governments and their central banks focused policy initiatives on reassuring credit markets that there was an availability of credit and liquidity , by reducing interest rates , and by providing foreign currency , primarily dollars , through currency arrangements .

in addition to continuing efforts to restore the financial markets , eu members also face a worsening economic climate that requires actions by individual central banks , international organizations , and coordinated actions by eu members and other governments .

investment services directive the eu has adopted a number of directives that provide a basic framework for eu members to coordinate financial regulation across the eu and to integrate financial sectors .

one such directive is the investment services directive ( isd ) that entered into force on january 1 , 1996 .

the isd provided general principles for national securities regulations , with the goal of providing mutual recognition of regulations across the eu .

the isd created a "european passport" that provided for a cross - border right of establishment for non - bank investment firms and the freedom to provide services across borders for investment firms to carry out a wide range of investment business .

under the passport , firms were authorized and supervised by domestic authorities , but could still provide specified investment services in other eu countries .

such cross - border services included: collecting and executing buy and sell orders on an agency basis , dealing , managing and underwriting portfolios , and such additional services as providing investment advice , advising on mergers and acquisitions , safekeeping and administration of securities , and foreign exchange transactions .

the european "passport" provision required member states to dismantle restrictive legislation that prevented cross - border branching and freedom of services .

nevertheless , eu members retained the responsibility for determining their own domestic laws and regulations concerning such issues as fitness , authorization , capital requirements , and protection of client assets .

eu members could also impose rules and regulations on investment firms using the european passport as long as the rules and regulations were , "in the interest of the general good," and applied to the business activities that the firms carried out in their state .

the isd opened up stock exchange membership in all member states to all types of investment firms , whether bank or non - bank entities .

another objective of the isd was to eliminate the so - called concentration rule in order to allow member states that lacked their own securities trading floor to access electronic terminals with investment firms and banks in other member states , thereby allowing them to be members of the markets on a remote electronic basis .

financial services action plan in 1999 , the eu replaced the investment services directive with the financial services action plan .

the plan consists of a set of measures that are intended to remove the remaining formal barriers in financial markets among eu members and to provide a legal and regulatory environment that supports the integration of eu financial markets .

similar to the isd , the fsap process supports a two - pronged approach that combines eu directives with national laws .

the eu directives provide for a general level of regulation concerning the provision of financial services across borders and the harmonization of national regulations governing cross - border activities .

eu members , however , retain the right to regulate firms within their own borders , as long as those firms , whether foreign or domestic , are treated equally .

the fsap contains 42 articles , 38 of which were implemented , that are intended to meet three specific objectives: ( 1 ) a single wholesale market ; ( 2 ) an open and secure retail market ; and ( 3 ) state - of - the art rules and supervision .

wholesale measures relate to securities issuance and trading ; securities settlement ; accounts ; and corporate restructuring .

retail measures relate to insurance ; savings through pension funds and mutual funds ; retail payments ; electronic money ; and money laundering .

markets in financial instruments directive the cornerstone of the fsap's achievement is the markets in financial instruments directive ( mifid ) , which became effective on november 1 , 2007 .

the mifid establishes a comprehensive , harmonized set of rules for europe's securities markets so financial services firms can provide investment services in each of the eu member states .

mifid retained the principles of the eu "passport" and extended the list of services and financial instruments that are covered by the passport procedures , including investment advice .

mifid also removed the so - called concentration rule that required investment firms to route all stock transactions through established exchanges .

mifid introduced the concept of 'maximum harmonization' which places more emphasis on home state supervision .

this is a change from the previous eu financial service legislation which featured a "minimum harmonization and mutual recognition" concept .

minimum harmonization provides for a law or a regulation that sets a floor , or a minimum standard , that eu countries were expected to meet in developing legislation .

maximum harmonization provides for a maximum level of a law or a regulation that sets the maximum allowable standard that can be adopted in domestic laws or regulations .

at times some eu members have been accused of adopting domestic measures that exceed the eu standard in a manner that acted as a protectionist barrier .

some key elements of the mifid are: authorization , regulation and passporting .

firms covered by mifid are authorized and regulated in their "home state. .

once a firm is authorized , it can use the mifid passport to provide services to customers in other eu member states .

these services are regulated by the "home state" in which the firm is authorized .

client categorization .

mifid requires firms to categorize clients as "eligible counter - parties," professional clients , or retail clients , with increasing levels of protection .

client order handling .

mifid places requirements on information that needs to be captured when firms accept client orders in order to ensure that a firm is acting in a client's best interests .

pre - trade transparency .

mifid requires the operators of various kinds of equity exchanges to make the best bid and offer prices available to potential buyers and sellers .

post - trade transparency .

mifid requires firms to publish the price , volume and time of all trades in listed shares , even if executed outside of a regulated market , unless certain requirements are met to allow for deferred publication .

best execution .

mifid will require that firms take all reasonable steps to obtain the best possible result in the execution of an order for a client .

the best possible result is not limited to execution price but also includes cost , speed , likelihood of execution and likelihood of settlement and any other factors deemed relevant .

systematic internalizer .

a systematic internalizer is a firm that executes orders from its clients against its own book or against orders from other clients and are treated as mini - exchanges , which makes them subject to pre - trade and post - trade transparency requirements capital requirements directive the capital requirements directive , which became effective in january 2007 , introduced a supervisory framework within the eu for investment management firms and banks .

the purpose of the directive is to move the eu towards complying with the basel ii rules on capital measurement , adequacy , and related market disclosure disciplines .

this directive promotes a risk based capital management methodology through a "three pillar" structure that includes ( 1 ) new standards that set out the minimum capital requirements that firms will be required to meet for credit , market , and operational risk ; ( 2 ) firms and supervisors will be required to decide whether they are holding enough capital to address the risks realized under pillar i and act accordingly ; and ( 3 ) improve market discipline by requiring firms to publish certain details about their risks , capital , and risk management .

the directive also requires firms to make provision for a charge against their capital for operational risks in order to identify , monitor , manage , and report on certain types of external events that may have a negative effect on their capital .

the directive applies not only to internationally active banks , which is the main focus of the basel ii approach , but it also applies to all credit institutions and investment firms irrespective of the size , scope of activities , or levels of sophistication .

under the directive , firms are required to meet rules governing the minimum amounts of their own financial resources they must have in order to cover the risks to which they may be exposed .

lamfalussy process as the european commission crafted a coordinated eu approach to the financial crisis , it has done so in accordance with a set of procedures known as the lamfalussy process .

the lamfalussy structure provides a framework for updating eu financial regulations and developing similar supervisory practices .

while this process can be time consuming , it provides a process for eu members to follow so that policies that are considered through the process ultimately will be acceptable to all eu members and , therefore , will be more likely to be implemented .

mifid is the most significant piece of legislation that has been introduced under this process .

originally developed in march 2001 , it is named after the chair of the eu advisory committee that created it , alexandre lamfalussy .

the process is composed of four "levels," each focusing on a specific stage of the implementation of legislation .

level 1 is traditional eu decision making , which means that decisions are adopted in the form of directives or regulations proposed by the commission and then approved under the co - decision procedure by the european parliament and the eu council .

legislation adopted at this level primarily establishes the core values of a law .

at the second level , sector - specific committees and regulators provide advice on developing the technical details of the principles that were adopted in level 1 and then bring the measure to a vote by the representatives of each eu member .

these measures can be adopted , adapted and updated by the commission after they have been submitted to the european securities committee ( esc ) , a committee composed mainly of members of ministries of finance , and to the european parliament for their opinion .

the committee of european securities regulators ( cesr ) , an independent advisory body made up of securities regulators , also advises the commission on the technical implementing details to be included in level 2 legislation .

this advice is provided in response to specific "mandates" from the commission asking for help in particular areas .

level 2 implementing measures do not alter the principles agreed upon at level 1 , but simply provide the technical details that are necessary in order to make the principles operational .

at the third level , national regulators work on coordinating new regulations with other nations .

at this stage , cesr may adopt non - binding guidelines or common standards regarding matters not covered by eu legislation , as long as these standards are compatible with the legislation adopted at level 1 and level 2 .

the fourth level involves compliance and enforcement of the new rules and laws , including initiating proceedings on cases of non - conformity .

the lamfalussy process is intended to provide several benefits over traditional lawmaking , including more - consistent interpretation , convergence in national supervisory practices , and a general boost in the quality of legislation on financial services .

nevertheless , the lamfalussy process has sparked controversy , because some critics argue that the procedure can effectively bypass accountable oversight by the european council and the elected european parliament , thereby embodying a move away from representative democracy towards technocratic and participatory democracy .

