efforts to mitigate the impact of natural hazards have been undertaken for decades .

in the earliest history of community planning , leaders would consider the possible risks from flooding when deciding where to locate buildings along a body of water .

earthquakes , mud slides , hurricanes , wildfires , and other extreme weather events also pose a hazard to communities .

today , the challenges of mitigating the impacts of hazards are more complicated .

communities are increasingly confronted with natural disasters that are devastating and costly , and public officials are being challenged with providing for the safety of established communities .

mitigation is an activity designed to reduce the impacts from such hazards or events .

the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) defines mitigation as follows: mitigation is defined as any sustained action taken to reduce or eliminate long - term risk to life and property from a hazard event .

mitigation , also known as prevention ( when done before a disaster ) , encourages long - term reduction of hazard vulnerability .

the goal of mitigation is to decrease the need for response as opposed to simply increasing the response capability .

mitigation can save lives and reduce property damage , and should be cost - effective and environmentally sound .

this , in turn , can reduce the enormous cost of disasters to property owners and all levels of government .

in addition , mitigation can protect critical community facilities , reduce exposure to liability , and minimize community disruption .

mitigation activities are generally categorized as structural and nonstructural .

structural mitigation activities may include physical changes to a structure or development of standards such as building codes and material specifications .

physical changes to a structure could include retro - fitting a building to be more resistant to wind - hazards or earthquakes , or elevating a structure to reduce flood damage .

nonstructural activities may include community planning initiatives such as developing land - use zoning plans , disaster mitigation plans , and flood plans .

other nonstructural community activities may include participating in insurance programs and developing warning systems .

federal disaster mitigation assistance provides funding for both structural and nonstructural mitigation activities .

a primary source of federal disaster mitigation assistance is the hazard mitigation grant program ( hmgp ) , authorized by section 404 of the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( stafford act ) .

hazard mitigation embodies a concept that is widely accepted: such efforts save lives and protect property in disasters .

while there is widespread support for hazard mitigation , there are challenges that pose barriers to effective hazard mitigation .

current economic conditions at the federal , state and local level have brought attention to fiscal management challenges in many areas of government .

one such area is hazard mitigation .

the fiscal management challenges and the role of the federal government in hazard mitigation programs will likely be considered in light of recent catastrophic events and current economic conditions .

hazard mitigation is a concept supported through a multitude of federal agency programs and at all levels of government .

today , the burden for hazard mitigation still lies predominately with individuals and local government .

the federal government encourages state and local governments to address hazards through various programs , notably hmgp .

understanding the fiscal management challenges of hazard mitigation programs is critical in evaluating current and future programs .

additionally , consideration of the federal role in hazard mitigation includes areas where complications in implementing hazard mitigation activities have arisen .

one area of complication is the lag between a major disaster declaration and expenditure of federal hazard mitigation assistance .

another area is the structure of grants administration at the federal , state , and local level .

a decision by congress to increase federal hazard mitigation assistance would potentially address some problems and challenges ; however , that approach may not ensure greater effectiveness .

the potential cost savings of hazard mitigation has to be weighed against the fiscal management challenges of estimating the costs .

other approaches may include changing the structure of mitigation grants by consolidating federal programs , modifying grant eligibility criteria , and funding certain project types to provide a higher degree of technical assistance for risk assessment .

an evaluation of the risk analysis used in federal programs and public safety regulations may also provide a higher degree of effective hazard mitigation .

now that hazard mitigation has become an established and accepted concept among stakeholders , congress may wish to consider what additional steps will strengthen the foundation they have built .

