interest in using desalination technologies to treat seawater , brackish water , wastewaters , and contaminated sources has increased globally and in the united states , as costs have fallen and pressure to develop drought - proof water supplies has grown .

adoption of desalination , however , remains constrained by financial , environmental , regulatory , and social factors .

at issue is the role congress establishes for the federal government in desalination , particularly in desalination research and development and the federal regulatory environment for desalination projects .

also of congressional interest is what role desalination may play in meeting water demands .

desalination processes generally treat saline or impaired waters to produce a stream of freshwater , and a separate , saltier stream often called waste concentrate or brine .

the availability and regulation of disposal options for waste concentrate can limit adoption in some locations ; this is a particular challenge for large - scale inland facilities .

for seawater desalination , the impacts of intake facilities on marine life also often are raised as concerns .

desalination's attractions are that it can create a new source of freshwater from otherwise unusable waters , and that this source may be more dependable and drought - proof than freshwater sources that rely on annual or multi - year precipitation , runoff , and recharge rates .

another significant application of desalination technologies is for treatment of contaminated waters or industrial water or municipal wastewater .

some communities and industries use desalination technologies to produce drinking water that meets federal standards , to treat contaminated water supplies to meet disposal requirements , or to reuse industrial wastewater .

many of the technologies developed for desalination also can produce high - quality industrial process water .

for many of these applications , there may be few technological substitutes that are as effective and reliable as desalination technologies .

there are multiple desalination methods .

two common categories of desalination technologies — thermal ( eg , distillation ) and membrane ( eg , reverse osmosis ) — are the most common , with reverse osmosis technologies dominating in the united states .

for more information on traditional and emerging technologies , see appendix a .

desalination treatment costs have dropped in recent decades , making the technology more competitive with other water supply augmentation and treatment options .

electricity expenses vary from one - third to one - half of the cost of operating desalination facilities .

a rise in electricity prices could reverse the declining trend in desalination costs ; similarly , drops in electricity costs improve desalination's competitiveness .

costs and cost uncertainties remain among the more significant challenges to implementing large - scale desalination facilities , especially seawater desalination plants .

desalination's energy intensity also raises concerns about the greenhouse gas emissions emitted and desalination's usefulness as part of a climate change adaptation strategy .

substantial uncertainty also remains about the environmental impacts of large - scale desalination facilities .

social acceptance and regulatory processes also affect the technologies' adoption and perceived risks .

research and additional full - scale facilities may resolve uncertainties , alleviate concerns , and contribute to cost reductions and options for mitigating environmental impacts .

to date , the federal government primarily has supported research and development , some demonstration projects , and select full - scale facilities ( often through congressionally directed spending ) .

the federal government also may support construction of municipal desalination facilities through loans or other credit assistance provided through programs of the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

for most municipal desalination facilities , local governments or public water utilities ( often with state - level involvement and federal construction loans ) have been responsible for planning , testing , building , and operating desalination facilities , similar to their responsibility for treating freshwater drinking water supplies .

during recent congresses , legislative proposals have identified a range of different potential federal roles in desalination .

desalination issues before the 114 th congress may include how to focus federal research to produce results that provide public benefits , at what level to support desalination research and projects , and how to provide a regulatory context that protects the environment and public health without unnecessarily disadvantaging these technologies .

desalination and membrane technologies are increasingly investigated and used as an option for meeting municipal and industrial water supply and water treatment demands .

the nation's installed desalination capacity has increased in recent years , reflecting the technology's growing competitiveness and applications and increasing demands for reliable freshwater supplies .

as of 2005 , approximately 2,000 desalination plants larger than 0.3 million gallons per day ( mgd ) were operating in the united states , with a total capacity of 1,600 mgd .

this represents more than 2.4% of total u.s. municipal and industrial freshwater withdrawals , not including water for thermoelectric power plants .

two - thirds of the u.s. desalination capacity is used for municipal water supply ; industry uses about 18% of the total capacity .

municipal use of desalination for saline water and wastewater treatment in the united states expanded from 1990 to 2010 ; the number of facilities rose from 98 facilities with a total capacity of 100 mgd in 1990 to 324 facilities with 1,100 mgd of capacity in 2010 .

by 2010 , 32 states had municipal desalination facilities .

florida , california , and texas have the greatest installed desalination capacity and account for 68% of the municipal desalination facilities .

florida dominates the u.s. capacity , with the facility in tampa being a prime example of large - scale desalination implementation ( see box ) ; however , texas and california are bringing municipal plants online or are in advanced planning stages .

several other efforts also are preliminarily investigating desalination for particular communities , such as albuquerque .

the saline source water that is treated using desalination technologies varies largely on what sources are available near the municipalities and industry with the demand for the water .

in the united states , only 7% of the existing desalination capacity uses seawater as its source .

more than half of u.s. desalinated water is from brackish sources .

another 25% is river water treated for use in industrial facilities , power plants , and some commercial applications .

globally , seawater desalination represents 60% of the installed desalination capacity .

while interest in obtaining municipal water from desalination is rising in the united states , desalination is expanding most rapidly in other world regions , often in places where other supply augmentation options are limited by geopolitical as well as natural conditions , such as arid conditions with access to seawater .

the middle east , algeria , spain , and australia are leading in the installation of new desalination capacity , with saudi arabia and the united arab emirates leading in annual production of desalinated water .

roughly 98% of the desalination capacity worldwide is outside of north america , with 65% in the middle east .

desalination and membrane technologies are playing a growing role in meeting water supply and water treatment needs for municipalities and industry .

the extent to which this role further expands depends in part on the cost - effectiveness of these technologies and their alternatives .

desalination's energy use , concentrate disposal options , and environmental and health concerns are among the top issues shaping the technology's adoption .

how to focus federal desalination research and support to produce results that provide public benefits , and how to provide a regulatory context that protects the environment and public health without unnecessarily disadvantaging these technologies , are among the desalination issues before the 114 th congress .

appendix a .

traditional and emerging desalination technologies there are a number of methods for removing salts from seawater or brackish groundwater to provide water for municipal and agricultural purposes .

the two most common processes , thermal distillation and reverse osmosis , are described below ; their descriptions are followed by descriptions of some of the more innovative and alternative desalination technologies .

the earliest commercial plants used thermal techniques .

improvements in membrane technology have reduced costs , and membrane technology is less energy - intense than thermal desalination ( although it is more energy - intense than most other water supply options ) .

reverse osmosis and other membrane systems account for nearly 96% of the total u.s. desalination capacity and 100% of the municipal desalination capacity .

reverse osmosis reverse osmosis forces salty water through a semipermeable membrane that traps salt on one side and lets purified water through .

reverse osmosis plants have fewer problems with corrosion and usually have lower energy requirements than thermal processes .

examples of how research advances in the traditional desalination technologies of reverse osmosis have the potential for improving the competitiveness and use of desalination are: nanocomposite and nanotube membranes and chlorine resistant membranes .

nanocomposite membranes appear to have the potential to reduce energy use within the reverse osmosis process by 20% , and nanotube membranes may yield a 30% - 50% energy savings .

membranes are susceptible to fouling by biological growth ( i.e. , biofouling ) , which reduces the performance of the membranes and increases energy use .

the most widely used biocide is chlorine because it is inexpensive and highly effective .

the most common membranes used in reverse osmosis , however , do not hold up well to exposure to oxidizing agents like chlorine .

advancements in chlorine resistant membranes would increase the resiliency of membranes and expand their applications and operational flexibility .

distillation in distillation , saline water is heated , separating out dissolved minerals , and the purified vapor is condensed .

there are three prominent ways to perform distillation: multi - stage flash , multiple - effect distillation , and solar distillation .

in general , distillation plants require less maintenance and pretreatment before the desalination process than reverse osmosis facilities .

while solar distillation is an ancient means for separating freshwater from salt using solar energy , research into improving the technology is increasing .

in large part the interest stems from the potential application for the technology to supply freshwater to small remote settlements where saline supplies are the only source and power is scarce or expensive .

innovative and alternative desalination processes capacitive deionization capacitive deionization desalinates saline waters by absorbing salts out of the water using electrically charged porous electrodes .

the technology uses the fact that salts are ionic compounds with opposite charges to separate the salts from the water .

the limiting factor for this technology is often the salt absorption capacity of the electrodes .

flow - through capacitive deionization shows promise for energy - efficient desalination of brackish waters .

electrodialysis electrodialysis and capacitive deionization technologies depend on the ability of electrically charged ions in saline water to migrate to positive or negative poles in an electrolytic cell .

two different types of ion - selective membranes are used — one that allows passage of positive ions and one that allows negative ions to pass between the electrodes of the cell .

when an electric current is applied to drive the ions , fresh water is left between the membranes .

the amount of electricity required for electrodialysis , and therefore its cost , increase with increasing salinity of feed water .

thus , electrodialysis is less economically competitive for desalting seawater compared to less saline , brackish water .

forward osmosis forward osmosis is an increasingly used but relatively new membrane - based separation process that uses an osmotic pressure difference between a concentrated "draw" solution and the saline source water ; the osmotic pressure drives the water to be treated across a semi - permeable membrane into the draw solution .

the level of salt removal can be competitive with reverse osmosis , and forward osmosis membranes may be more resistant to fouling than reverse osmosis membranes .

a main challenge is the selection of a draw solute ; the solute needs to either be desirable or benign in the water supply , or be easily and economically separated out .

research is being conducted on whether a combination of ammonia and carbon dioxide gases or polymers can be used in the draw solution , and on the effects of marine biology on the membranes .

the attractiveness of forward osmosis is that when combined with industrial or power production processes that produce waste heat , its electricity requirements can be significantly less than for reverse osmosis .

potential disadvantages of forward osmosis are a lower quantity of freshwater per unit of water treated and a larger quantity of brine requiring disposal .

freezing processes freezing processes involve three basic steps: ( 1 ) partial freezing of the feed water in which ice crystals of fresh water form an ice - brine slurry ; ( 2 ) separating the ice crystals from the brine ; and ( 3 ) melting the ice .

freezing has some inherent advantages over distillation in that less energy is required and there is a minimum of corrosion and scale formation problems because of the low temperatures involved .

freezing processes have the potential to concentrate waste streams to higher concentration than other processes , and the energy requirements are comparable to reverse osmosis .

while the feasibility of freeze desalination has been demonstrated , further research and development remains before the technology will be widely available .

ion exchange in ion exchange , resins substitute hydrogen and hydroxide ions for salt ions .

for example , cation exchange resins are commonly used in home water softeners to remove calcium and magnesium from "hard" water .

a number of municipalities use ion exchange for water softening , and industries requiring extremely pure water commonly use ion exchange resins as a final treatment following reverse osmosis or electrodialysis .

the primary cost associated with ion exchange is in regenerating or replacing the resins .

the higher the concentration of dissolved salts in the water , the more often the resins need to be renewed .

in general , ion exchange is rarely used for salt removal on a large scale .

