there is continuing interest in the potential for ethanol to displace petroleum as a transportation fuel .

in 2010 , the united states consumed roughly 13 billion gallons of fuel ethanol , representing about 10% of all u.s. gasoline consumption ( by volume ) .

fuel ethanol consumption has grown from roughly 1 billion gallons per year in the early 1990s , largely as a result of federal policies promoting its use , including tax incentives and mandates for the use of renewable fuels .

arguably the most significant incentive for ethanol's use is the renewable fuel standard ( rfs ) established in the energy policy act of 2005 and expanded in the energy independence and security act of 2007 .

the rfs mandates the use of 9.0 billion gallons of renewable fuel in 2008 , increasing steadily through 2022 ( figure 1 ) .

while the rfs is not an explicit ethanol mandate , the vast majority of the requirement has been met using corn - based ethanol .

going forward , there are limitations on the amount of corn - based ethanol that may be used to meet the mandate , although it is likely that much of the additional mandate for "advanced biofuels" will be met using ethanol derived from sugarcane and from cellulosic feedstocks such as perennial grasses , fast - growing trees , and agricultural wastes .

by 2022 , eisa requires the use of 36 billion gallons of renewable fuels , and much of this would likely be ethanol from a variety of feedstocks .

however , there is a key obstacle to the use of so much ethanol in gasoline .

currently , although some ethanol is sold as an alternative fuel ( e85 ) , most is sold as an additive in conventional and reformulated gasoline .

before epa's decision on the growth energy waiver petition , the amount of ethanol that could be blended in gasoline for all conventional gasoline vehicles and engines was limited to 10% by volume ( e10 ) by guidance developed by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) under the clean air act ( caa ) , as well as by vehicle and engine warranties , and certification procedures for fuel - dispensing equipment .

under the rfs , assuming that most of the mandate is met using ethanol , gasoline blenders are likely to hit a limit in the next few years .

in 2012 , the rfs will require over 15 billion gallons of renewable fuel , while projected gasoline consumption in 2012 is just above 140 billion gallons .

after 2012 , the renewable fuel mandate will continue to increase .

however , a limit of 10% ethanol would mean that ethanol for gasoline blending ( not including e85 ) likely cannot exceed 14 billion gallons per year .

this "blend wall" is the maximum possible volume of ethanol that can be blended into u.s. motor gasoline ( see figure 2 ) .

it is likely that the actual limit is lower , since older fuel tanks and pumps at some retail stations may not be equipped to handle ethanol - blended fuel .

because of this "blend wall," there is interest , especially among ethanol producers , in increasing the allowable concentration of ethanol in gasoline .

research is ongoing on intermediate - level blends , including 15% , 20% , 30% , and 40% ethanol ( e15 , e20 , e30 , and e40 , respectively ) .

on march 6 , 2009 , growth energy ( on behalf of 52 u.s. ethanol producers ) applied to epa for a waiver from the caa e10 limit .

the application requested an increase in the maximum concentration to 15% ( e15 ) .

the waiver would allow the use of significantly more ethanol in gasoline than was permitted under the 10% limit .

under eisa , epa had 270 days ( december 1 , 2009 ) to grant or deny the waiver .

in a november 2009 letter to growth energy , epa noted that "it is clear that ethanol will need to be blended into gasoline at levels greater than the current limit of 10 percent" to meet the eisa mandates .

in the letter , epa noted that long - term testing on newer vehicles had not been completed , but that the agency expected that model year 2001 and newer vehicles "will likely be able to accommodate higher ethanol blends , such as e15. .

on october 13 , epa granted a partial waiver for my2007 and later vehicles , and deferred a decision on my2001-my2006 vehicles until it received final testing data from the department of energy ( doe ) — epa granted that waiver on january 26 , 2011 .

as part of the october 2010 decision , epa denied the waiver for use of e15 in my2000 and older passenger vehicles , as well as for all heavy - duty vehicles , motorcycles , marine engines , and non - road equipment .

however , a group of engine and equipment manufacturers has challenged the partial waiver in court , arguing that epa failed to estimate the likelihood of misfueling ( using e15 equipment denied a waiver ) , and the economic and environmental consequences of that misfueling .

epa estimates that my2007 and later vehicles will represent 29% of the cars and light trucks on the road in 2011 .

expanding the waiver to my2001 and later covers an additional 38% of vehicles .

as newer vehicles are driven longer distances than older vehicles , my2001 and later vehicles would represent an even larger share of vehicle miles traveled and fuel consumption .

as part of the decision , epa stated that it had "reasons for concern with use of e15 in nonroad products , particularly with respect to long - term exhaust and evaporative emissions durability and materials compatibility. .

epa denied this part of the waiver petition but stated that the agency would revisit the issue if new data were submitted .

in a july 2010 "status update" epa stated that although we continue to evaluate all available information , it has become clear that insufficient data have been submitted on the use of e - 15 in older vehicles and non - road engines ( such as chainsaws and marine engines ) to enable epa to make a decision on a waiver that would allow the use of e - 15 for these engines .

as noted by epa , granting growth energy's petition to increase gasoline ethanol content to 15% addresses only one component of the blend wall .

the other impediments — current state laws , vehicle and engine warranties , and distribution infrastructure — still need to be addressed before ethanol use in gasoline is taken beyond 10% .

further , for epa to allow the sale of e15 , a fuel supplier still needs to register the fuel with epa and submit health effects testing for epa to review — a process that has not yet been started .

the "blend wall" is the upper limit to the total amount of ethanol that can be blended into u.s. gasoline .

before 2010 gasoline ethanol content for all uses was limited to 10% by volume , and in 2009 gasoline consumption was roughly 140 billion gallons .

therefore , the 10% blend wall is roughly 14 billion to 15 billion gallons of ethanol that could be blended into gasoline .

the blend wall is largely driven by four factors .

first , under the caa it is unlawful to sell gasoline that contains additives at levels higher than those approved by epa .

for ethanol , the limit was 10% by volume for all vehicles through 2010 .

to allow a higher percentage , a fuel manufacturer would need to petition epa for a waiver .

 ( see " approval of new fuels and fuel additives ." ) .

second , automakers currently warranty their vehicles to operate on ethanol / gasoline blends up to 10% .

while there are data to suggest that newer vehicles could be operated reliably on higher levels of ethanol without modification , no automaker has yet approved those higher blends for use .

further , small engine manufacturers generally advise against using gasoline with more than 10% ethanol in machines such as lawnmowers , trimmers , and snowmobiles .

even with epa's approval of higher ethanol blends for use in some vehicles , it is unclear whether vehicle and machine owners will be willing to use the new fuel without explicit approval from the engine / vehicle manufacturer .

third , most existing infrastructure ( eg , underground gasoline storage tanks , fuel pumps ) is designed and certified to deliver blends up to e10 .

it is unclear whether it can tolerate higher ethanol concentrations .

underwriters laboratories ( ul ) , an independent testing and certification company , announced guidance supporting the use of ethanol blends up to a maximum of 15% in existing fuel pumps currently certified to dispense e10 .

however , according to the same announcement , ul stated that "under normal business conditions , e10 at the dispenser can vary from about seven to 13 percent ethanol. .

however , a similar variance is likely to exist for e15: according to a ul representative , "it cannot ever be said that [e15] is exactly 15 percent. .

therefore , a higher maximum level , perhaps 18% , would be necessary to allow those pumps to be certified to deliver e15 .

in november 2010 , the national renewable energy laboratory ( nrel ) released a study ( conducted by ul ) on the compatibility of new and legacy equipment ( listed to dispense up to e10 ) with e15 .

ul determined that some of the testing was inconclusive , and some parts did corrode .

while modifications to address some of these corrosion issues might be relatively inexpensive , some may represent a significant cost to fuel retailers .

in march 2010 , ul certified two new pumps to dispense blends up to e25 .

further , one pump manufacturer , gilbarco , retroactively expanded its warranty coverage to e15 for pumps manufactured after april 1 , 2008 .

fourth , many state laws and regulations , including fire codes and other standards , limit ethanol in gasoline to 10% .

to allow e15 , these state laws and regulations would also need to be amended .

in addition , private or state insurance restrictions may or may not reflect changes to ul certification .

while all of these components of the blend wall are relevant , this report focuses on the process for addressing the first component , the caa restriction on ethanol concentration in gasoline .

for a blend of gasoline and gasoline additives to be approved under section 211 ( f ) ( 1 ) ( a ) of the caa , it must be "substantially similar" to unleaded gasoline .

epa has defined "gasoline" to have an upper limit of 2.7% oxygen content ( by weight ) , effectively limiting the ethanol concentration to roughly 7.5% ( by volume ) .

however , section 211 ( f ) ( 4 ) of the caa ( as amended by eisa ) allows manufacturers of fuels and fuel additives to apply for a waiver from the "substantially similar" requirement if they can prove that the use of the fuel or additive will not "cause or contribute to" a vehicle not meeting applicable emissions standards over its useful life .

the epa administrator , upon application of any manufacturer of any fuel or fuel additive , may waive the prohibitions established under paragraph ( 1 ) or ( 3 ) of this subsection or the limitation specified in paragraph ( 2 ) of this subsection , if he determines that the applicant has established that such fuel or fuel additive or a specified concentration thereof , and the emission products of such fuel or fuel additive or specified concentration thereof , will not cause or contribute to a failure of any emission control device or system ( over the useful life of the motor vehicle , motor vehicle engine , nonroad engine or nonroad vehicle in which such device or system is used ) to achieve compliance by the vehicle or engine with the emission standards with respect to which it has been certified pursuant to sections 206 and 213 ( a ) of this title .

the administrator shall take final action to grant or deny an application submitted under this paragraph , after public notice and comment , within 270 days of the receipt of such an application .

epa has twice granted waivers for 10% ethanol under section 211 ( f ) .

the first was granted in 1978 to gas plus , inc. for blends of ethanol up to 10% .

the second was in 1982 to synco 76 fuel corp. for a blend of 10% ethanol plus a proprietary additive .

to allow the use of e15 or e20 , epa would need to revise its definition of "substantially similar" to allow a higher oxygen content , or a manufacturer would need to petition epa for a waiver under section 211 ( f ) , as growth energy has done .

as stated above , on march 6 , 2009 , growth energy petitioned epa for a waiver to allow the use of up to 15% ethanol in gasoline .

under the caa , epa had up to 270 days ( december 1 , 2009 ) to approve or deny the waiver request , but on november 30 , 2009 , epa sent a letter to growth energy stating that not enough testing had been completed , and that it would continue to evaluate the petition .

on october 13 , 2010 , epa granted a partial waiver for my2007 and later passenger vehicles ; epa denied the waiver for my2000 and older vehicles , as well as for heavy - duty vehicles , motorcycles , and non - road equipment ; and deferred a decision on my2001-my2006 passenger vehicles .

in its application , growth energy stated that "recent and extensive research demonstrates that use of higher ethanol blends will significantly benefit the environment by reducing greenhouse gas emissions , reducing harmful tailpipe emissions , reducing smog , using less energy for an equivalent amount of fuel , and protecting natural resources. .

growth energy contended that available data and multiple recent studies regarding the impact of various intermediate blends [of ethanol] on emissions , materials compatibility , durability , and driveability , were completed on extensive and representative test fleets , provide a reliable comparison to certification conditions , and demonstrate that use of e - 15 will not cause or contribute to failure of any emission control device or system to meet its certification emissions standards .

growth energy cited a doe study that found a statistically significant decrease in carbon monoxide emissions using e15 , and a marginally significant decrease in non - methane hydrocarbon emissions .

the same study also found a statistically significant increase in acetaldehyde emissions , and a marginally significant increase in formaldehyde emissions .

both formaldehyde and acetaldehyde are regulated as toxic air pollutants under sections 202 and 211 of the caa .

however , the fact that emissions increased using the fuel is not enough for epa to deny the waiver: epa would need to prove that the increase in emissions is enough to cause the vehicle or engine to fall out of compliance with emissions standards .

growth energy asserts that the doe study and other studies have found that the use of e15 results in emissions within applicable limits .

in its november 30 letter to growth energy , epa stated that "we want to make sure we have all necessary science to make the right decision," including more long - term testing data .

on october 13 , 2010 , epa granted a partial waiver for newer ( my2007 and later ) passenger cars and light trucks , initially deferring a decision on my2001-my2006 passenger vehicles before granting the partial waiver on january 26 , 2011 , and denied the waiver for older passenger vehicles as well as all other vehicles .

in its october 13 decision , epa determined that there were insufficient data to alleviate concerns over potential emissions increases from older passenger vehicles and non - road engines .

as stated above , the epa waiver is not the only hurdle in enabling the use of intermediate - level ethanol blends .

with the waiver granted , a fuel supplier still must register the fuel with epa under the caa , a process which includes an assessment of the health effects of the fuel .

a key non - vehicle issue is whether existing infrastructure can support ethanol blends above e10 .

like automobiles , while some existing gasoline tanks and pumps were designed and / or certified to handle up to e10 , none to date have been designed or certified to handle higher ethanol blends .

even with approval by epa for use in newer motor vehicles , presumably fuel suppliers and / or retailers would be unwilling to sell the fuel unless they are confident that it will not damage their existing systems or lead to liability issues in the future , and that they will not compromise their insurance coverage .

otherwise , it seems doubtful that fuel suppliers and retailers would voluntarily upgrade their systems to handle the new fuel .

for example , underground storage tank ( ust ) owners must demonstrate that the components of their ust systems are compatible with the fuel they are storing under the ust provisions of the solid waste disposal act .

epa took comments through december 17 , 2010 , on updating its guidance to include ways for owners to demonstrate compatibility with e15 .

further , loan covenants and insurance policies would need to be modified to reflect the use of the higher ethanol blend .

in addition to fuel supply concerns , for vehicle and machine owners to accept the new fuel , engine and auto manufacturers would likely need to convince their customers that both new and existing equipment would not be damaged by using the new fuel , and that its use would not void vehicle and equipment warranties .

this may be especially difficult for small - engine manufacturers and users who are currently concerned about the effects on their engines from e10 , let alone higher blends of ethanol .

because of concerns over potential misfueling , a group of automobile and equipment manufacturers has challenged the partial waiver in court .

they argue that epa did not estimate the likelihood of misfueling or the potential economic and environmental effects .

they also argue that some misfueling may be unavoidable if e15 becomes so prevalent that fuel suppliers stop selling e10 .

many state laws and regulations limit the use of ethanol in gasoline to 10% .

these state rules would also need to be updated to allow widespread use of e15 .

further , gasoline retailers are concerned that they could lose insurance coverage if they distribute gasoline with higher than 10% ethanol concentration .

a key issued raised with epa's partial waiver decision is the likelihood of misfueling of e15 in vehicles and engines not approved for its use .

as part of the october 2010 partial waiver approval , epa proposed new rules to prevent misfueling , including requiring new labels for fuel pumps that dispense e15 .

epa finalized the misfueling rules in june 2011 .

along with public comments , epa consulted with the federal trade commission ( ftc ) to harmonize the design and content of the label with current ftc labeling rules for motor fuels .

one of the key questions was whether the label should be treated as a cautionary label warning users of non - approved equipment or as one providing information but not necessarily a "warning label. .

proponents of e15 were concerned that a too - strongly - worded warning label would lead to concerns about the fuel among owners of approved vehicles that could hamper its introduction into the marketplace .

ultimately , epa and ftc settled on the word "attention" as providing the proper level of information and aligning the design and wording with other similar ftc labels .

 ( see figure 3 . ) .

