p.l .

114-94 , the fixing america's surface transportation ( fast ) act , was signed by president obama on december 4 , 2015 .

the act reauthorizes federal highway and mass transit programs through the end of fy2020 .

it also authorizes to be appropriated about $305 billion for these programs , an increase of about 4.2% over current funding levels plus projected inflation for highway programs ( $225.19 billion versus $216.122 billion ) and 7.9% over current funding levels plus projected inflation for public transportation programs ( $48.904 billion versus $45.331 billion ) .

for example , in the first year , fast increases current highway spending by about $2.1 billion ( from $40.995 billion in fy2015 to $43.1 billion ) and current public transportation spending by $753 million ( from $8.595 billion to $9.348 billion ) .

in fy2020 , fast increases highway spending by about $2.16 billion over current funding levels plus projected inflation ( $47.104 billion versus $44.940 billion ) and public transportation spending by $753 million ( $10.150 billion versus $9.429 billion ) .

fast supersedes p.l .

112-141 , the moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century act ( map - 21 ) , which was signed into law by president obama on july 6 , 2012 .

it reauthorized federal highway and mass transit programs through the end of fy2014 ( 27 months ) and authorized to be appropriated $105.2 billion for these programs in fy2013 and fy2014 ( about $118 billion including already appropriated funding for fy2012 ) .

map - 21 followed 10 short - term reauthorizations of the safe , accountable , flexible , and efficient transportation equity act of 2005: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) , and lengthy consideration of federalism issues in surface transportation policy .

map - 21's authorization was extended five times , most recently by p.l .

114-87 , the surface transportation extension act of 2015 , part ii , through december 4 , 2015 .

although the federal presence , and influence , on surface transportation policy remains significant , fast is a continuation of previous reauthorizations' emphasis on increasing state decisionmaking authority .

for example , fast provided states greater flexibility in the use of federal highway assistance by converting the surface transportation program ( stp ) into a block grant ; rolling the transportation alternatives program into the stp and allowing 50% of local government transportation alternatives funding to be used on any stp - eligible project ; and consolidating truck and bus safety grant programs .

fast also includes changes to the project delivery approval process in an effort to reduce the average project delivery time for highway and mass transit construction projects .

the changes made by fast and its predecessor , map - 21 , demonstrate that the nature of federalism relationships in american surface transportation policy is continuously evolving over time in reaction to changes in american culture , society , and politics .

as will be shown , the federal government's role in determining the nature of american surface transportation policy has become increasingly influential , especially since the federal - aid to highway act of 1956 that authorized the interstate highway system .

for many years , state and local government officials , through their public interest groups ( especially the national governors association , national conference of state legislatures , national association of counties , national league of cities , u.s. conference of mayors , and american association of state highway and transportation officials ) , have lobbied for increased federal assistance for surface transportation grants and increased flexibility in the use of those funds .

for example , during fast's consideration , the national governors association advocated a multi - year reauthorization of federal highway and mass transit programs that "provide maximum flexibility to the state for implementation and innovation because of our diversity of geography , population , and priorities. .

state and local government officials contend that providing them added flexibility in surface transportation policy is justified because they are better able to identify surface transportation needs in their states than federal officials and are capable of administering federal grant funds with relatively minimal federal oversight .

they also argue that states have a long history of learning from one another .

in their view , providing flexibility in the use of federal funds results in better surface transportation policy because it enables states to experiment with innovative solutions to surface transportation problems and then share their experiences with other states .

others argue that the federal government has a responsibility to ensure that federal funds are used in the most efficient and effective manner possible to promote the national interest in expanding national economic growth and protecting the environment .

in their view , providing states increased flexibility in the use of federal funds diminishes the federal government's ability to ensure that national needs are met .

still others have argued for a fundamental restructuring of federal and state government responsibilities in surface transportation policy , with some responsibilities devolved to states and others remaining with the federal government .

this report provides a historical perspective on contemporary federalism issues in surface transportation policy since the beginning of the nation .

it includes a discussion of the five multi - year reauthorizations of the federal - highway act since 1987: 1. the $151 billion , six - year intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ; p.l .

102-240 ) signed by president george h. w. bush on december 18 , 1991 .

2. the $203.4 billion , six - year transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ; p.l .

105-178 ) signed by president bill clinton on june 9 , 1998 .

3. the $286 billion , six - year safe , accountable , flexible , and efficient transportation equity act of 2005: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) signed by president george w. bush on august 10 , 2005 .

4. the $118 billion ( $105.2 billion for fy2013 and fy2014 ) , 27-month , moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) signed by president barack obama on july 6 , 2012 .

5. the $305 billion , five - year fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast ; p.l .

114-94 ) , signed by president barack obama on december 4 , 2015 .

when the nation was formed in 1789 , there was considerable debate concerning whether congress had constitutional authority to provide direct , cash assistance for surface transportation projects .

that uncertainty created a conceptual framework that initially limited congressional options for federal involvement in surface transportation policy .

over time , that conceptual framework has evolved in response to changes in american society and in the american political system .

today , the federal government has a prominent role in surface transportation policy , providing about $51.9 billion annually for highway and mass transit grants , including about $43.1 billion for highways ( in fy2016 ) and $10.9 billion for mass transit ( in fy2016 ) .

federal spending represents about one - quarter of total government expenditures on highways and mass transit , and nearly half ( 44.3% ) of government highway and mass transit capital expenditures .

the following section examines the evolution of the federal role in surface transportation policy since the nation's formation in 1789 to 1956 , the year the federal - aid to highway act of 1956 , which authorized the interstate highway system's construction , was adopted .

the discussion focuses on key provisions , and arguments presented , affecting federalism issues in surface transportation policy in selected federal - aid to highway acts , starting with the federal - aid road act of 1916 .

from 1956 to 1991 , state and local government officials focused their efforts in surface transportation policy on maximizing the provision of federal assistance and minimizing federal involvement in how they used federal funds .

specifically , they opposed efforts to increase federal fuel taxes to pay for the increasing cost to complete the interstate highway system on the grounds that any such increases infringed on their sovereign authority to tax fuel by making it more difficult for them to raise state fuel taxes .

they also opposed efforts to divert federal highway trust fund revenue to other uses , including mass transit and deficit reduction ; and opposed the proliferation of intergovernmental crossover sanctions requiring states to take specific actions , such as limiting highway speeds , removing certain highway billboards , and imposing uniform alcohol standards for determining drunk driving , or lose a portion of federal highway assistance .

states also supported efforts to increase federal surface transportation funding levels and to increase the federal share of non - interstate highway expenses .

there have been five multi - year reauthorizations of the federal - aid highway act since 1987: the $151 billion , six - year intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea ; p.l .

102-240 ) signed by president george h. w. bush on december 18 , 1991 ; the $203.4 billion , six - year transportation equity act for the 21 st century ( tea - 21 ; p.l .

105-178 ) signed by president bill clinton on june 9 , 1998 ; the $286 billion , six - year safe , accountable , flexible , and efficient transportation equity act of 2005: a legacy for users ( safetea ; p.l .

109-59 ) signed by president george w. bush on august 10 , 2005 ; the $118 billion ( $105.2 billion for fy2013 and fy2014 ) , 27-month , moving ahead for progress in the 21 st century ( map - 21 ; p.l .

112-141 ) signed by president barack obama on july 6 , 2012 ; and the $305 billion , five year fixing america's surface transportation act ( fast ; p.l .

114-94 ) , signed by president barack obama on december 4 , 2015 .

the following discussion examines the major federalism issues involved in each of these reauthorizations , including efforts to sort out appropriate roles for federal , state , and local governments in surface transportation policy .

congress has debated the federal role in surface transportation policy since the nation's formation in 1789 .

a review of the historical record suggests that the debate over the federal role in surface transportation policy has been influenced by factors both internal and external to the institution .

internally , the background , personalities , and ideological preferences of congressional leaders such as senator harry byrd , senator daniel patrick moynihan , and representative e. g. "bud" shuster have had a profound impact on the development of federal - state - local government relationships in surface transportation policy over time .

the norms , customs , and traditions of the house and senate have also had an influence .

for example , the decentralized nature of decisionmaking in both the house and the senate has compartmentalized decisions into more manageable pieces , but , arguably , has made it more difficult for congress to develop broad - based policies that cut across committee jurisdictions or to enact proposals to consolidate programs or devolve programmatic authority to states as these actions might upset existing power relationships and require the consent of several committees and committee chairs .

for example , in the house of representatives , programmatic and funding distribution issues are under the jurisdiction of the committee on transportation and infrastructure , but tax and highway trust fund issues are under the jurisdiction of the committee on ways and means .

in the senate , most programmatic and funding distribution issues are under the jurisdiction of the committee on environment and public works for highways and other aspects of title 23 , but are under the committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs for transit .

tax and highway trust fund issues are under the jurisdiction of the committee on finance .

in the senate , most safety issues are under the jurisdiction of either the committee on environment and public works or the committee on commerce , science , and transportation .

externally , interest groups representing both the private and public sectors have historically been united in their advocacy of additional federal funding , but have been divided over how program funds should be allocated , both among states and among transportation modes .

congress has tended to arbitrate the differences among these varied interests by balancing the need to promote the national interest with the recognition that , for the most part , state and local government officials have proven over time to be relatively capable administrators of surface transportation programs .

as a result , congress has rejected efforts to devolve most federal programmatic authority to states .

instead , it has adopted policies that have expanded state programmatic flexibility while , at the same time , promote the national interest by requiring state and local governments to adhere to federal guidelines for managing the project development process and monitoring highway and bridge conditions , highway safety programs , traffic congestion mitigation programs , and transit facility and equipment maintenance programs , as well as intermodal transportation facilities and systems .

fast , and its predecessor map - 21 , continued this trend .

for example , fast provides states greater flexibility in the use of federal highway assistance by converting the surface transportation program ( stp ) into a block grant ; rolling the transportation alternatives program into the stp and allowing 50% of local government transportation alternatives funding to be used on any stp - eligible project ; and consolidating truck and bus safety grant programs .

fast also includes changes to the project delivery approval process in an effort to reduce the average project delivery time for highway and mass transit construction projects .

presidents , perhaps reflecting their role in representing the national interest as a whole and , perhaps , at least in part , because several presidents had formerly served as governors , have tended to be more supportive of program consolidation and devolution of programmatic authority in surface transportation policy than congress .

this has been especially the case when the president's ideology favored smaller government .

typically , presidential efforts to consolidate surface transportation programs have faced strong opposition from private sector interest groups worried that program consolidation will result in less funding for the consolidated programs over time , and from members worried that consolidation could lead to less funding for specific programs that are important to them .

perhaps the most difficult factor to account for in the development of federalism relationships in surface transportation policy over time has been the changing nature of american society and expectations concerning personal mobility .

once a rural society with relatively limited expectations concerning personal mobility , america is now a primarily urban / suburban society where automobile ownership and the personal mobility that automobile ownership brings is not only a powerful social status symbol but also viewed as a necessity .

obtaining a drivers' license is now a major life - altering event , signifying for millions of american teenagers each year the transition from childhood to adulthood .

because the american bond with the automobile is strong , moving away from a primary focus on building and constructing highways towards a "more balanced" intermodal transportation approach has been made more difficult for policymakers at all levels of government .

moreover , given the public's relatively high expectations concerning personal mobility , congress has been reluctant to devolve surface transportation programs to states , at least in part , because some members worry that if states are provided additional authority and fail to meet public expectations , that they might be held accountable for that failure on election day .

in their view , a more prudent , risk - adverse approach is to provide states additional programmatic flexibility , but retain a federal presence through both program oversight and the imposition of federal guidelines to ensure that states do not stray too far from national objectives .

it remains to be seen how all of these factors will play out in the future .

one certainty is that congress will continue to play the key role in determining the future of federalism relationships in surface transportation policy .

another is that those relationships will continue to evolve over time , adapting to changes in american society and in congress .

