the constitution grants congress the power of the purse and provides that "no money shall be drawn from the treasury , but in consequence of appropriations made by law. .

it does not , however , establish any specific procedures by which congress must consider spending legislation .

instead , congress has developed rules and practices that govern consideration of spending and other budgetary legislation under each chamber's constitutional authority to " ... determine the rules of its proceedings. .

it is under this authority that the procedures in the congressional budget act of 1974 were created .

the congressional budget act established the basic framework that is used today for congressional consideration of budget and fiscal policy .

it provides for the annual adoption of a concurrent resolution on the budget as a mechanism for coordinating congressional budgetary decision making .

the budget resolution creates enforceable parameters with which spending , revenue , and debt legislation must be consistent .

it is not a law .

it is not signed by the president nor can it be vetoed .

instead , its purpose is to establish a framework within which congress considers legislation dealing with spending and revenue .

the budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy .

instead , details of such policy are to be included in legislation reported from the committees with legislative jurisdiction subsequent to the adoption of the budget resolution .

all spending or revenue legislation reported from legislative committees , however , is expected to be consistent with the levels and priorities agreed to in the budget resolution .

the spending policies in the budget resolution encompass two types of spending legislation: discretionary spending and direct ( or mandatory ) spending .

discretionary spending is controlled through the appropriations process .

appropriations legislation is considered annually for the fiscal year beginning october 1 .

appropriations legislation provides funding for numerous activities such as national defense , education , and homeland security , as well as general government operations .

direct spending , alternately , is provided for in legislation outside of appropriations acts .

direct spending programs are typically established in permanent law that continue in effect until such time as they are revised or terminated by another law .

the actual annual cost of direct spending is not determined by congress .

it is instead dictated by formulas within the legislation providing for the program .

the overall cost of a program depends on the eligibility requirements and benefits set forth in the legislation .

these criteria determine who will be eligible to receive benefits and how much benefit they will receive .

only by altering these formulas can congress adjust how much money will be spent .

the 302 ( a ) allocations made to the house and senate appropriations committees reflect their jurisdiction over all discretionary spending .

these allocations hold the appropriations committees accountable for staying within the spending limits established by the budget resolution .

in recent years , budget resolutions have also sometimes included explicit spending limits on discretionary spending .

both the house and senate appropriations committees have 12 subcommittees .

each of these subcommittees is responsible for reporting one regular appropriations bill .

sometimes these bills are packaged together in what is referred to as an omnibus appropriations act .

once an appropriations committee has received its 302 ( a ) allocation , it then subdivides the committee allocation among its subcommittees as soon as practicable after the budget resolution has been adopted .

these suballocations are known as 302 ( b ) subdivisions .

the appropriations committees may make allocations among subcommittees , even if they do not correspond with the levels set forth in the functional categories of the budget resolution .

section 302 ( c ) of the budget act provides a point of order against the consideration of any appropriations measures before the appropriations committee reports its subdivisions .

the appropriations committees are then required to report these subdivisions to their respective chambers .

the appropriations committees may revise the 302 ( b ) subdivisions anytime during the appropriations process to reflect actions taken on spending legislation .

if an appropriations committee does adjust the subdivisions among subcommittees , it must inform its respective chamber of the new levels by issuing a new 302 ( b ) subdivision report .

after extensive hearings , each of the subcommittees reports one of the regular appropriations bills to its respective full appropriations committee .

then , the full appropriations committee reports the bill to its respective chamber .

section 302 ( f ) of the budget act prohibits consideration of any measure or amendment that would cause the 302 ( a ) or 302 ( b ) allocations to be exceeded .

since appropriations subcommittees usually report their bills at the maximum level of spending , amendments offered to the appropriations bill on the floor are often vulnerable to being ruled out of order since they would cause the spending to exceed the 302 ( b ) .

this rule , combined with other rules and practices , makes it difficult to rearrange spending priorities within an appropriations bill through amendments on the floor .

a separate amendment ( or amendments ) to reduce spending would need to be agreed upon prior to , or in conjunction with , one that would increase spending for an agency or program in order to offset that increase .

house and senate legislative committees also receive 302 ( a ) allocations that reflect their jurisdiction over direct spending programs .

any legislation reported by these committees must be consistent with these allocations .

as with discretionary spending , section 302 ( f ) prohibits the consideration of any measure or amendment that would cause the 302 ( a ) allocation to be exceeded .

spending allocations may be revised subsequent to the adoption of the budget resolution if provided for in the budget resolution .

congress frequently includes provisions referred to as "reserve funds" in the annual budget resolution , which provide the chairs of the house and senate budget committees the authority to adjust the committee spending allocations if certain conditions are met .

typically these conditions consist of legislation dealing with a particular policy being reported by the appropriate committee or an amendment dealing with that policy being offered on the floor .

once this action has taken place , the budget committee chairman submits the adjustment to his respective chamber .

reserve funds frequently require that the net budgetary impact of the specified legislation be deficit neutral .

deficit - neutral reserve funds provide that a committee may report legislation with spending in excess of its allocations , but require the excess amounts be "offset" by equivalent amounts .

the budget committee chairman may then increase the committee spending allocations by the appropriate amounts to prevent a point of order under section 302 of the budget act .

for example , the budget resolution for fy2009 included the following language providing for a deficit - neutral reserve fund concerning san joaquin river restoration and navajo nation water rights settlements: in the house , the chairman of the committee on the budget may revise the allocations , aggregates , and other appropriate levels in this resolution for any bill , joint resolution , amendment , or conference report that would fulfill the purposes of the san joaquin river restoration settlement act or implement a navajo nation water rights settlement and other provisions authorized by the northwestern new mexico rural water projects act by the amounts provided in such measure if such measure would not increase the deficit or decrease the surplus for the period of fiscal years 2008 through 2013 or for the period of fiscal years 2008 through 2018 .

reserve funds are not always required to be deficit - neutral .

they may , instead , allow the levels of spending set forth in the budget resolution to be exceeded , as long as the policy legislation meets the conditions of the reserve fund .

in some instances , the increases authorized by a reserve fund are limited to specified amounts .

