in the supreme court's 2008-2009 term , which likely will conclude in late june , 2009 , the court has accepted for argument five environmental cases — an unusually large number out of the roughly 85 cases accepted for argument .

the reason for this interest in environmental cases at this particular time is speculative ; the court generally does not explain why it accepts cases .

this report reviews the cases , decided and undecided , and then briefly comments .

at this writing , one of the five cases has been decided .

though the navy sonar case is the only one of the five cases accepted by the supreme court likely to generate headlines in the popular press , all of these cases are important for their individual programs , and in some cases for standing and administrative law beyond .

they are also likely to be revealing of the environmental direction to be taken by the still - emerging roberts court , which has split closely on some major environmental cases .

industry views these five cases with optimism ; the environmental community with apprehension .

for one thing , the environmental side won in the decision below in all five cases .

assuming the conventional wisdom that the supreme court does not take cases merely to affirm the decision below , the environmental sweep in the appellate courts suggests decisions going the other way in the supreme court ( the one decision so far , in winter v. natural resources defense council , follows that prediction ) .

reinforcing this possibility is the fact that four of the five cases are from the ninth circuit — as mentioned , a circuit with a high reversal rate in the supreme court .

as for the principal nepa case , summers v. earth island institute , it has been noted that the supreme court has voted against the environmental position in each of its 15 nepa decisions .

finally , as an overall matter , today's supreme court , with a few notable exceptions , has been less tolerant of regulation and more sympathetic to business concerns than the court of the 1970s and early 1980s , the first decade - and - a - half of federal environmental legislation .

as for the large number of environmental cases this term , there is always the chance that it is due purely to the random vagaries of the court's certiorari - granting process ( the court's previous term had no environmental cases ) .

another view is that the conservative justices , realizing the possibility of appointments to the court by president obama , want to resolve as many environmental issues as possible before their numbers are diminished .

finally , it has been suggested that the most eminent supreme court practitioners of the day are taking a greater interest in environmental cases , and that their skills and their names on the petitions for certiorari increase the likelihood that the court will accept such cases .

finally , it is worth noting that the court continues to reject repeated petitions for certiorari in the most difficult cases , including in the current term .

these include preeminently the question of whether certain intrastate applications of the endangered species act comport with the commerce clause of the constitution ( petitions rejected at least four times ) , and efforts to clarify the court's fractured opinions as to the geographic scope of the clean water act in rapanos v. united states ( petitions rejected five times ) .

as with the cases granted certiorari above , the reasons for the court's nonacceptance of cases are speculative , beyond pointing out that the overwhelming majority of petitions for certiorari are turned down .

as to rapanos , however , the reason for nonacceptance ( even when , this term , the united states itself was the petitioner ) is very likely that the justices on the court today are the same as in 2006 when rapanos was decided .

in that year , no single rationale commanded the support of a majority of the justices , leaving the lower courts in confusion as to the rule of law to be extracted from the decision .

that would also likely be the result if the court were to accept a post - rapanos case now .

