on january 13 , 2009 , the food and drug administration ( fda ) issued a notice in the federal register regarding the availability of its guidance for industry on the distribution of medical journal articles and scientific publications regarding unapproved new uses ( also known as off - label uses ) of approved drugs .

the guidance seemingly creates a safe harbor for dissemination of information on off - label uses of fda - approved drugs .

the fda's guidance contains provisions similar to , and potentially more expansive than , the provisions on dissemination of information on off - label uses in § 401 of the fda modernization act of 1997 ( fdama ) , which expired in 2006 .

no similar provision was included in the most recent piece of major fda legislation , the fda amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa ) .

first , this report outlines the relevant provisions of the federal food , drug , and cosmetic act ( ffdca ) and related regulations that have been used to address misbranding violations of the act that relate to pharmaceutical manufacturers' promotion of off - label use .

second , the report summarizes the fda's previous off - label marketing provisions under fdama § 401 , which are no longer in effect .

third , the report details the january 2009 guidance document and its similarities to and differences from the fdama provisions .

fourth , the report outlines first amendment challenges to fdama and older fda guidance documents addressing off - label promotion .

fifth , the report discusses the nature of guidance documents , in contrast to rules promulgated under the administrative procedure act ( apa ) , as well as administrative law issues associated with the fda's issuance of the guidance .

sixth , the report provides an overview of the false claims act ( fca ) and related qui tam cases that addressed off - label marketing practices of pharmaceutical companies .

finally , the report analyzes the interaction of the new guidance document and the fca .

fda rules may be subject to legal challenges .

this section addresses administrative law principles that may come into play in the event that the fda's guidance is implemented or enforced in a manner that would render it a binding rule that should have been promulgated under the provisions of the administrative procedure act ( apa ) .

additionally , this section addresses the question of whether the fda had the authority to issue such a guidance document , due to the expiration of the fdama provisions .

assuming that the fda has the authority to issue the guidance , these provisions may face a first amendment challenge .

fdama § 401 and the earlier 1996 fda guidance documents ( both of which addressed permissible methods for the dissemination of information about "off - label" uses by drug manufacturers ) have been challenged on first amendment grounds .

the u.s. district court for the district of columbia initially found that these provisions violated the first amendment and issued an injunction .

however , subsequent developments at the court of appeals level caused the injunction to be vacated , leaving the constitutional question open .

this section will briefly describe these cases .

the washington legal foundation ( wlf ) , a nonprofit group that advocates against excessive government regulation , challenged earlier fda guidance documents ( issued in 1996 ) dealing with the distribution of enduring materials by drug manufacturers .

in particular , the wlf argued that the fda was impermissibly restricting constitutionally protected speech .

the district court in wlf v. friedman ( wlf i ) determined that the fda was restricting protected speech , but that the speech was entitled to a lower degree of constitutional protection because it was commercial in nature ( rather than wholly scientific or academic , as wlf argued ) .

in order for a restriction on commercial speech to be constitutional , the restriction must satisfy a four - part test .

the first question addressed in the four - part test is whether the speech covered by the restriction is false , misleading , or concerns an illegal activity .

the first amendment does not protect commercial speech concerning unlawful activities or false or deceptive advertising .

the district court in wlf i determined that the speech addressed by the fda guidance did not concern an illegal activity , because the speech being distributed by the drug manufacturers "addresse[d] using fda - approved drugs to treat conditions and in treatment regimens other than those set forth in the label approved by the fda," an activity that is not unlawful .

a closer question for the court was the whether the speech could be deemed false or misleading .

here , the court looked at whether the information being distributed could be characterized as "inherently misleading. .

in making its determination , the court looked at the controls available to the fda concerning the information that may be distributed by the manufacturers .

the court found that these controls circumscribed the possibility that untruthful or misleading information could be disseminated by manufacturers .

as a result , the court did not consider the speech to be inherently misleading .

the speech at issue , therefore , is entitled to some degree of first amendment protection .

in order to determine whether the fda's policies were a constitutionally permissible restriction on commercial speech , the court proceeded to the next three steps of the constitutional analysis: ( 1 ) whether the government has a substantial interest in imposing the restriction on speech ; ( 2 ) whether the restriction at issue directly advances that interest ; and ( 3 ) whether the restriction at issue is not more extensive than necessary to achieve that interest .

the court found that the government does have a substantial interest in encouraging drug manufacturers to get off - label treatments on - label , as many uses for drugs that have been approved in other treatment contexts would otherwise evade the fda approval process ( a process that congress has declared all uses for drugs should endure ) .

the court also found that restricting marketing options for off - label uses of approved drugs advances this interest , because it is "one of the few mechanisms available to the fda to compel" manufacturers to seek fda approval for off - label uses ( considering that the conventional mechanism of preventing the drug from being introduced into interstate commerce is unavailable because fda - approved drugs may be introduced into interstate commerce , regardless of whether they will be prescribed for an off - label use or an fda - approved use ) .

however , the court found that the guidance documents at issue in this case were nonetheless unconstitutional , because they were , in the court's estimation , more extensive than necessary to achieve the stated interest .

though , under a commercial speech analysis , the government need not choose the least restrictive method for achieving its goal , an effort must be made to create a reasonable fit between the method chosen and the ends sought .

if a commercial speech restriction burdens substantially more speech than necessary , courts will not allow the restriction to take effect .

the district court , finding that the fda guidance burdened substantially more speech than necessary , cited at least one alternative method that the government could have used to achieve its objectives , which placed a significantly smaller burden on protected speech .

for example , the court hypothesized that requiring complete and unambiguous disclosure by manufacturers who would disseminate the information at issue would be equally effective in achieving the government's goal and would place a lesser burden on speech .

as a result , the court held that while the government may restrict drug manufacturer promotion of off - label uses , the restrictions in the guidance documents were too extensive to withstand constitutional scrutiny .

the district court issued an injunction barring the fda from prohibiting , restricting , or sanctioning drug manufacturers "for disseminating or redistributing to physicians or other medical professionals any article concerning prescription drugs or medical devices previously published in a bona fide peer - reviewed professional journal , regardless of whether such article includes a significant or exclusive focus on uses of drugs or medical devices other than those approved by fda and regardless of whether such article reports the original study on which fda approval of the drug or device in question was based. .

following the issuance of this injunction , which applied to the guidance documents of 1996 , fdama took effect in 1997 and superseded the guidance documents .

the district court amended its injunction to clarify that the injunction applied with equal force to fdama .

though some aspects of fdama were different from the previous guidance documents , the court ultimately determined that the underlying policies in fdama largely duplicated those of the guidance documents and were unconstitutional for similar reasons .

the fda appealed .

the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia described the parties' briefs in this case as "confusing. .

the fundamental disconnect in the opposing parties' arguments became clear only at oral argument .

wlf , in briefings and at oral argument , challenged the fda's guidance documents under the theory that the fda was banning independently the manufacturer dissemination of enduring materials on off - label uses and that proof of such dissemination would alone justify enforcement action .

the fda , however , asserted at oral argument that the fdama provided a "safe harbor" for the dissemination of such information , and that "the agency would draw no independent prosecutorial authority from the fdama to buttress any enforcement proceeding. .

the fda , though reserving the right to use such promotional conduct as evidence in a misbranding or "intended use" enforcement action , claimed no independent authority to regulate speech through the fdama .

because both parties , at that point , agreed that there was no constitutional controversy , the court of appeals declined to rule on the constitutionality of the provisions at issue .

furthermore , since no controversy over the fda's newly clarified interpretation existed , the court vacated the injunction that declared fdama to be unconstitutional and dismissed the fda's appeal .

in disposing of the case in such a manner , the court noted that it was not criticizing or overruling the reasoning of the district court on the first amendment issue as it had been presented to the district court .

the appeals court also made clear that a manufacturer may still bring suit in order to argue that the fda's use of a manufacturer's promotion of off - label uses as evidence in an enforcement action violates the first amendment .

in the guidance document released earlier this year , the fda appears to create a "safe harbor" similar to that which was previously in place under fdama .

the fda does not claim to draw independent enforcement authority from violations of the guidance .

instead , the agency said that it does not intend to consider information distributed in compliance with the guidance documents as "establishing intent that the product be used for an unapproved new use. .

the fda reserves the right to consider information that is distributed outside the parameters of the guidance as evidence in establishing such intent , however .

in light of this , a manufacturer ( or any other plaintiff with standing to sue ) may challenge under the first amendment the fda's use of off - label promotion as evidence in other enforcement actions .

if the speech is used as evidence to establish an element of a violation which itself is a restriction on lawful commercial speech , that violation may also be challenged on first amendment grounds .

the fda's new guidance regarding the promotion of off - label drug uses may also raise issues under the false claims act .

under the fca , any person who "knowingly presents , or causes to be presented , ... a false or fraudulent claim for payment or approval" to the united states government may be subject to civil penalties .

penalties under the fca include treble damages , plus an additional penalty of $5,500 to $11,000 for each false claim filed .

civil actions may be brought in federal district court under the false claims act by the attorney general or by a whistleblower , for the person and for the u.s. government , in what is termed a qui tam action .

the ability to initiate a qui tam action has been viewed as a powerful weapon against fraud , in that it may be initiated by a private party who may have direct and independent knowledge of any wrongdoing .

the popularity of qui tam actions brought under the fca may be attributed partially to the fact that successful whistleblowers can receive between 15% and 30% of the monetary proceeds of the action or settlement that are recovered by the government .

in the context of manufacturer promotion of off - label uses of drugs , several qui tam actions have been brought in recent years using the fca .

one of the largest settlements resulted from a case brought by a whistleblower named dr. david franklin against his former employer , warner - lambert co. , a pharmaceutical company .

in that case , franklin alleged that warner - lambert promoted off - label uses of the drug neurontin , and that such promotion "caused the submission of false claims to the veterans administration and to the federal government for medicaid reimbursement. .

the court in that case explained the interaction of off - label prescribing and medicaid reimbursement: reimbursement under medicaid is , in most circumstances , available only for "covered outpatient drugs. .

42 u.s.c .

§ 1396b ( i ) ( 10 ) .

covered outpatient drugs do not include drugs that are "used for a medical indication which is not a medically accepted indication. .

id .

§ 1396r - 8 ( k ) ( 3 ) .

a medically accepted indication , in turn , includes a use "which is approved under the [ffdca]" or which is included in a specified drug compendia .

id .

§ 1396r - 8 ( k ) ( 6 ) .

see also id .

§ 1396r - 8 ( g ) ( 1 ) ( b ) ( i ) ( identifying compendia to be consulted ) .

thus , unless a particular off - label use for a drug is included in one of the identified drug compendia , a prescription for the off - label use of that drug is not eligible for reimbursement under medicaid .

neither neurontin , or accupril , another drug for which warner - lambert's marketing practices were at issue , had off - label uses that were present in the indicated compendia .

neurontin had only been approved by the fda for use in conjunction with other drugs "to control seizures in people with epilepsy. .

however , dr. franklin alleged that warner - lambert sales representatives called "medical liaisons" were trained to discuss reports of neurontin's effectiveness as a mono - therapy to treat epilepsy , meaning the use of neurontin without the other drugs with which its safety and effectiveness had been presented to fda .

the medical liaisons also allegedly reported that the use of the drug for bipolar disease , pain syndromes , and attention deficit disorders was effective according to clinical trials and other reports , though no such data existed .

the case settled and did not go to trial .

pfizer , which merged with warner - lambert , paid criminal monetary penalties for its violations of the ffdca and civil monetary penalties for its violations of the fca totaling $430 million .

pfizer pled guilty to two felony violations of the ffdca — one for misbranding due to a failure to give adequate directions for use and one for introducing an unapproved new drug in interstate commerce — for which it agreed to pay a $240 million criminal fine .

additionally , the company paid the united states government $83.6 million , plus interest , for its civil liability under the fca for medicaid reimbursement claims ; $68.4 million , plus interest , to the states and the district of columbia for state medicaid losses ; and $38 million , plus interest , "for harm caused to consumers and to fund a remediation program to address the effects of warner - lambert's improper marketing scheme. .

finally , pfizer agreed to a corporate integrity agreement that addresses the "training and supervising [of] its marketing and sales staff , and ensures that any future off - label marketing conduct is detected and corrected on a timely basis. .

the warner - lambert court's reasoning is similar to that presented in other fca suits related to marketing of off - label drug uses for which medicaid , medicare , or a governmental entity reimbursed the claims that were false because of the off - label use .

for example , in a separate fca qui tam case , the u.s. government alleged that the pharmaceutical manufacturer cell therapeutics , inc. , "made false and misleading statements to treating doctors to the effect that [an acute promyelocytic leukemia drug] trisenox was medically accepted for the off - label uses being promoted , and therefore eligible for medicare reimbursement. .

the whistleblower in this case was a former sales representative who alleged that the manufacturer unlawfully marketed trisenox for diseases such as chronic myeloid leukemia to physicians who had rarely , if ever , treated patients with the disease ( acute promyelocytic leukemia ) for which use of the drug was fda - approved .

the manufacturer allegedly caused false and misleading statements about the drug's indications to appear in a medical bulletin that doctors use to find answers regarding medicare reimbursement ; the manufacturer's sales representatives then distributed thousands of copies of the bulletin to doctors to "mislead physicians into mistakenly believing that off - label trisenox prescriptions were medically accepted and reimbursable. .

the government alleged that the false statements resulted in trisenox being misbranded and that the company had shipped it as an unapproved new drug in interstate commerce , both violations of the ffdca .

the department of justice settled the case for $10.5 million , plus interest , in april 2007 , without the company admitting wrongdoing , but rather asserting that its "statements were a consequence of negligent advice provided" by an outside party .

in another fca suit , jazz pharmaceuticals , inc. , settled with the department of justice for $20 million in civil and criminal penalties and restitution in july 2007 .

this fca suit was brought by a former sales representative and addressed the company's promotion of xyrem — a drug also known as the date - rape drug or ghb ( gamma - hydroxybutyrate ) — for off - label uses other than the two approved medical uses related to narcolepsy .

the company's subsidiary pled guilty to criminal misbranding under the ffdca , through which it led doctors to prescribe xyrem though such prescriptions were not reimbursable by private insurers , medicare , or medicaid .

the xyrem case also concerned the distribution of documents regarding unapproved new uses that did not follow fda guidance regarding manufacturer promotion .

one question that arises in the context of promotion of off - label drug uses is whether the new fda guidance might be used to create a safe harbor for pharmaceutical companies if they are sued under the fca .

although the guidance document is not a statute and may not be binding , this report will first analyze it as if it created a question of statutory construction , as this may help to show how a court may view the role of the guidance document in a fca case based on marketing or promotion by a pharmaceutical company that arguably falls within the purported safe harbor of the guidance document .

conflicts frequently arise between the operation of two federal statutes that are silent as to their relationship .

in such a case , courts will try to harmonize the two so that both can be given effect .

a court "must read [two allegedly conflicting] statutes to give effect to each if [it] can do so while preserving their sense and purpose. .

only if provisions of two different federal statutes are "irreconcilably conflicting," or "if the later act covers the whole subject of the earlier one and is clearly intended as a substitute," will courts apply the rule that the later of the two prevails .

"[r]epeals by implication are not favored , ... and will not be found unless an intent to repeal is clear and manifest. .

generally , if congress intends one statute to repeal an earlier statute or section of a statute , or intends the earlier statute to remain in effect , it usually says so directly in the repealing act .

in a case that is roughly analogous to the current inquiry regarding the interaction of a guidance document and the fca , a federal court's decision in the fca qui tam suit united states ex rel .

r.c .

taylor iii v. mario gabelli may be instructive .

in that case , the defendants argued that a remedial scheme promulgated by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) for violations of the agency's regulations preempted the fca and therefore the whistleblower could not apply the fca to false statements made to the agency .

the court noted that repeals by implication are disfavored , but that more detailed statutes may indicate congress's intent to override more general ones in the area of federal claims and statutory remedies .

the court further explained that courts have been 'reluctant to find pre - emption of the [fca] even where other laws provided closely related regulation and remedies. .

indeed , the legislative history indicates that congress specifically contemplated the use of the act to address regulatory violations .

the court found that the defendants did not show , from the legislative history or otherwise , that congress meant to override the remedies available in the fca when congress delegated its authority to create a remedial scheme to the fcc .

the court also examined whether the fcc's more specific remedial scheme would preempt the fca because the agency's remedies were more detailed than those in the fca .

it held that the fcc regulations and the fca were not in conflict , even if the fcc remedial scheme offered a more detailed remedy than the fca .

therefore , the court concluded that congress did not intend "to preclude fca claims by authorizing the fcc to grant relief for violations of fcc regulations. .

assuming that the fda has the authority to issue guidance on the dissemination of reprints since the expiration of the relevant fdama provisions , and that a reviewing court would use reasoning similar to that in gabelli , it appears unlikely that a court would find that congress intended to preempt the fca when it delegated general rulemaking authority to the fda and enacted general statutes relating to guidance issued by the fda , which the fda then used to issue its guidance .

whistleblowers in qui tam cases have used the fca to address false claims that stem from regulatory violations of misbranding , and , as the court noted above , the fca's legislative history shows that congress had contemplated using the fca this way .

additionally , as a court noted in a case specifically relating to the dissemination provisions under fdama , "the fda's prosecutorial power flows from its long established authority to prosecute manufacturers for misbranding , not from the newly created [now expired] fdama" provisions .

therefore , while the fda's guidance may indicate how the agency intends to wield its enforcement powers with respect to pharmaceutical manufacturers — because it provides them with the fda's "current views and recommendations" regarding dissemination of reprints regarding off - label uses — the agency itself has stated that the " fda's legal authority to determine whether distribution of medical or scientific information constitutes promotion of an unapproved 'new use' or whether such activities cause a product to violate the [ffdca] has not changed . .

this comment echoes the position taken by the fda in a federal register notice , in which the agency indicated that it could determine a manufacturer's intent on a case - by - case enforcement basis using its longstanding statutory authorities .

nor would the fda's guidance affect the legal authority , enforcement powers , or other capabilities of outside agencies that have been involved in prosecuting fca cases related to off - label marketing , such as the hhs office of inspector general , the federal bureau of investigation , and the department of justice .

with regard to cases brought under statutory provisions of the ffdca , under the guidance , the fda's ability to use dissemination of materials regarding off - label or new uses of a drug as evidence in establishing the manufacturer's intent that the drug be used for a new , unapproved use would not appear to change , either .

the fda could still proceed on a case - by - case basis , using the guidance as a safe harbor for manufacturers who follow it: "if a manufacturer follows the recommendations described ... fda does not intend to consider the distribution of such medical and scientific information ... as establishing intent that the product be used for an unapproved new use," which would result in a product being misbranded .

but if a manufacturer unlawfully promoted a drug , it appears that dissemination of materials regarding off - label use could be used as evidence of intent and could lead to an enforcement action .

the guidance also appears to indicate that unlawful promotion of a drug would invalidate a case where the manufacturer followed the guidance recommendations but illegally promoted a drug .

furthermore , even if the manufacturer's promotion of an off - label use of a drug fell within the safe harbor of the fda guidance document , fca suits may still arise .

the off - label use of the drug may still not be covered for reimbursement under federal programs such as medicaid because the off - label use of the drug would not be for a medically accepted indication ( i.e .

an fda - approved use or an off - label use included in a specified drug compendia ) .

