the world economy may now be undergoing its most severe crisis since the great depression .

the economies of the united states , japan , and europe are in recession and the emerging economies in asia and latin america are experiencing slower growth as well .

according to the international monetary fund ( imf ) , world economic activity is projected to contract by 1.3% in 2009 , the first such fall in 60 years .

developed countries are projected to be the hardest hit , with a 3.8% decline in overall output .

developing countries are expected to grow on average by only 1.2% , after growing by 5.9% in 2008 as economic activity has slowed around the globe and trade finance has become harder to obtain , world trade flows have also declined .

the decline , which began in the summer of 2008 , has affected all the major trading countries .

overall , the world bank is predicting that world trade flows will decline by 10% in real terms in 2009 after growing by 4% in 2008 .

exports of developed countries are forecast to drop by roughly 14% and the decline for developing countries is projected to be about 7% .

emblematic of these concerns , the leaders of the most - developed g20 countries proposed at a november 2008 meeting "to refrain from raising new barriers on trade in goods and services" for at least 12 months .

a second g20 leaders meeting in april 2009 similarly committed to "... refrain from raising new barriers to investment or to trade in goods and services , imposing new restrictions , or implementing wto inconsistent measures to stimulate exports" until the end of 2010 , and to "rectify promptly any such measure. .

underlying these declarations was a view that government efforts to shield local companies from the global economic downturn through the imposition of trade barriers would only curb economic growth and prolong the global downturn .

more starkly , there was an additional concern that a rise in trade barriers could turn the global downturn into a global depression .

in the view of some analysts , this is what happened in the 1930s as a result of the passage of the u.s. smoot - hawley tariff act of 1930 , an event which triggered a cycle of retaliation and counter - retaliation .

the specter of widespread protectionism or trade wars has been the subject of numerous newspaper and press articles .

until recently it was possible to dismiss many mass media alarms on the grounds that today's global economy has numerous firewalls against protectionism that did not exist in the 1930s .

but the accelerating global economic decline has increased pressures on policymakers to adopt a number of measures to assist distressed industries that are considered by some observers to be "protectionist. .

protectionism is a very elastic concept with multiple meanings .

for many economists , no form of protection is legitimate because such interventions distort prices and misallocate resources over time .

for some trade lawyers , only measures that are not consistent with wto rules and obligations are protectionist and considered unacceptable .

for many political realists and policymakers , protective measures that provide help to constituents in times of economic distress are a political responsibility and necessity , not protectionism .

for some historians , efforts by countries to improve their own trade position and help domestic industries at the expense of others by imposing measures that artificially increase exports or limit imports describe protectionism .

still other historians define protectionism as a return to the policies of the 1930s , which are characterized by substantial across the board increases in trade barriers often directed at particular countries and cycles of retaliation and counter - retaliation .

to analyze the relationship between the economic downturn and protectionism , this report constructs three scenarios .

each scenario reflects a different dimension of the relationship between the economic downturn and protectionism .

the scenarios are a continuum based on an analysis of the situation today to the direction that trade protectionism could take under different assumptions and circumstances .

the scenarios are not predictions , but descriptions of how and why protectionist pressures could be manifested and transmitted under very different situations and policy responses .

under a low impact s cenario existing wto rules and obligations , bolstered by a high level of global interdependence , keep pressures for protection under control .

proposals for protection , if implemented , have a modest impact on global trade flows .

under a medium impact scenario wto rules prove inadequate or are disregarded due to the exigencies of the economic crisis .

as a result , trade and investment flows over time could be diverted or fall outside wto surveillance , thereby weakening the world trading system .

under a high impact scenario wto rules are violated or ignored , major trade conflicts occur , and the world trading system is damaged .

this threat arises from longstanding trade imbalances driven by distorted global savings and consumption patterns .

the depth and duration of the economic downturn likely will be a major determinant of which scenario or scenarios prevail .

at the same time , the degree to which protectionist measures are adopted could affect the course of the economic downturn as well .

a concluding section discusses several policy challenges that rising pressures for trade protection may pose for policymakers and the 111 th congress .

this issue has been on the agenda of the g - 20 countries when the leaders met in london in april 2009 and on the agenda of the g - 8 countries when the finance ministers met in trieste in june 2009 .

there are a number of reasons why the threat of a return to protectionist , beggar - thy - neighbor policies could be vastly overstated .

unlike the 1930s , today's global economy has several strong firewalls to prevent governments from raising trade barriers that result in a cycle of retaliation and counter - retaliation .

these firewalls include more institutionalized obstacles to protectionism built into the wto system , more policy instruments to address the economic slowdown , and a more interdependent and open world economy than existed in the 1930s .

in addition , some in today's media may tend to overstate the threat of protectionism by not always distinguishing between protectionist actions and protectionist pressures and / or by equating legitimate forms of protection with protectionism .

the fact that there is ample room for increases in trade measures and barriers that are consistent with the rules and obligations of the wto often may go unappreciated in some press coverage .

these trade measures and barriers include increases in applied tariffs to bound rates , and imposition of countervailing and antidumping duties , so - called 'defensive' trade measures .

protection for limited periods of time and under prescribed conditions is built into the rules of the wto as a political safety valve and as a recognition of the human and social costs that are associated with the often wrenching adjustments that accompany increased trade competition .

under this scenario , wto rules and obligations are disregarded or prove ineffective and trade and capital flows are diverted or misallocated .

as a result , the global trading system could be weakened over time .

this scenario involves sector specific financial assistance programs that governments around the world have developed in response to the economic crisis .

to date these programs have been directed primarily to auto companies and banks .

in the auto sector , almost every producing country — the united states , canada , sweden , germany , france , australia , argentina , brazil , south korea , and china – has launched programs to aid producers or stimulate car sales .

one estimate totals these subsidies at $48 billion worldwide , including $17.4 billion thus far in the united states .

in the financial services sector , the wto reports that 58 different programs worth trillions of dollars have been announced by 26 countries in an effort to strengthen struggling institutions .

much larger estimates have been provided independent researchers .

these financial assistance programs have been devised and implemented in response to extraordinary conditions .

in the financial sector , as some major banks and institutions have appeared on the edge of bankruptcy , government rescue packages and takeovers have increased in scope and magnitude in an effort to avoid contagion or systematic risk — not by a desire to save failing companies .

the destruction of wealth in the financial sector has also hurt the real economy and key industrial sectors , with large firms facing bankruptcy and large cut - backs in their labor force .

while alleged subsidies contained in the rescue packages under some circumstances can improve national economic performance and resource allocation , they may also be a vehicle for a kind of murky protection and misallocation of resources .

whether any of the many different rescue packages discriminate against foreign firms may also become an important consideration in judging their impact on the trading system over time .

under this scenario , wto rules are violated or ignored and major trade conflicts occur .

as a result , the functioning and legitimacy of the world trading system is undermined .

this threat arises from the longstanding presence of highly skewed trade balances driven by distorted global consumption and savings patterns — patterns that were an underlying cause of the global economic downturn .

high savings countries such as china , japan and germany produced more than they consumed and had to rely on export - led growth to help keep their economies growing .

in the process , these three countries , plus the oil - exporting countries , experienced large and growing current account surpluses .

in 2008 , the current account surpluses were estimated to be around $2 trillion .

the united states , on the other hand , was a low savings country , consuming much and having to borrow from the rest of the world to finance its investment needs .

the global economic downturn is deep and broad .

job cuts and declining levels of economic activity are affecting countries around the globe .

even before the crisis hit , there had been an erosion of public support for trade and globalization in many countries , including the united states .

as a result , increased pressures for protection should not be unexpected .

policymakers and members of congress , thus , find themselves situated between a rock and a hard place .

on the one hand , they are under increased pressure to respond to pleas from voters to take action that will alleviate immediate distress .

on the other hand , they are cognizant of the need to keep markets open and trade and investment flowing .

how to balance considerations of constituent requests for relief — national and political demands — with recognition of the growing imperatives of an integrated global economy — which requires international cooperation — is an overarching dilemma .

in this context , three broad policy challenges can be derived from the analysis presented in this report .

the first deals with international coordination and surveillance of fiscal stimulus programs .

the second relates to multilateral surveillance of trade pressures and barriers adopted during this crisis .

the third pertains to the management of u.s. trade relations , particularly as it relates to trade with china and other current account surplus countries .

most economists maintain that governments need to place high priority on bolstering aggregate demand in an effort to arrest deteriorating economic conditions around the world .

expansionary economic policies , via tax cuts , increased public spending , and budget deficits , are one way to get national and global economic activity moving again .

in addition to its beneficial impact on bolstering global demand and addressing the recession , such policies can also be channeled to alleviating some of the losses ( jobs and health care benefits ) workers are experiencing from the economic downturn — losses that often intensify protectionist pressures .

expansionary policies , including monetary policies , are not universally supported .

some critics worry about consequences of larger public debt .

many european governments maintain that financial regulatory reforms are a more important priority .

other critics believe that it is more efficient to allow markets to adjust without government interference .

and still others maintain that expansionary policies are unlikely to prove sufficient in achieving long - term rebalancing of domestic demand .

the current account surplus countries generally are in the best position to run expansionary fiscal policies .

such policies are also necessary if current account deficit countries , which are trying to save more than before , are able to improve their net export position , a development critical for economic recovery .

moreover , the united states , the world's largest deficit country , will be hard pressed to employ expansionary economic policies for many years without adverse consequences for the value of the dollar and its overall debt position .

in the absence of help from these countries , political frustration in the united states could grow if it is perceived that other countries are shirking their global economic responsibilities .

under these circumstances , it could prove helpful if policymakers and members of congress had available an objective analysis of the extent to which all major countries are pursuing expansionary policies , given their differential circumstances .

such public information could be used in discussions with their counterparts ( in all major countries ) to do their "fair" share in keeping the world economy moving forward and as a way to hold everyone to account .

the analysis could include targets for demand growth and monetary policy , perhaps differentiated by individual country circumstances .

u.s. treasury secretary tim geithner has called for each g20 country to set a spending target equaling 2% of aggregate gdp for 2009 and 2010 , and for the imf to monitor progress towards that goal .

some economists are calling for a more ambitious 3% spending target given the deterioration in the outlook for world economic growth .

the imf's fiscal affairs department has produced an analysis that addresses this objective in part .

whether such an analysis or macroeconomic scorecard could benefit from a formal mandate from the leadership of the imf or the g - 20 countries is something that could be considered .

the wto secretariat has begun tracking trade and trade - related measures taken in the context of the current economic crisis .

these efforts are designed to bolster policymakers' resolve to reject calls for protection by making the measures transparent and public .

the idea is that by raising public awareness of what barriers are being imposed , countries may realize that they are not acting alone and that their restrictive measures could be emulated quickly by their trading partners .

an initial concern about the wto effort is that the data have been drawn primarily from secondary sources such as press reports .

member governments currently are obliged to notify the wto about changes in applied tariffs and subsidies only on an annual basis .

for the tracking system to become more useful and relevant , there may be a need for greater involvement of member governments in providing information on new measures adopted .

along with this information , the member country could be asked to provide some justification for taking the action , along with a promise to remove the new protection within a certain period of time .

it also has been suggested that an inventory of new protective measures , many of which are likely to be wto - consistent or legal , could also prove useful once the global recession ends .

much of the damage from the higher tariffs of the 1930s was that they remained in place for decades .

thus , devising a plan to remove the barriers induced during the economic crisis arguably could also be contemplated .

the global economic downturn creates numerous challenges for congress and the president in managing u.s. trade relations .

based on a longstanding division of responsibilities - - congress's constitutional responsibility to "regulate foreign commerce" and presidential responsibility to negotiate with foreign countries — the legislative and executive branches of government are challenged to consult and cooperative closely .

this is true on a range of issues , including constituent requests for protection , facilitating the adjustment of current account surplus countries , and formulating trade liberalization priorities .

as constituent requests for protection are likely to increase as the recession persists , congress is faced with balancing the political imperative of being responsive to constituent needs against u.s. international obligations under the wto .

on the one hand , current wto and other international trade obligations do grant member countries some leeway to raise tariffs , protect domestic producers for limited periods of time , and provide domestic preferences or financial assistance to specific sectors under certain circumstances .

such protection provides a political safety valve for absorbing the political pressures associated with efforts of companies and workers to adjust to increased competition .

on the other , protection that falls outside existing international trade obligations has less legitimacy .

under these circumstances , the policy challenge is not necessarily protection versus no protection , but under what circumstances might protection be appropriate and for how long .

as the history of u.s. trade policy suggests , providing no protection when it may be warranted can often backfire , generating support for greater and perhaps excessive protection at a later date .

how best to facilitate a more rapid adjustment of current account surplus countries is a second large challenge for congress and the executive branch .

legislative initiatives threatening trade sanctions , for example , are likely to hurt both sides if imposed , but they could also provide the president with useful leverage in pressing counterparts in europe and asia to do more in terms of boosting aggregate demand .

in an ideal world , international cooperation and institutions are a better way to encourage the current account surplus countries to undertake necessary structural changes and to head off protectionist actions .

as part of any agreement , a realistic amount of time may be required for these countries to make the necessary adjustments .

in return for open markets in the deficit countries while these changes are being made , the surplus countries could agree not to employ predatory trade policies .

problems and possible conflict likely will occur , however , if it becomes clear that current account surplus countries are trying to export their overcapacity and unemployment to the united states by manipulating their exchange rate , subsidizing exports , or blocking imports .

challenging these practices through the available international channels may be less politically contentious and more effective than unilateral actions , but such challenges can often take years to be resolved .

in the meantime , trade can take on a zero sum game appearance as the choice between preserving jobs at home or abroad becomes more stark .

a third challenge for the congress and administration involves weighing the role that trade liberalizing agreements can play during the current recession .

on the one hand , in a time of great economic uncertainty and retrenchment , many stakeholders may prefer to preserve benefits ( subsidies or tariffs ) that they already have .

this is because trade liberalization rests on a willingness to swap current benefits derived by protection or subsidies in return for future benefits offered by promises of greater access to foreign markets that are growing .

on the other hand , trade liberalization , by cutting protection , may provide an effective economic stimulus and , in the process , appear more attractive .

as the economic downturn has placed added demands on the use of public funds to stimulate economic activity , conducting negotiations that free up public funds through the reduction of subsidies may become more appealing .

one key practical question is whether the global economic downturn could cast the long - stalled doha round of multilateral negotiations in a new light .

some observers believe that some wto members may reevaluate the basis for their opposition to some version of the agreement proposed in july 2008 based on today's radically different economic environment .

this is , in part , due to the fact that shrinking trade flows have highlighted the importance of open markets for economic development among a broad group of countries , and in the process , increased the value of concessions left on the negotiating table last year .

this group includes the export - dependent countries in asia countries and india .

other observers think that the kind of political leadership that is necessary to push trade liberalization will be in short supply and difficult to secure in a time of a global recession and increased protectionist pressures .

moreover , the u.s. business community is not enthusiastic about the package of market opening concessions that was proposed last july , thus providing little stakeholder support in the united states for an effort to reach a partial doha agreement .

