requiring or encouraging parents' involvement in the education of their children has been a long - standing goal of title i , part a , education for the disadvantaged , authorized by the of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ( esea ) , most recently amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) .

however , activities that constitute parental involvement in the esea have changed since the law's inception from parent advisory council meetings to volunteering in school to school - parent compacts and helping children learn at home .

nclb continued to view parents as partners in their children's education , but it also included parental notification requirements and two new options for parents whose children attend schools that did not meet state standards .

these two options are title i public school choice , which allows a parent to transfer a child from a school that has not met adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) for two consecutive years or more to a school that has met ayp , and supplemental educational services ( ses ) , which allows a parent to enroll a child in free tutoring if the child's school has not met ayp for three or more years .

most of the parental involvement requirements in the esea , as amended by nclb , are in title i - a , section 1118 , though section 1116 includes parental notification requirements and sections 1111 and 1112 also have parental involvement provisions .

additionally , there are parental involvement requirements in title i - b ( reading first and even start ) , title iii ( language instruction for limited english proficient and immigrant students ) , title iv ( 21 st century schools ) , title v ( parent information and resource centers ) , and title ix ( parental consent regarding armed forces recruiter access to student information ) .

recent state monitoring reports and implementation evaluations from the u.s. department of education ( ed ) have found that most state educational agencies ( seas ) , local educational agencies ( leas ) , and schools need to improve their implementation of parental involvement requirements , especially regarding parent notification .

while leas and schools can surely refine their current parental involvement strategies , alternative approaches to increasing parental involvement could include more full - service approaches such as expanding public charter schools and community schools .

this report examines various modes of parental involvement in the education of their children .

it delineates the parental involvement activities that are promoted through the esea .

it examines progress made toward implementing these activities , and examines research on the importance of various parental involvement activities .

it also discusses possible approaches for enhancing parental involvement in education .

it is worth noting that the research reviewed for this report does not generally provide in - depth information about how thoroughly parental activities are implemented in locales or about what makes them more or less successful at achieving goals .

information on implementation of parental involvement activities covered in this report generally comes from survey data reporting on the frequency of activities and on school personnel views on the importance of these activities .

additionally , this report does not examine whether parental involvement activities are uniformly beneficial .

while the parental activities reported on are ones which many schools are seeking to promote and which are generally thought to be beneficial to students , parents , and teachers , it is possible that they are implemented in some settings in ways that are not beneficial .

as an example , one can imagine involving parents in instructional support activities that do not align well with parents' backgrounds or skills .

these issues were not a central focus of the literature reviewed for this report , and are beyond the purview of the report .

requiring or encouraging parents' involvement in the education of their children has been a long - standing goal of title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 .

parental involvement initially referred to policy involvement — ensuring that schools were focusing title i - a funds on the needs of disadvantaged students .

the 1988 and 1994 reauthorizations of the esea ( p.l .

100-297 and p.l .

103-382 , respectively ) included an emphasis on helping parents become more involved in their child's education .

more recently , nclb gave parents the new role of consumers: through new accountability requirements , parents have the option of choosing a different school for their child or electing free tutoring ( supplemental educational services ) for their child if their child's school fails to make ayp for two consecutive years or more years .

requiring or encouraging parents' involvement in the education of their children and in the decisions affecting the education of their children has been a goal of title i - a of the esea since its enactment in 1965 .

the esea has been reauthorized eight times ( including most recently in 2001 , when it was amended by nclb ) , and the parental involvement provisions often changed with each reauthorization , and sometimes in between , through guidance from the u.s. office of education and , later , the u.s. department of education .

parental involvement requirements in nclb continued to focus on parental involvement policies and school - parent compacts , but also included additional parental notification requirements and two new options for parents whose children attended schools that did not meet state standards .

these two options are title i - a public school choice , which allows a parent to transfer a child from a school that has had not met ayp for two consecutive years or more to a school that has met ayp , and supplemental educational services , which allows a parent to enroll a child in free tutoring if the child's school has not met ayp for three or more years .

most of the parental involvement requirements in nclb are contained in title i - a , section 1118 , though section 1116 includes parental notification requirements and sections 1111 and 1112 also have parental involvement provisions .

additionally , there are parental involvement requirements in title i - b ( reading first and even start ) , title iii ( language instruction for limited english proficient and immigrant students ) , title iv ( 21 st century schools ) , title v ( parent information and resource centers ) , and title ix ( parental consent regarding armed forces recruiter access to student information ) .

as mentioned previously , in the nls - nclb , 78% of teachers in schools identified for improvement , corrective action , or restructuring reported that during the 2006-2007 school year a "major" or "moderate" challenge of improving student performance was "insufficient parent involvement. .

the survey question did not define "parent involvement," so it is unclear exactly how teachers believe parents should be more involved to improve student performance .

if , for instance , teachers believe that parents should be more involved with their child's homework and the school's activities , schools could simply employ variations on existing strategies to reach these goals: for example , improve communication by using more methods with increased frequency and ensuring translations in more languages to inform parents of school policies and events ; provide more professional development to teachers and principals on how to interact with parents ; provide parents with more information — in an appropriate language — on how to help their children learn ; and provide more workshops for parents that are targeted to their specific needs .

if doing more of these activities is an approach used to improve parental involvement , technical assistance could be provided by ed , seas , or leas to refine and improve the strategies and provide additional guidance to school leaders on effective implementation techniques .

the nls - nclb found that a minority of principals reported that during the 2006-2007 school year they worked with community partners and employed parent liaisons to promote parent involvement .

a community leader or fellow parent may be able to convey the importance of parental involvement to low - income or non - english speaking parents who are wary of the school environment .

parent liaisons often go door - to - door to talk with parents in their homes and are often members of the community themselves .

while the esea does not require leas and schools to implement these strategies , it may be useful to evaluate the effectiveness of these practices in increasing parental involvement and provide guidance to school leaders on best practices .

currently , research documenting the positive effectives of parent liaisons on parental involvement is confined to case studies .

other alternatives to increasing parental involvement include promoting more full - service models: public charter schools and community schools .

public charter schools operate according to the terms of charters or contracts granted by public chartering agencies .

the terms of charters typically provide charter school operators with increased autonomy over the operation of schools , often including exemption from , or flexibility in the application of , many of the state or local regulations otherwise applicable to public schools .

this increased autonomy is often granted in exchange for the expectation of increased accountability for results or outcomes .

an ed evaluation of public charter schools found that charter schools were more likely then traditional public schools to have higher levels of parental involvement in certain school - based parental involvement activities .

for example , about 35% of charter schools reported that during the 1999-2000 school year , at least half of their parents volunteered at school , compared with about 15% of traditional schools that reported this rate of volunteering .

less than 20% of charter schools reported that at least of half of their parents participated in parent education workshops , instructional issues , governance , and budget decisions ; however , charter schools were at least twice as likely as traditional schools to report this frequency of involvement .

these findings do not necessarily indicate that charter schools increase parental involvement ; rather , it is possible that parents who have always been highly involved in their child's education are the very parents who are more likely to enroll their child in a charter school .

in fact , in the ed study , there were no statistical differences between charter and traditional public schools in parent participation in parent conferences and open houses: over 70% of both types of schools reported that at least half of their parents participated in both of these activities .

as public charter schools become more popular and their numbers continue to increase , it may be useful to evaluate the effectiveness of charter schools in increasing parental involvement .

at the time this report was written , there had not been any action in the 111 th congress concerning community schools , though members of the 110 th congress introduced bills that focused on such schools .

identical bills were introduced in the house ( h.r .

2323 ) and the senate ( s. 1391 ) that would have amended title iv of the esea to include grant programs for full - service community schools .

two grant programs would have been authorized by the bills: ( 1 ) grants to consortiums of leas and community - based , nonprofit organizations that would have provided services to multiple schools and ( 2 ) grants to state collaboratives to support the development of full - service community schools .

in both bills , $200,000,000 would have been authorized for fy2008 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fy2009-fy2013 .

of the appropriated amount , 75% would have funded the local grants , 20% would have funded the state grants , and at least $500,000 of the remaining 5% would have been used for technical assistance .

though neither bill was reported out of committee , ed was able to award 10 five - year grants for full - service community school programs in fy2008 under title v - d , fund for the improvement of education .

the fy2008 appropriation for the grant program was $4,912,650 .

the coalition for community schools' vision for community schools includes the following: a community school is both a place and a set of partnerships between the school and other community resources .

its integrated focus on academics , services , supports and opportunities leads to improved student learning , stronger families and healthier communities .

schools become centers of the community and are open to everyone — all day , every day , evenings and weekends .

using public schools as hubs , community schools knit together inventive , enduring relationships among educators , families , volunteers and community partners .

health and social service agencies , family support groups , youth development organizations , institutions of higher education , community organizations , businesses , and civic and faith - based groups all play a part .

by sharing expertise and resources , schools and communities act in concert to transform traditional schools into permanent partnerships for excellence .

because community schools provide services to parents and family members , these schools have another opportunity to reach out to parents and try to increase parents' involvement in their child's education .

a three - year evaluation of two children's aid society community schools in new york city found that parents were more involved and felt more welcome at the community schools than at demographically similar comparison schools .

in addition to increasing parental involvement , some research has found that community schools have increased academic achievement .

in its fy2010 budget request , the obama administration proposed creating the promise neighborhoods program modeled after the harlem children's zone ( hcz ) .

hcz aims to improve college - going rates by combining a rigorous k - 12 education in charter schools with a full network of supportive services — from early childhood education to after - school activities to college counseling — in an entire neighborhood from birth to college .

hcz combines the supportive services offered by community schools with the educational benefits of charter schools .

there are currently three charter schools in the hcz that will eventually serve children from grades k - 12 .

there are also community centers that are open during the afternoons and evenings , on the weekends , and over summer that provide a wide range of programs and services for children , parents , and community members .

