the nation's military installations have gone through several rounds of base realignments and closures ( brac ) , the process by which excess military facilities are identified and , as necessary , transferred to other federal agencies or disposed of , placing ownership in non - federal entities .

since the enactment of the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 , as amended ( base closure act ) , transfer or disposal of former military installations has been governed by relatively consistent legal requirements .

on december 28 , 2001 , a round of base closures was authorized by congress .

the brac process requires the secretary of defense to prepare and submit a list of military installations recommended for closure or realignment to the congressional defense committees and an independent commission .

the independent brac commission , created by the base closure act , is required to review and analyze the department of defense's ( dod ) recommendations and submit a report to the president with findings and conclusions that accept , reject , and / or modify the recommendations .

the president reviews the brac commission report , and upon acceptance of the recommendations , submits it to congress .

if the president fails to submit the recommendations to congress within the timeframe required under the base closure act , the brac process is terminated .

upon receipt of the report from the president , congress has the opportunity to disapprove of the recommendations through the enactment of a joint resolution .

the 2005 brac commission considered 190 separate dod recommendations , a number exceeding the number of recommendations considered by all previous brac commissions combined .

ultimately , the brac commission recommended a total of 182 closures or realignments with an estimated savings to the taxpayer of $15 billion over 20 years .

the recommendations were accepted by the president and forwarded to congress .

congress did not disapprove of the report and , therefore , the recommendations became law on november 9 , 2005 .

the current brac law is similar to the original statute and retains many of the transfer authorities that were available in previous rounds .

significant amendments in 1999 and 2001 altered portions of the law's disposal authorities , including requirements related to economic development conveyances .

consequently , dod promulgated new regulations to implement the property disposal authorities available for the 2005 round .

however , in 2009 , congress amended the law as it relates to economic development conveyances requiring dod to issue revised regulations .

this report provides an overview of the transfer and disposal authorities available under the law for military installations closed during the 2005 round , and indicate how amendments to the base closure act have altered the property transfer and disposal process .

it also describes dod's regulations implementing the amended base closure act .

the transfer or disposal of federal property is primarily performed by the general services administration ( gsa ) pursuant to the federal property and administrative services act of 1949 ( fpasa ) .

the base closure act directs the administrator of the gsa to delegate specified transfer and disposal authorities to dod for use at brac installations , and dod has , in turn , delegated this authority to the various military departments .

thus , brac property transfer and disposal is performed , generally , in accordance with the fpasa and the gsa regulations implementing it .

in addition , the base closure act authorizes dod , with gsa approval , to supersede gsa regulations with brac - specific regulations .

apart from the transfer and disposal authorities typically available for federal property , the base closure act and other provisions of law authorize a variety of other conveyance mechanisms .

the available authorities include: public benefit transfers , economic development conveyances ( at cost and no cost ) , negotiated sales to state or local governments , conservation conveyances , and public sales .

in some cases , the analysis and use of particular authorities must precede analysis and use of others .

on the other hand , there are many transfer and disposal mechanisms that are given roughly equivalent priority ; thus analysis and use of them may occur simultaneously .

in addition to dod's role in making disposal and transfer determinations , the base closure act also provides a substantial role for states and communities in the property redevelopment planning process .

thus , local communities can significantly affect the brac property transfer and disposal decisions made at the federal level .

the specific roles for states and communities as well as the various transfer and disposal authorities are discussed below .

the base closure act and the fpasa primarily governed the transfer and disposal process for 2005 round brac properties .

the process first requires screening to determine if other dod components or federal agencies have a need for the property .

in the event that property is not transferred in this manner , it is deemed surplus and may be disposed of pursuant to brac and fpasa authorities .

compliance with these authorities generally requires an analysis of suitability for homeless assistance or a public benefit transfer .

dod is directed to take into consideration multiple factors in determining which authority to use , including consultation with lras and their redevelopment plans , but dod appears to be ultimately responsible for making final determinations .

public auctions and negotiated sales are generally available , although it would appear that fair market value must generally be obtained under these authorities .

edcs are authorized as well , which may be made for no consideration , contingent upon certain conditions of transfer .

