department of defense ( dod ) fuel consumption varies from year to year in response to changes in mission and the tempo of operations .

dod may consume upwards of 1% of the petroleum products annually refined in the united states .

foreign purchased petroleum products may double dod's consumption .

the defense energy support center ( desc ) , under the command of the defense logistics agency ( dla ) , has the mission of purchasing fuel for all of dod's services and agencies , both in the continental united states ( conus ) and outside ( oconus ) .

desc's origins date back to world war ii , when the army - navy petroleum board fell under the department of the interior .

its mission transferred to the war department in 1945 and its designation changed to the joint army - navy purchasing agency .

in 1962 , the agency became a part of the former defense supply agency , now known as the defense logistics agency ( dla ) .

designated the defense fuel supply center ( dfsc ) in 1964 , it served as a single entity to purchase and manage the dod's petroleum products and coal .

in 1998 , it was re - designated the defense energy support center with an expanded new mission to manage a comprehensive portfolio of energy products .

in practice , desc typically awards fuel contracts based on the lowest cost to the point of delivery , typically for lengths of one year .

desc's fuel procurement categories include bulk petroleum products ( jp - 8 , jp - 5 , and diesel fuel ) , ships' bunker fuel , into - plane ( refueling at commercial airports ) , and post - camp - and - station ( pc&s ) .

although dod may represent the single largest consumer of petroleum products , its consumption primarily of jp - 8 , jp - 5 , and diesel fuel aligns more closely with the narrower market for middle - distillate fuels .

this report summarizes dod's fuel purchases over the current decade ( fy2000 through fy2008 ) ; and compares fuel spending to overall dod spending .

it also compares the prices that dod pays for fuel to commercially equivalent fuel , and the quantities of dod fuel purchases to the net production of u.s. refined petroleum products .

to place dod's fuel requirement in a larger perspective , the report discusses refining and refineries supplying dod's jet fuel , and desc's fuel procurement practices .

the report concludes by discussing recent legislation and policies that affect fuel procurement .

in the past , when crude oil and refined petroleum prices were high , congress has looked at dod's fuel demand as a means of stimulating private sector interest in producing alternative fuels .

recent legislation directs dod to consider using alternative fuels to meet its needs , and to stimulate commercial interest in supplying the needs .

recent high fuel prices did stimulate dod and private interest in producing alternative fuels from coal and oil shale , though no project has yet reached commercial operation .

legislation ensuring that federal agencies do not spend taxpayer dollars on new fuel sources that will exacerbate global warming now counters earlier policy objectives .

proposed rules that mandate greenhouse gas emission reporting may minimally affect refineries .

recently introduced legislation that would cap greenhouse gas emissions is likely to affect some refinery operations , if not the refining industry's responsiveness to dod's fuel requirements .

dod's fuel consumption varies from year to year in response to changes in mission and the tempo of operations .

the majority of desc's bulk fuel purchases are for jp - 8 jet fuel , which has ranged from 60 to 74 million barrels annually over the past decade ( the equivalent of 165,000 to 200,000 barrels per day ) .

the air force and the army represent the primary consumers of jp - 8 fuel .

the navy consumes jp - 5 jet fuel .

all services to varying degrees consume diesel fuel .

desc's total fuel purchases peaked at 145.1 million barrels in fy2003 , when u.s. forces invaded iraq .

jp - 8 purchases peaked in fy2004 and have since been declining ( as discussed further below ) .

in fy2000 , jp - 8 represented almost 60% of overall desc's overall purchases and by fy2008 only 46% .

overall desc fuel expenditures grew from roughly $3.6 billion in fy2000 to nearly $18 billion by fy2008 — a nearly 500% increase .

actual volumes purchased had only increased by 30% over the same time .

desc petroleum product purchases , summarized by volume and total cost , appear in table 1 .

desc's purchases , however , do not necessarily correspond with dod's actual consumption .

desc may draw fuel down from storage to supplement demand and may replenish fuel stores with purchases .

dod also maintains a fuel "war reserve" that it may draw down in contingencies .

while dod's full consumption began leveling off after the iraq war , fuel costs and average fuel prices continued increasing ; in part , from increasing crude oil prices ( which spiked to nearly $140 per barrel in the summer of 2008 ) and , in part , from increasing refining margins ( discussed below ) .

the average cost of all petroleum products purchased rose from $34.62 per barrel in fy2000 to over $133 per barrel in fy2008 ; an increase of nearly 370% ( see figure 1 ) .

originally , dod's authority to procure fuel extends from power originally granted to the navy .

under 10 u.s.c .

§ 7229 ( purchase of fuel ) , "... the secretary of the navy may , in any manner he considers proper , buy the kind of fuel that is best adapted to the purpose for which it is to be used. .

section 7229 superseded 34 u.s.c .

580 "which had been interpreted as authorizing the armed services petroleum purchasing agency to negotiate contracts for the purchase of fuel , not only when acting as a procuring activity for the navy , but also when filling the consolidated fuel requirements of the armed forces. .

however , desc now relies on the general procurement authority under 10 u.s.c .

2304 ( contract: competition requirement ) , since this gives dod the authority to buy almost any kind of supply or service .

desc awards contracts and purchases fuel in a one - step process under the defense working capital fund ( dwcf ) .

it internally transfers the fuel to dod customers , which it refers to as "sales. .

this operation permits the department to take advantage of price breaks for large quantity purchases , and in most years provides the dod customer a stabilized price for all products during that fiscal year .

over the current decade , which saw an unprecedented spike in crude oil prices , dod experienced a 500% increase in the cost of fuel cost ( dollars per barrel ) .

the concern over declining worldwide crude oil production had preceded rising fuel costs also for several years .

in 2006 , due to increasing fuel costs and military operations in iraq and afghanistan , the air force had to reduce funding available for flying hours used to train air combat command aircrews .

fuel costs have represented as much as 3% of dod's spending and over 7% of the operation and maintenance budget in the past decade .

in comparison , the airline industry's major operating costs are fuel .

however , the airline industry has the option during periods of high fuel cost of passing the costs on to customers , adjusting flight schedules , withholding stock dividends , or even declaring insolvency .

unlike the airlines , dod's only recourse has been to request supplemental appropriations to pay for the increased costs and supplies .

for example , dod identified $0.5 billion in the fy2007 emergency supplemental request for increases in baseline fuel costs resulting from higher market costs in the first half of fy2007 .

dod has looked at several options to limit its vulnerability to fuel price swings and supply shortages .

these include "fuel hedging," multi - year contracting , and alternate fuels .

in particular , increasing purchases of more widely available commercial jet a fuel have not only reduced dod's fuel costs but have expanded the range of supplies ─ an arguable goal for an alternative fuel .

desc's "business model" provides the flexibility needed to meet changing operational requirements from year - to - year .

as noted above , desc uses fixed - price contracts that include an economic price adjustment clause that provides for upward and downward price revisions .

desc has designed this contract provision to take advantage of swings in fuel prices , which ultimately reflect crude oil prices .

if prices decline , desc's costs decline .

if prices rise , the economic clause adjusts the price that desc would pay to the going market rate .

this limits desc's risk in holding contracts for fuel priced above the going market rate , but does not hold down costs during rapidly escalating prices .

 ( desc will pay higher prices , but look for the best offer. ) .

a practice used in the airline industry makes use of various "hedging" strategies to minimize the risk of future jet fuel price increases .

a simple hedge involves buying "futures" contracts to lock in prices .

for example , when crude oil prices peaked at nearly $147 per barrel in the summer of 2008 , southwest airlines reportedly had managed earlier to hedge its fuel at $51 / barrel .

in 2004 , the defense business board convened the fuel hedging task group to examine potential ways of reducing dod's exposure to fuel price volatility by hedging in commercial markets .

although the board task group concluded that dod could feasibly hedge its fuel purchases , it gave broader support to engaging in "no - market" hedging through the department of the interior's mineral management service .

during crude oil price spikes , additional interior department oil could apply lease revenues to offset increasing dod fuel costs .

the group concluded that dod could request that the office of management and budget ( omb ) seek legislative authority to transfer funds from interior to defense , or vice versa ; depending on which department benefits from unanticipated price changes .

however , interior derives the bulk of its revenues from outer continental shelf ( ocs ) leases , and congress has already statutorily allocated those revenues among various government accounts , including coastal states .

furthermore , ocs lessees pay royalties - in - kind , in the form of oil delivered to the strategic petroleum reserve ( spr ) .

congress created the spr as a response to the 1970s arab oil embargo to prevent a reoccurrence of supply disruptions .

when filled to its 727 million barrel capacity , the spr represents roughly 70 days of imported supply .

a drawdown of the spr under the energy policy and conservation act ( epca – p.l .

94-163 ) can take the form of a sale to the highest bidder ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 6241 ) , or an exchange ( the company receiving the oil must later replace it with a comparably valued volume ) .

during the opening days of the 1991 persian gulf war , president george h.w .

bush's drawdown authorization precipitated a rapid crude oil price decline .

the government accountability office ( gao ) reported that in 2006 , 40% of the crude oil refined in u.s. refineries was heavier than that stored in the spr .

refineries that process heavy oil cannot operate at normal capacity if they run lighter oils .

the types of oil currently stored in the spr would not be fully compatible with 36 of the 74 refineries considered vulnerable to supply disruptions .

gao cited a doe estimate that u.s. refining throughput would decrease by 735,000 barrels per day ( or 5% ) if the 36 refineries had to use spr oil — a substantial reduction in the spr's effectiveness during an oil disruption , especially if the disruption involved heavy oil .

the spr does not have a defined role in mitigating a dod fuel supply disruption .

presumably , a refinery under contract to supply dod would have the option of bidding on a drawdown sale .

a typical refinery yields only 8% jet fuel on average .

that is , for every gallon of jet fuel a refinery yields , it also produces roughly 11.5 gallons of other petroleum products ( gasoline , diesel ) .

this operational limitation on producing jet fuel limits the spr's role during a supply disruption , if the only objective is supporting dod's requirement .

as a final recourse , dod may look to an alternative or replacement for crude oil , as provided in the 2005 energy policy act .

however , the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-140 ) prohibits federal agencies from procuring alternative or synthetic fuels , unless contract provisions stipulate that life - cycle greenhouse gas emissions do not exceed equivalent conventional fuel emissions produced from conventional petroleum sources .

the provision was included to ensure that federal agencies are not spending taxpayer dollars on new fuel sources that will exacerbate global warming — a response to proposals under air force consideration to develop coal - to - liquid ( ctl ) fuels .

the air force has since abandoned plans to attract private investment in a ctl fuel plant to supply malmstrom air force base , montana , but desc is interested in pursuing a pilot program for synthetic fuels to support dod jp - 8 fuel requirements in alaska .

although crude oil prices have precipitously declined , as of late , the reoccurrence of crude oil supply shortages and price spikes may be inevitable .

both policy and economics keep fossil - based alternatives out - of - reach for now .

confronted with the same realities facing all energy consumers , dod is shifting its thinking toward efficiency .

dod might better inform congress by reporting on the fully burdened cost of fuel for military operations and contingencies .

another potential concern for congress may be the refining sector's lack of responsiveness to dod's procurement announcements when periods of high petroleum prices make the demands of commercial - sector more profitable .

in response to proposed greenhouse gas emission caps , refinery operators may question whether the value of emission credits outweighs the continued operation of marginally profitable refineries .

in the long term , congress may be concerned whether some operators may shut down their refineries and if such actions might reduce the number of defense fuel suppliers .

for background on alternative fuel sources , see crs report rl34133 , fischer - tropsch fuels from coal , natural gas , and biomass: background and policy .

crs report rl33359 , oil shale: history , incentives , and policy .

for background information on greenhouse gas legislation and the cap - and - trade system , see crs report r40643 , greenhouse gas legislation: summary and analysis of h.r .

2454 as passed by the house of representative .

avgas ( aviation gasoline ) is a high octane fuel used in light aircraft powered by reciprocating spark - ignition engines .

crude oil classification dfm ( diesel fuel marine ) has been used in all shipboard propulsion plants ( diesel , gas turbine , and steam - boiler ) since 1975 .

its nato equivalent is f - 76 .

df2 ( no .

2 diesel fuel ) is the primary fuel for ground mobility vehicles .

fsii stands for fuel systems icing inhibitor fob ( free on board ) is a trade term requiring the seller to deliver goods on board a vessel designated by the buyer .

the seller fulfills its obligations to deliver when the goods have passed over the ship's rail .

when used in trade terms , the word "free" means the seller has an obligation to deliver goods to a named place for transfer to a carrier .

contracts involving international transportation often contain abbreviated trade terms that describe matters such as the time and place of delivery and payment , when the risk of loss shifts from the seller to the buyer , as well as who pays the costs of freight and insurance .

jet a - 1 ( ja1 ) is a civilian - aviation kerosene - based turbine fuel adopted by international commercial aviation .

its astm specification is d16555 ( jet a - 1 ) , and identified by nato as f - 35 .

jet a , normally available in the united states has the same flash point ( 100 "f ) as jet a - 1 but a higher freeze point .

jet a ( ja ) is civilian - aviation kerosene type of jet fuel ( similar to ja - 1 ) , produced to an astm specification and normally only available in the united states .

it has the same flash point as jet a - 1 but a higher freeze point maximum ( - 40°c ) .

it is supplied under astm d1655 ( jet a ) specification .

jet b is a distillate covering the naphtha and kerosene fractions .

it can be used as an alternative to jet a - 1 but because it is more difficult to handle ( higher flammability ) , there is only significant demand in very cold climates where its better cold weather performance is important .

it is supplied in canada under canadian specification is can / cgsb 3.23 .

jp - 4 ( jp for "jet propellant" ) is the military equivalent of jet b with the addition of corrosion inhibitor and anti - icing additives ; it meets the requirements of the u.s. military specification mil - dtl - 5624u grade jp - 4 .

 ( as of january 5 , 2004 , jp - 4 and 5 meet the same u.s. military specification ) .

jp - 4 also meets the requirements of the british specification def stan 91-88 avtag / fsii ( formerly derd 2454 ) .

its nato code is f - 40 .

jp - 5 is a fuel developed for use in military aircraft stationed aboard aircraft carriers where the risk of fire is a great concern , particularly in the confined spaces of the hanger deck .

it is kerosene - based , and has a relatively higher flash - point ( 140 "f ) than other aviation turbine fuels ( jet a - 1 and jp - 8 ) .

its specification is mil - dtl - 5624 u .

its nato code is f - 44 .

jp - 5 is also suitable for use as ship turbine fuel .

jp - 8 is the military equivalent of jet a - 1 but with corrosion inhibitors and icing inhibitors .

the air force switched to jp - 8 in 1996 out of concerns for safety and combat survivability .

it is a less flammable and a less hazardous fuel than the previously used naphtha - based jp - 4 .

 ( the alaska air guard still relies on jp - 4 for its cold - climate properties. ) .

though jp - 8 contains less benzene ( a carcinogen ) and less n - hexane ( a neurotoxin ) than jp - 4 , it has as stronger smell and is oily to the touch , whereas jp - 4 is more solvent - like .

its astm specification is mil - dtl - 83133 , and is identified by natio as f - 34 .

jp - 8+100 includes an additive that increases thermal stability .

jp - 8 has also been adopted for use in diesel - powered tactical ground vehicles .

middle distillate range fuels include kerosene , jet fuel , and diesel fuel .

military installation means a base , camp , post , station , yard , center , or other activity under the jurisdiction of the secretary of a military department or , in the case of an activity in a foreign country , under the operational control of the secretary of a military department or the secretary of defense ( 10 u.s.c .

2801 ( c ) ( 2 ) ) .

mogas ( motor gasoline ) is the primary fuel for non - tactical ground vehicles .

multiyear contracting is a special contracting method to acquire known requirements in quantities and total cost not over planned requirements for up to five years unless otherwise authorized by statute , even though the total funds ultimately to be obligated may not be available at the time of contract award ( 48 cfr 17.104 general ) .

this method may be used in sealed bidding or contracting by negotiation .

agency funding of multiyear contracts must conform to omb circulars a - 11 ( preparation and submission of budget estimates ) and a - 34 ( instructions on budget execution ) .

naphtha is a petroleum distillate with a boiling range between gasoline and heavier benzene .

it is used as a feedstock in gasoline production where it is catalytically reformed from a lower to a higher octane product termed reformate .

