about 1.7 million children in the united states have parents who are currently incarcerated and more than 10 million u.s. children are separated from one of their parents during a portion of their childhood because of the parent's incarceration .

according to the bureau of justice statistics , of the 1.5 million inmates held in the nation's prisons ( federal and state ) in mid - 2007 , approximately 809,800 of them ( 53% ) were parents of minor children .

of the estimated 700,000 persons who are released from prison each year , about 400,000 of them are fathers and mothers .

for the last 30 years , states have locked up more persons ( many for longer periods of time ) and have built more prisons to hold them .

now many states faced with reduced resources and huge prison costs are reevaluating their prison policies and practices .

the current economic crisis together with overcrowded prisons and state budget shortfalls may lead to thousands of parents convicted of nonviolent offenses ( eg , persons with drug offenses , burglary , check fraud , or theft convictions ) getting out of prison months ( in some cases , a year or more ) earlier than they were sentenced .

how former inmates reconnect to their families impacts not only the children involved but society at large and is of great interest to congress and the nation .

more now than in the past , corrections institutions are acknowledging that most of their population will eventually be released , and probably sooner than the maximum time allowed by their sentence .

thus , they are moving toward a position that will allow them to effectively help inmates successfully transition back into local communities .

successful re - entry means lower recidivism and thereby reduced costs for penal institutions .

it also means safer communities .

a broad array of research indicates that the two most important factors in successful re - entry are employment and a healthy connection to one's family .

the child support enforcement ( cse ) program is a federal - state program whose mission is to enhance the well - being of children by helping custodial parents and children obtain financial support from the noncustodial parents , including those in prison or who were formerly in prison .

child support payments enable parents who do not live with their children to fulfill their financial responsibility to their children by contributing to the payment of childrearing costs .

there is a growing consensus that the cse program is one of the financial keys to helping families remain self - sufficient .

according to the most recently available data , on average , child support constitutes about 17% of family income for households who receive it .

among poor households who receive it , child support constitutes about 30% of family income .

parents who make regular child support payments are more likely than those who do not to have better family relationships .

research indicates that positive family relationships increase family stability and can help reduce recidivism .

the intersection of the mission of state and federal correction facilities ( i.e. , successful re - entry of former prisoners into local communities ) and the mission of the cse program ( i.e. , consistent payment of child support obligations ) provides both systems with an opportunity to marshal their efforts in a way that results in positive outcomes for children .

both congress and the obama administration are examining federal programs in an effort to reduce waste in the federal budget .

although programs are often evaluated in isolation , the likelihood of reduced federal and state funding may promote more innovative thinking and collaboration among agencies involved in administering the criminal justice system and cse program .

this report examines the cse program within the context of large numbers of former inmates re - entering communities .

it provides a brief review of the cse program and data related to parents who are in state or federal prisons .

next , it analyzes several issues that relate to the payment of child support by incarcerated or formerly incarcerated parents .

then it presents policy options that address the problem of nonpayment of child support .

for example , it discusses ways in which the cse program can help ex - offenders who are parents reconnect with their children and communities .

it also suggests strategies that may lead to both lower recidivism and more parents making child support payments .

this report focuses on the cse program to explore ways to deal with nonpayment of child support by noncustodial parents who are or were in prison .

as higher numbers of inmates are released , the cse program will face more pressure to perform better in the area of increasing child support collections and reducing child support debt .

if it is successful , a positive consequence may be fewer parents returning to prison .

it is thought that even under current economic conditions , a positive family life will encourage formerly incarcerated noncustodial parents to keep looking for legitimate employment and to steadfastly maintain law - abiding behaviors .

this section provides a brief overview of the cse program .

it also presents information and data related to noncustodial parents who are incarcerated or who were formerly incarcerated .

given the high cost of state and federal prison systems and the high recidivism rates , it is not surprising that policymakers at all levels of government are interested in promoting policies and strategies that help former inmates successfully reunite with their children and families and effectively reintegrate into their communities .

research suggests that family support and employment are the two most important predictors of an ex - offender's successful re - entry into his or her community .

during this time of reduced resources at both the state and national level , policymakers and program administrators are interested in ensuring that programs are effective and efficient .

the obama administration has stated that there will be increased scrutiny of federal programs in an effort to reduce waste in the federal budget .

also , congress , as part of its budget duties and oversight authority , will be reviewing programs for their effectiveness .

this section examines the cse program within the analytic framework of addressing the impact of huge numbers of inmates that may be released back into local communities sooner than expected because of state and federal budget shortfalls and overcrowded prisons .

it begins with a discussion of how unrealistic child support orders and high child support debt may be adversely affecting overall cse program results and public perceptions about the program .

although most cse data cannot be disaggregated to isolate inmates or former inmates who owe child support , many ex - offenders are low - income noncustodial parents .

thus , any of the proposals that would help resolve child support issues related to the low income levels of noncustodial parents would also impact a significant percentage of inmates and former inmates who are parents .

this section also discusses how the increase of mothers in prisons may impact the cse program .

further , it looks at federal law that permits the termination of parental rights of ex - offenders .

this section looks at ways in which some of the problems discussed above might be resolved .

continuing a historical precedent , many of the proposals or suggestions for the cse program that are presented below originated with the states .

the future success of the cse program is tied to its ability to continue to be proactive in finding and implementing services and / or approaches that resolve the many problems that the program now faces .

the competition for scarce state and federal dollars makes this challenge more difficult and more imperative .

this section discusses three policy options: establishment of realistic child support orders , modification of child support obligations , and program coordination .

ex - offenders re - entering communities face a host of problems , a major one being barriers to employment because of their criminal records .

most employers now conduct background checks , with the result that people are often denied employment or even fired from jobs because of their criminal records .

research indicates that employment and family support are important predictors of an ex - offender's successful re - entry into his or her community .

given that employment opportunities are scarce and may become more limited in the current economy , formerly incarcerated parents may want to strengthen positive connections to their children , family , and community .

the inability of many people released from prisons and jails to meet their financial obligations can contribute to their being incarcerated again .

cse policies that are receptive to noncustodial parents with a recent history of incarceration , unemployment , or low - wage jobs have been shown to increase the prospects that such individuals will maintain steady employment , regular child support payments , and contact with their children .

it probably would benefit both entities if the staff of cse agencies collaborated with the staff of corrections facilities to develop policies that promote positive child support outcomes as well as successful reintegration of individuals released from prison or jail .

as noted earlier , about 53% of the 1.5 million inmates in state or federal prisons are parents with dependent children .

about 57% of ex - offenders who are released from state or federal prisons each year are parents .

the current economic situation is likely to increase the number of persons released from prison .

according to a 2009 news report , federal judges in california ruled that california may have to reduce the number of inmates in its overcrowded prison system by up to 40% .

the judges reported that the state's prison system was at about 200% of capacity .

the judges suggested a two - to three - year time frame for reducing the number of inmates in the prison system .

although it is true that a child's needs for financial support do not diminish just because a parent is incarcerated , most custodial parents realize that they probably will not receive any child support while the noncustodial parent is in prison , but they do expect to receive child support payments after the noncustodial parent is released from prison .

however , this is not what usually happens .

instead of resuming their child support payment schedules , many newly released noncustodial parents have little or no income or assets available to them , and therefore do not make their payments .

moreover , most former inmates have difficulty finding employment after they are released from prison and they often have to rely on family members for food and shelter .

also , when they leave prison , many parents find they have accumulated significant child support debt that they are expected to begin paying off as soon as they become employed ( or sooner ) .

without intervention , they may face wage attachments of up to 65% of their disposable earnings to cover their child support obligations .

they may also face cse remedies such as driver's license suspension , which could limit their work options .

advocates for incarcerated parents are concerned that unrealistically high child support orders or arrearages may discourage ex - offenders from finding a regular job because regular employment allows a person's paycheck to be subject to income withholding procedures .

some advocates argue that policies and practices that allow for up to 65% of a person's disposable earnings to be garnished tempts many former inmates to find jobs in the underground economy which may lessen their chances of successfully establishing ties with their children , families , and communities and may contribute to recidivism .

there are several evaluations and studies underway that will provide evidence of the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of various re - entry programs , but results from those studies are not yet available .

evaluation findings are very important because the current economic situation is causing many states to quickly reduce their prison populations , and successful re - entry of ex - offenders can reduce recidivism and thereby save both state and federal dollars .

evaluations also are underway , but not yet available , with respect to healthy marriage and responsible fatherhood programs that are focusing their services on incarcerated parents or formerly incarcerated parents .

evaluation findings will provide some insights about the delivery and effectiveness of marriage and family - strengthening programs for populations involved with the criminal justice system .

extreme poverty sometimes means that a person cannot take advantage of opportunities that make good financial sense .

in some cases , noncustodial parents who are former inmates may be so disadvantaged that even programs that attempt to help them deal with huge child support debts ( eg , child support arrearage forgiveness or reduction programs ) are of no benefit to them because they simply do not have any funds to give to their children ( thus preventing them from participating in such programs ) .

custodial parents warn that the precarious financial situation of children must be a primary concern of policymakers in their efforts to help low - income noncustodial parents who often have only a high school education ( or less ) , low skills , and little work experience , and may be unemployed or recently released from prison .

some policymakers contend that progress must be made in making the cse program fair for noncustodial parents at every income level while simultaneously ensuring that children are not short - changed .

it has periodically been suggested that in some cases in which the child support obligation cannot be met , in - kind assistance ( such as providing child care ) may be one way in which society can steadfastly adhere to the tenet that both parents are responsible for the well - being of their children while recognizing the reality of the dire financial situation in which many ex - offenders find themselves .

connecting and / or reconnecting children to their noncustodial parents has become a goal of federal social policy .

promoting coordination among federal and states programs may help programs optimize their funds and resources .

some prisons and local communities are helping noncustodial parents meet and / or acknowledge their child support responsibilities by offering parenting programs , informational sessions on how to deal with the cse agency , conflict - resolution classes , and job readiness preparation .

research highlights the common ground between the prison system and the cse system .

for example , studies show that family support is one of the key factors in lowering the probability that ex - offenders will return to prison and research further indicates that being involved in the lives of one's children promotes responsible behavior , such as making regular child support payments and being productive citizens .

federally - mandated program coordination in certain areas may be one way to increase child support collections and simultaneously reduce recidivism .

incarceration has high costs not only for the inmate but for his or her children and family as well as society in general .

incarceration , health care , education , and other important programs , including the cse program , are now competing with one another for state and federal funding .

given the current economic downturn state and federal agencies may start to work together to further the goals that they have in common .

