medicare is a federal program that pays for covered health care services of qualified beneficiaries .

it was established in 1965 under title xviii of the social security act to provide health insurance to individuals 65 and older , and has been expanded over the years to include permanently disabled individuals under 65 .

the program is administered by the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( cms ) , within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

medicare consists of four distinct parts: part a ( hospital insurance , or hi ) covers inpatient hospital services , skilled nursing care , hospice care , and some home health services .

the hi trust fund is mainly funded by a dedicated payroll tax of 2.9% of earnings , shared equally between employers and workers .

since 2013 , workers with income of more than $200,000 per year for single tax filers ( or more than $250,000 for joint tax filers ) pay an additional 0.9% on income over those amounts .

part b ( supplementary medical insurance , or smi ) covers physician services , outpatient services , and some home health and preventive services .

the smi trust fund is funded through beneficiary premiums ( set at 25% of estimated program costs for the aged ) and general revenues ( the remaining amount , approximately 75% ) .

part c ( medicare advantage , or ma ) is a private plan option for beneficiaries that covers all parts a and b services , except hospice .

individuals choosing to enroll in part c must also enroll in part b .

part c is funded through the hi and smi trust funds .

part d covers outpatient prescription drug benefits .

funding is included in the smi trust fund and is financed through beneficiary premiums , general revenues , and state transfer payments .

medicare serves approximately one in six americans and virtually all of the population aged 65 and older .

in 2019 , the program will cover an estimated 61 million persons ( 52 million aged and 9 million disabled ) .

the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimates that total medicare spending in 2019 will be about $772 billion ; of this amount , approximately $749 billion will be spent on benefits .

about 28% of medicare benefit spending is for hospital inpatient and hospital outpatient services ( see figure 1 ) .

cbo also estimates that federal medicare spending ( after deduction of beneficiary premiums and other offsetting receipts ) will be about $637 billion in 2019 , accounting for about 14% of total federal spending and 3% of gdp .

medicare is required to pay for all covered services provided to eligible persons , so long as specific criteria are met .

spending under the program ( except for a portion of administrative costs ) is considered mandatory spending and is not subject to the appropriations process .

medicare is expected to be a high - priority issue in the current congress .

the program has a significant impact on beneficiaries and other stakeholders as well as on the economy in general through its coverage of important health care benefits for the aged and disabled , the payment of premiums and other cost sharing by those beneficiaries , its payments to providers who supply those health care services , and its interaction with other insurance coverage .

projections of future medicare expenditures and funding indicate that the program will place increasing financial demands on the federal budget and on beneficiaries .

in response to these concerns , congress may consider a range of medicare reform options , from making changes within the current structure , including modifying provider payments and revising existing oversight and regulatory mechanisms , to restructuring the entire program .

the committees of jurisdiction for the mandatory spending ( benefits ) portion of medicare are the senate committee on finance , the house committee on ways and means , and the house committee on energy and commerce .

the house and senate committees on appropriations have jurisdiction over the discretionary spending used to administer and oversee the program .

medicare was enacted in 1965 ( p.l .

89-97 ) in response to the concern that only about half of the nation's seniors had health insurance , and most of those had coverage only for inpatient hospital costs .

the new program , which became effective july 1 , 1966 , included part a coverage for hospital and posthospital services and part b coverage for doctors and other medical services .

as is the case for the social security program , part a is financed by payroll taxes levied on current workers and their employers ; persons must pay into the system for 40 quarters to become entitled to premium - free benefits .

medicare part b is voluntary , with a monthly premium required of beneficiaries who choose to enroll .

payments to health care providers under both part a and part b were originally based on the most common form of payment at the time , namely "reasonable costs" for hospital and other institutional services or "usual , customary and reasonable charges" for physicians and other medical services .

medicare is considered a social insurance program and is the second - largest such federal program , after social security .

the 1965 law also established medicaid , the federal / state health insurance program for the poor ; this was an expansion of previous welfare - based assistance programs .

some low - income individuals qualify for both medicare and medicaid .

in the ensuing years , medicare has undergone considerable change .

p.l .

92-603 , enacted in 1972 , expanded program coverage to certain individuals under 65 ( the disabled and persons with end - stage renal disease ( esrd ) ) , and introduced managed care into medicare by allowing private insurance entities to provide medicare benefits in exchange for a monthly capitated payment .

this law also began to place limitations on the definitions of reasonable costs and charges in order to gain some control over program spending which , even initially , exceeded original projections .

during the 1980s and 1990s , a number of laws were enacted that included provisions designed to further stem the rapid increase in program spending through modifications to the way payments to providers were determined , and to postpone the insolvency of the medicare part a trust fund .

this was typically achieved through tightening rules governing payments to providers of services and limiting the annual updates in such payments .

the program moved from payments based on reasonable costs and reasonable charges to payment systems under which a predetermined payment amount was established for a specified unit of service .

at the same time , beneficiaries were given expanded options to obtain covered services through private managed care arrangements , typically health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) .

most medicare payment provisions were incorporated into larger budget reconciliation bills designed to control overall federal spending .

this effort culminated in the enactment of the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba 97 ; p.l .

105-33 ) .

this law slowed the rate of growth in payments to providers and established new payment systems for certain categories of providers , including establishing the sustainable growth rate ( sgr ) methodology for determining the annual update to medicare physician payments .

it also established the medicare+choice program , which expanded private plan options for beneficiaries and changed the way most of these plans were paid .

bba 97 further expanded preventive services covered by the program .

subsequently , congress became concerned that the bba 97 cuts in payments to providers were somewhat larger than originally anticipated .

therefore , legislation was enacted in both 1999 ( balanced budget refinement act of 1999 , or bbra ; p.l .

106-113 ) and 2000 ( medicare , medicaid , and schip benefits improvement and protection act of 2000 , or bipa ; p.l .

106-554 ) to mitigate the impact of bba 97 on providers .

in 2003 , congress enacted the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ; p.l .

108-173 ) , which included a major benefit expansion and placed increasing emphasis on the private sector to deliver and manage benefits .

the mma included provisions that ( 1 ) created a new voluntary outpatient prescription drug benefit to be administered by private entities ; ( 2 ) replaced the medicare+choice program with the medicare advantage ( ma ) program and raised payments to plans in order to increase their availability for beneficiaries ; ( 3 ) introduced the concept of income testing into medicare , with higher - income persons paying larger part b premiums beginning in 2007 ; ( 4 ) modified some provider payment rules ; ( 5 ) expanded covered preventive services ; and ( 6 ) created a specific process for overall program review if general revenue spending exceeded a specified threshold .

during the 109 th congress , two laws were enacted that incorporated minor modifications to medicare's payment rules .

these were the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( dra ; p.l .

109-171 ) and the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( trhca ; p.l .

109-432 ) .

in the 110 th congress , additional changes were incorporated in the medicare , medicaid , and schip extension act of 2007 ( mmsea ; p.l .

110-173 ) and the medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( mippa ; p.l .

110-275 ) .

in the 111 th congress , comprehensive health reform legislation was enacted that , among other things , made statutory changes to the medicare program .

the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 ) , enacted on march 23 , 2010 , included numerous provisions affecting medicare payments , payment rules , covered benefits , and the delivery of care .

the health care and education affordability reconciliation act of 2010 ( the reconciliation act , or hcera ; p.l .

111-152 ) , enacted on march 30 , 2010 , made changes to a number of medicare - related provisions in the aca and added several new provisions .

included in the aca , as amended , are provisions that ( 1 ) constrain medicare's annual payment increases for certain providers ; ( 2 ) change payment rates in the ma program so that they more closely resemble those in fee - for - service ; ( 3 ) reduce payments to hospitals that serve a large number of low - income patients ; ( 4 ) create an independent payment advisory board ( ipab ) to make recommendations to adjust medicare payment rates ; ( 5 ) phase out the part d prescription drug benefit "doughnut hole" ; ( 6 ) increase resources and enhance activities to prevent fraud and abuse ; and ( 7 ) provide incentives to increase the quality and efficiency of care , such as creating value - based purchasing programs for certain types of providers , allowing accountable care organizations ( acos ) that meet certain quality and efficiency standards to share in the savings , creating a voluntary pilot program that bundles payments for physician , hospital , and post - acute care services , and adjusting payments to hospitals for readmissions related to certain potentially preventable conditions .

in the 112 th and 113 th congresses , the american taxpayer relief act of 2012 ( atra ; p.l .

112-240 ) , the continuing appropriations resolution of 2014 ( p.l .

113-67 ) , and the protecting access to medicare act of 2014 ( pama ; p.l .

113-93 ) primarily made short - term modifications to physician payment updates and payment adjustments for certain types of providers .

pama also established a new skilled nursing facility ( snf ) value - based purchasing program and a new system for determining payments for clinical diagnostic laboratory tests .

the improving medicare post - acute care transformation act of 2014 ( impact ; p.l .

113-185 ) required that post - acute care providers — defined in the law as long - term care hospitals ( ltchs ) , inpatient rehabilitation facilities ( irfs ) , snfs , and home health agencies ( hhas ) — report standardized patient assessment data and data on quality measures and resource use .

impact also modified the annual update to the hospice aggregate payment cap and required that hospices be reviewed every three years to ensure that they are compliant with existing regulations related to patient health and safety and quality of care .

in the 114 th congress , the medicare access and chip reauthorization act of 2015 ( macra ; p.l .

114-10 ) repealed the sgr formula for calculating updates to medicare payment rates to physicians and other practitioners and established an alternative set of methods for determining the annual updates .

macra also introduced alternatives to the current fee - for - service ( ffs ) based physician payments by creating a new merit - based incentive payment system ( mips ) and put in place processes for developing , evaluating , and adopting alternative payment models ( apms ) .

additionally , macra reduced updates to hospital and post - acute care provider payments , extended several expiring provider payment adjustments , made adjustments to income - related premiums in parts b and d , and prohibited using social security numbers on beneficiaries' medicare cards .

among other changes , the increasing choice , access , and quality in health care for americans act ( division c of the 21 st century cures act ; p.l .

114-255 ) made adjustments to ltch reimbursement and modified the average length of stay criteria , which determines whether a hospital qualifies as an ltch .

it also delayed payment reductions and required the secretary of health and human services ( the secretary ) to make changes to how payments are determined for certain durable medical equipment , prosthetics , orthotics , and supplies ( dmepos ) .

lastly , it allowed beneficiaries with esrd to enroll in ma beginning january 1 , 2021 .

in the 115 th congress , the bipartisan budget act of 2018 ( bba 18 ; p.l .

115-123 ) made a number of changes to federal health care programs , including medicare .

for example , bba 18 included provisions designed to expand care for beneficiaries with chronic health conditions , such as promoting team - based care by providers , increasing the use of telehealth services , and expanding certain ma supplemental benefits .

in addition , bba 18 extended for five years a number of existing medicare provisions that were set to expire ( or that had temporarily expired ) , including the medicare dependent hospital program and add - on payments for low - volume hospitals , rural home health services , and certain ambulance services .

bba 18 also specified payment updates for the medicare physician fee schedule , snfs , and home health services ; reduced payments for non - emergency ambulance transports ; and required modification of the home health prospective payment system starting in 2020 .

in addition , the act provided for indefinite authority for ma special needs plans , repealed limits on outpatient therapy services , and eliminated the ipab .

starting in 2019 , the act will require that pharmaceutical manufacturers participating in medicare part d provide a larger discount on brand - name drugs purchased by enrollees in the coverage gap and will create a new high - income premium category under parts b and d .

most persons aged 65 or older are automatically entitled to premium - free part a because they or their spouse paid medicare payroll taxes for at least 40 quarters ( about 10 years ) on earnings covered by either the social security or the railroad retirement systems .

persons under the age of 65 who receive cash disability benefits from social security or the railroad retirement systems for at least 24 months are also entitled to part a .

 ( since there is a five - month waiting period for cash payments , the medicare waiting period is effectively 29 months. ) .

the 24-month waiting period is waived for persons with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( als , "lou gehrig's disease" ) .

individuals of any age with esrd who receive dialysis on a regular basis or a kidney transplant are generally eligible for medicare .

medicare coverage for individuals with esrd usually starts the first day of the fourth month of dialysis treatments .

in addition , individuals with one or more specified lung diseases or types of cancer who lived for six months during a certain period prior to diagnosis in an area subject to a public health emergency declaration by the environmental protection agency ( epa ) as of june 17 , 2009 , are also deemed entitled to benefits under part a and eligible to enroll in part b .

persons over the age of 65 who are not entitled to premium - free part a may obtain coverage by paying a monthly premium ( $437 in 2019 ) or , for persons with at least 30 quarters of covered employment , a reduced monthly premium ( $240 in 2019 ) .

in addition , disabled persons who lose their cash benefits solely because of higher earnings , and subsequently lose their extended medicare coverage , may continue their medicare enrollment by paying a premium , subject to limitations .

generally , enrollment in medicare part b is voluntary .

all persons entitled to part a ( and persons over the age of 65 who are not entitled to premium - free part a ) may enroll in part b by paying a monthly premium .

in 2019 , the monthly premium is $135.50 ; however , about 3.5% of part b enrollees pay less , due to a "hold - harmless" provision in the social security act .

since 2007 , higher - income part b enrollees pay higher premiums .

 ( see " part b financing ." ) .

although enrollment in part b is voluntary for most individuals , in most cases , those who enroll in part a by paying a premium also must enroll in part b. additionally , esrd beneficiaries and medicare advantage enrollees ( discussed below ) also must enroll in part b .

together , parts a and b of medicare comprise "original medicare," which covers benefits on a fee - for - service basis .

beneficiaries have another option for coverage through private plans , called the medicare advantage ( ma or part c ) program .

when beneficiaries first become eligible for medicare , they may choose either original medicare or they may enroll in a private ma plan .

each fall , there is an annual open enrollment period during which time medicare beneficiaries may choose a different ma plan , or leave or join the ma program .

beneficiaries are to receive information about their options to help them make informed decisions .

in 2019 , the annual open enrollment period runs from october 15 to december 7 for plan choices starting the following january .

since 2012 , ma plans with a 5-star quality rating have been allowed to enroll medicare beneficiaries who are either in traditional medicare or in an ma plan with a lower quality rating at any time .

finally , each individual enrolled in either part a or part b is also entitled to obtain qualified prescription drug coverage through enrollment in a part d prescription drug plan .

similar to part b , enrollment in part d is voluntary and the beneficiary pays a monthly premium .

since 2011 , some higher - income enrollees pay higher premiums , similar to enrollees in part b .

generally , beneficiaries enrolled in an ma plan providing qualified prescription drug coverage ( ma - pd plan ) must obtain their prescription drug coverage through that plan .

in general , individuals who do not enroll in part b or part d during an initial enrollment period ( when they first become eligible for medicare ) must pay a permanent penalty of increased monthly premiums if they choose to enroll at a later date .

individuals who do not enroll in part b during their initial enrollment period may enroll only during the annual general enrollment period , which occurs from january 1 to march 31 each year .

coverage begins the following july 1 .

however , the law waives the part b late enrollment penalty for current workers who have primary coverage through their own or a spouse's employer - sponsored plan .

these individuals have a special enrollment period once their employment ends ; as long as they enroll in part b during this time , they will not be subject to penalty .

individuals who do not enroll in part d during their initial enrollment period may enroll during the annual open enrollment period , which corresponds with the part c annual enrollment period — from october 15 to december 7 , with coverage effective the following january .

individuals are not subject to the part d penalty if they have maintained "creditable" drug coverage through another source , such as retiree health coverage offered by a former employer or union .

however , once employees retire or have no access to "creditable" part d coverage , a penalty will apply unless they sign up for coverage during a special enrollment period .

finally , for persons who qualify for the low - income subsidy for part d , the delayed - enrollment penalty does not apply .

medicare parts a , b , and d each cover different services , with part c providing a private plan alternative for all medicare services covered under parts a and b , except hospice .

the parts a - d covered services are described below , along with a description of medicare's payments .

a variety of public and private entities are involved in carrying out medicare administrative and oversight functions .

cms , an agency within hhs , has primary operational responsibilities .

such responsibilities include managing program finances , developing policies and regulations , setting payment rates , and developing the program's information - technology infrastructure .

cms conducts its activities through its headquarters and 10 regional offices .

the social security administration , however , enrolls beneficiaries into the program and issues medicare beneficiary cards .

cms also contracts with various private entities , including private health insurance companies , to help administer the program .

for example , medicare administrative contractors ( macs ) process and pay parts a and b reimbursement claims , enroll providers and suppliers , educate providers and suppliers on billing requirements , support appeal processes , and answer provider and supplier inquiries through call centers , as well as other activities .

qualified independent contractors ( qics ) perform second - level reviews on appeals initially reviewed by macs .

medicare's quality assurance activities are primarily handled by state survey agencies and quality improvement organizations ( qios ) , which operate in all states and the district of columbia , puerto rico , and the u.s. virgin islands .

the state survey agencies are responsible for inspecting medicare provider facilities ( eg , nursing homes , home health agencies , and hospitals ) to ensure that they are in compliance with federal safety and quality standards referred to as conditions ( or requirements ) of participation .

alternatively , some types of providers , including hospitals , may receive certification through private accrediting agencies , such as the joint commission .

qios are mostly private , not - for - profit organizations that monitor the quality of care delivered to medicare beneficiaries and educate providers on the latest quality - improvement techniques .

medicare program integrity activities , such as audits , provider education , medical review , and predictive data analysis , also are carried out by a variety of government and private entities .

for example , the center for program integrity within cms works together with the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) and the hhs office of inspector general ( oig ) to identify and prevent fraud , waste , and abuse in medicare .

cms also works with private contractors to carry out certain program - integrity functions .

unified program integrity contractors ( upics ) perform integrity - related activities including data analysis to identify potentially fraudulent claims ( bills ) for medicare parts a and b , home health and hospice services , and dme .

similarly , the national benefit integrity medicare drug integrity contractor ( medic ) is responsible for identifying and investigating fraud , waste , and abuse in medicare advantage and part d. when appropriate , the upics and medic work with and refer cases to law enforcement , including oig and doj .

in addition , recovery audit contractors ( racs ) are responsible for identifying improper medicare payments , including both underpayments and overpayments , and for recouping any overpayments made to providers .

each year , the comprehensive error rate testing ( cert ) program quantifies a national improper medicare payment rate by examining a random sample of claims .

in turn , the supplemental medical review contractor targets medical reviews in areas where oig , racs , and cert have identified vulnerabilities and / or questionable billing patterns to identify ways to lower improper payment rates .

as required by the aca , the center for medicare and medicaid innovation ( cmmi ) was established in january 2011 to test and evaluate innovative payment and service delivery models to reduce program expenditures under medicare .

examples of these models include providing payment incentives for groups of doctors , hospitals , and other health care providers ( accountable care organizations , or acos ) to coordinate the services they provide to medicare beneficiaries ; bundling payments for services provided in different settings during a beneficiary's episode of care ; and reimbursing health providers based on the quality of care rather than on the volume of services .

cmmi also plays an important role in developing and implementing the new physician payment models required by macra .

medicare beneficiary education and outreach duties are shared between cms and the social security administration .

each year , cms mails out a "medicare and you" handbook to beneficiaries , which provides information on their benefits for the upcoming year .

additional educational materials and responses to frequently asked questions may be found on the cms - maintained "medicare.gov" website , and beneficiaries may call a cms - operated 1-800 number for assistance with specific questions and help with selecting and enrolling in a medicare advantage and / or part d plan .

a medicare beneficiary ombudsman is also available to provide assistance to medicare consumers with their complaints , grievances , and requests .

the social security administration is responsible for notifying low - income medicare beneficiaries about programs that may be able to assist them with their medical and prescription drug expenses .

the social security administration also provides general medicare eligibility and enrollment information on its webpage and on social security benefit statements .

finally , cms partners with community - based organizations , such as state health insurance assistance programs , in every state to provide educational resources and personalized assistance to medicare beneficiaries .

medicare's financial operations are accounted for through two trust funds maintained by the department of the treasury — the hospital insurance ( hi ) trust fund for part a and the supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) trust fund for parts b and d. for beneficiaries enrolled in medicare advantage ( part c ) , payments are made on their behalf in appropriate portions from the hi and smi trust funds .

hi is primarily funded by payroll taxes , while smi is primarily funded through general revenue transfers and premiums .

 ( see figure 3 . ) .

the hi and smi trust funds are overseen by a board of trustees that provides annual reports to congress .

the trust funds are accounting mechanisms .

income to the trust funds is credited to the fund in the form of interest - bearing government securities .

expenditures for services and administrative costs are recorded against the fund .

these securities represent obligations that the government has issued to itself .

as long as a trust fund has a balance , the department of the treasury is authorized to make payments for it from the u.s. treasury .

medicare expenditures are primarily paid for through mandatory spending — generally medicare pays for all covered health care services provided to beneficiaries .

aside from certain constraints in hi described below , the program is not subject to spending limits .

additionally , most medicare expenditures ( aside from premiums paid by beneficiaries ) are paid for by current workers through income taxes and dedicated medicare payroll taxes , that is , current income is used to pay current expenditures .

medicare taxes paid by current workers are not set aside to cover their future medicare expenses .

while medicare provides broad protection against the costs of many , primarily acute care , services , the program does not cover all services that may be used by its aged and disabled beneficiaries .

in general , medicare does not cover eyeglasses , hearing aids , dentures , or most long - term care services .

further , unlike most private insurance policies , it does not include an annual "catastrophic" cap on out - of - pocket spending on cost - sharing charges for services covered under parts a and b ( except for persons enrolled in medicare advantage plans ) .

most medicare beneficiaries have some coverage in addition to medicare .

the following are the main sources of additional coverage for medicare enrollees: medicare advantage .

many ma plans offer services in addition to those covered under original medicare , reduced cost sharing , or reduced part b or d premiums .

all ma plans have a catastrophic cap .

employer coverage .

coverage may be provided through a current or former employer .

in recent years , a number of employers have cut back on the scope of retiree coverage .

some have dropped such coverage entirely , particularly for future retirees .

as noted earlier , the mma attempted to stem this trend , at least for prescription drug coverage , by offering subsidies to employers who offer drug coverage , at least as good as that available under part d. medigap .

individual insurance policies that supplement fee - for - service medicare are referred to as medigap policies .

beneficiaries with medigap insurance typically have coverage for a portion of medicare's deductibles and coinsurance ; they may also have coverage for some items and services not covered by medicare .

individuals select from a set of standardized plans , though not all plans are offered in all states .

medicaid .

certain low - income medicare beneficiaries also may be eligible for full or partial benefits under their state's medicaid program .

individuals eligible for both medicare and medicaid are referred to as dual eligibles .

the lowest - income dual eligibles qualify for full medicaid benefits , so that the majority of their health care expenses are paid by either medicare or medicaid ; medicare pays first , with medicaid picking up most of the remaining costs .

in addition to full - benefit dual eligibles , state medicaid programs pay medicare premiums and some cost sharing for other partial dual eligibles , who have higher income than full - benefit dual eligibles but are still considered to have low income .

other public sources .

individuals may have additional coverage through the department of veterans affairs , or tricare for military retirees eligible for medicare ( and enrolled in part b ) .

in 2015 , about 87% of medicare beneficiaries had some form of additional coverage .

some persons may have had more than one type of additional coverage .

appendix a. abbreviations appendix b .

2019 medicare beneficiary cost .

