on november 4 , 2008 , the u.s. court of appeals for the federal circuit issued its decision in rothe development corporation v. department of defense , a case involving a challenge to the constitutionality of a "small disadvantaged business" ( sdb ) program of the department of defense ( dod ) .

as part of the sdb program , dod could apply a 10% price evaluation adjustment to the offers of small businesses owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals in pursuit of its goal of awarding 5% of its contract dollars to such businesses , among others .

in determining which small businesses were socially and economically disadvantaged , the sdb program relied upon section 8 ( d ) of the small business act , which presumes that minorities are socially and economically disadvantaged , while also allowing non - minorities to demonstrate disadvantage .

rothe development corporation ( rdc ) challenged the constitutionality of the sdb program after losing a contract to a korean - american - owned firm .

rdc's offer would have been lower had dod not applied a 10% price evaluation preference to the korean - american firm's offer .

rdc claimed that the sdb program was unconstitutional , both on its face and as applied , because the program denied it equal protection by treating minority and nonminority businesses differently .

prior litigation had resolved the as - applied challenge in rdc's favor , and , in its decision , the federal circuit resolved the facial challenge in rdc's favor as well .

the federal circuit found that dod's sdb program was unconstitutional because , when re - enacting the program in 2006 , congress lacked a "strong basis in evidence" for concluding that race - conscious contracting was necessary to remedy discrimination in the defense industry .

the federal circuit's decision in rothe was followed on february 27 , 2009 , by a decision of the u.s. district court for the western district of texas , san antonio division , to which the case had been remanded for entry of judgment .

this decision enjoined defense agencies from implementing other programs authorized by section 1207 because these programs were "contingent" on the subsections containing the price preference and must "also fall" when those subsections did .

these programs included technical and infrastructure assistance for certain minority - serving institutions ( msis ) of higher education , including historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) , hispanic - serving institutions ( hsis ) , alaska native - and native hawaiian - serving institutions ( annhis ) , and majority - minority institutions ( mmis ) .

however , the 111 th congress responded to the district court's decision by enacting legislation authorizing defense agencies to provide assistance similar to that authorized under section 1207 to msis .

on september 9 , 2011 , the obama administration proposed amending the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) in light of the decisions by the federal circuit and the district court in rothe .

among other things , the proposed changes would delete those provisions of the far which govern price evaluation adjustments to bids or offers submitted by small disadvantaged businesses for defense contracts , as well as relocate and amend those provisions of the far regarding monetary incentives and evaluation factors for subcontracting with small disadvantaged businesses .

the report examines the rothe decision in detail ; describes existing contracting programs for minority - owned and women - owned small businesses ; and analyzes rothe 's potential effect on these programs , including the business development program under section 8 ( a ) of the small business act .

these programs were not at issue in rothe and would not be substantively changed by the obama administration's proposed amendments to the far .

however , as numerous commentators and the small business administration ( sba ) have recognized , the rothe decision could have significant implications for other federal contracting programs for small businesses .

in particular , commentators wonder whether the government could demonstrate a "strong basis in evidence" for these programs , which include the subcontracting programs under sections 8 ( a ) and ( d ) of the small business act , if they were challenged .

in its november 4 , 2008 , decision , the federal circuit found that section 1207 was unconstitutional on its face because , when congress re - enacted section 1207 in 2006 , it lacked a strong basis in evidence for concluding that race - conscious contracting was necessary to remedy discrimination in the defense industry .

the district court , which had upheld the constitutionality of the challenged sdb program in " rothe vi," had found that six state and local disparity studies , along with other statistical and anecdotal evidence , constituted a strong basis in evidence for the re - enactment of section 1207 .

the federal circuit disagreed .

it found that the six state and local disparity studies — which had been the "primary focus of the district court's compelling interest analysis and of the parties' arguments on appeal" — did not constitute a strong basis in evidence because they did not provide the "substantially probative and broad - based statistical foundation ... that must be the predicate for nationwide , race - conscious action. .

the federal circuit first found significant methodological flaws with all of the disparity studies .

according to the federal circuit , two of the six studies failed to exclude unqualified businesses in calculating the number of minority businesses available for government contracts , while five of the six studies failed to account for the relative capacity of minority - owned small businesses in contracting with the government .

these flaws , coupled with the fact that the studies' findings addressed only six of the more than 3,000 counties and equivalent regions making up the united states , prompted the federal circuit to find that the studies were insufficient to constitute a strong basis in evidence for the nationwide sdb program .

the federal circuit also suggested , although it reached no final holding on the issue , that the studies were not "before congress" when section 1207 was reenacted because they were mentioned by name or discussed only in two floor speeches and congress did not make any findings concerning them .

the federal circuit similarly found that other statistical data and anecdotes discussed by the parties and the district court were insufficient to constitute a strong basis in evidence for the sdb program .

the federal circuit discounted the remaining statistical evidence because it was mentioned only in floor speeches , without being the subject of congressional findings .

in fact , the court noted that some of the purported evidence was not even "sufficiently described ... for [the federal circuit] to locate [it] , let alone subject [it] to detailed , skeptical , non - deferential analysis. .

it likewise discounted the anecdotal evidence , even though this evidence had been introduced at congressional hearings , because "anecdotal evidence is insufficient by itself to support section 1207 . .

the federal circuit further noted that the anecdotal evidence , including that compiled by the district court , did not address "a single instance of alleged discrimination by dod in the course of awarding a prime contract , nor a single instance of alleged discrimination by a private contractor identified as the recipient of a prime defense contract. .

the federal circuit found this lack of evidence of discrimination in dod contracts significant because it suggested that the government could not prove "passive participation" in discrimination , as required under city of richmond v. croson , as a justification for dod's sdb program .

under croson , a government entity can resort to racial classifications in situations when it is not remedying its own prior discrimination if it can show it is a "passive participant" in a system of racial exclusion practiced by industry .

at the end of its decision in rothe vii , the federal circuit remanded the case to the u.s. district court for the western district of texas , san antonio division , with instructions for the district court to enter a judgment declaring section 1207 , as re - enacted in 2006 , facially unconstitutional and enjoining application of the current 10 u.s.c .

§ 2323 .

the district court entered its judgment on february 27 , 2009 , prohibiting defense agencies not only from implementing price evaluation adjustments for offers from small disadvantaged businesses but also from implementing technical and infrastructure assistance programs for certain minority - serving institutions ( msis ) of higher education , including historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) , hispanic - serving institutions ( hsis ) , alaska native - and native hawaiian - serving institutions ( annhis ) , and majority - minority institutions ( mmis ) .

although the government argued on remand that the judgment should be limited to subsections ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) and ( e ) ( 3 ) of section 1207 , which incorporated the price evaluation adjustment authority applicable to the offers of small disadvantaged businesses that had been the focus of the parties' arguments and the federal circuit's decision , the district court disagreed .

it struck down the totality of section 1207 as presently codified in 10 u.s.c .

§ 2323 , including 1 .

provisions in subsection ( a ) ( 1 ) ( a ) - ( d ) allowing awards to qualified hubzone small businesses , hbcus , hsis , annhis , and mmis to count toward dod's 5% goal ; 2 .

provisions in subsections ( c ) ( 1 ) - ( 4 ) authorizing dod to provide technical assistance to entities counting toward its 5% goal , as well as infrastructure assistance to minority institutions ; 3 .

provisions in subsection ( e ) ( 2 ) allowing dod to make advance payments to qualifying entities ; and 4 .

provisions in sections ( f ) - ( k ) containing definitions and addressing implementation of dod's sdb program .

in so deciding , the district court specifically rejected arguments that any preferences for hubzone businesses are race neutral and that rdc lacks standing to challenge infrastructure assistance to colleges and universities .

the court's reasoning in doing so , and in issuing its judgment , was that the federal circuit struck down the totality of section ( a ) in its decision , and sections ( b ) through ( k ) are contingent upon section ( a ) and must "also fall" when section ( a ) does .

on march 10 , 2009 , the under secretary of defense ( acquisition , technology & logistics ) responded to the district court's decision by directing that … any activity , which includes but is not limited to the award of contracts and orders under contracts , advance payments , and the award of grants or scholarships or the addition of funds to existing grants and scholarships , that rely exclusively on the authority of 10 u.s.c .

§ 2323 should cease .

a subsequent memorandum from the department of the army clarified that , for purposes of army programs , options under existing contracts "should be treated … as separate contract action[s] and the contracting organization should not exercise the option if the funding authority for the underlying contract stemmed solely from title 10 u.s.c .

section 2323. .

the memorandum also stated that the army's goals for assistance to hbcus remain in effect as aspirational goals and that pre - existing agreements with hbcus could be continued until they lapse because the district court's decision was prospective and governed only contracting and other actions initiated after february 26 , 2009 .

the 111 th congress responded to the district court's decision , in part , by establishing a new program to assist hbcus , hsis , annhis , mmis , and other msis in performing "defense - related research , development , testing , and evaluation activities. .

among the forms of assistance that defense agencies may provide under this program are grants , scholarships , fellowships , and the acquisition of research equipment and instrumentation .

on september 9 , 2011 , the obama administration proposed amending the far in light of the decisions by the federal circuit and the district court in rothe .

the administration proposes to delete those portions of the far which govern price evaluation adjustments to bids or offers submitted by small disadvantaged businesses for defense contracts , and which are rooted solely in section 1207 of the department of defense authorization act of 1987 ( i.e. , subpart 19.11 and the corresponding clause at far 52.219-23 ) .

it also proposes to relocate and otherwise amend those provisions of the far which govern monetary incentives and evaluation factors for subcontracting with small disadvantaged businesses , and which are rooted in the small business act ( i.e. , subpart 19.12 and corresponding clauses far 52.219-24 , 52.219-25 and 52.219-26 ) .

according to the administration , the latter provisions "were not at issue in the rothe decision , and therefore retain their legal status. .

as numerous commentators and the sba have recognized , the federal circuit's decision in rothe could have significant implications for the percentage of federal contract dollars awarded to minority - owned small businesses and for other federal contracting programs for small businesses .

the demise of dod's price evaluation adjustment authority under section 1207 is not , in itself , necessarily all that significant , in part because other provisions of law have precluded dod from exercising this authority for over a decade , as is discussed below .

potentially more serious is the effect that the rothe decision could have on other programs for small disadvantaged businesses , which minority - owned small businesses are presumed to be .

the rothe decision arguably suggests grounds upon which potential plaintiffs might be able to successfully challenge these programs .

the rothe decision could also potentially leave programs for women - owned small businesses vulnerable to constitutional challenges .

while not subject to strict scrutiny like the program for minority contractors at issue in rothe , these programs are subject to heightened scrutiny rather than rational basis review , which is the most deferential form of judicial scrutiny .

other programs for small businesses should be unaffected by the rothe decision .

currently , the extent to which the courts will apply the reasoning in rothe to future legal challenges is unclear .

as a result , it is difficult to provide clear guidance regarding the requirements that congress must meet when enacting legislation that may be subject to equal protection review .

however , a few points may be made .

first , if enacting race - conscious measures or other legislation that will be subject to strict scrutiny , congress will be required to establish a "strong basis in evidence" to support the articulated compelling governmental interest .

this requirement for a "strong basis in evidence" was originally introduced by the supreme court in wygant v. jackson board of education .

over the years , subsequent court cases have provided some clarification of the meaning and nature of a "strong basis in evidence" by finding that such a basis existed , or was lacking , in particular circumstances .

as these cases suggest , the rothe court , which required the government to show the same types of evidence of racial discrimination as were required in other cases and subjected this evidence to the same scrutiny other courts had given it , arguably did not depart significantly from precedent in its approach to the "strong basis in evidence" requirement .

nevertheless , rothe appears to be the latest in a long line of cases that place an increasingly heavy evidentiary burden on congress .

in the immediate aftermath of the court's landmark decision in adarand constructors v. peña , which , for the first time , applied strict scrutiny to racial preferences in federal contracting programs , the federal courts generally stressed deference to congressional authority to conduct fact - finding and to enact remedial legislation pursuant to section 5 of the fourteenth amendment .

this deference to congressional authority has eroded over the years .

as a result , congress must now support any race - conscious measures it enacts by developing a strong record , as demonstrated in hearings and legislative findings , of methodologically sound , broad statistical evidence of discrimination capable of withstanding searching judicial inquiry .

