the balanced budget act of 1997 ( bba 97 ; p.l .

105-33 ) established the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) under a new title xxi of the social security act and provided annual appropriations for chip through fy2007 .

the children's health insurance program reauthorization act of 2009 ( chipra , h.r .

2 , p.l .

111-3 ) , which was signed into law on february 4 , 2009 , provided chip appropriations through fy2013 and made other changes .

chip offers federal matching funds to states and territories to provide health insurance to certain uninsured low - income children and pregnant women .

although specific requirements apply to eligibility , benefits , and beneficiary cost - sharing , as described below , these rules can be modified via waiver authority provided in section 1115 of the social security act .

eligibility for health benefits under chip is available to different groups via different federal authority and mechanisms .

these groups have included children , pregnant women , parents and childless adults .

groups may be covered under the chip state plan or via special waiver authority .

as noted above , when designing their chip programs , states may cover targeted low - income children under their medicaid program , create a new separate chip program , or devise a combination of both approaches .

states that use medicaid - expansion chip programs must provide the full range of mandatory medicaid benefits , as well as all optional services specified in their state medicaid plans .

as an alternative to providing all of the mandatory and selected optional benefits under traditional medicaid , the deficit reduction act of 2005 ( p.l .

109-171 ; dra ) gave states the option to enroll state - specified groups , including children in chip - financed medicaid expansions , in new benchmark and benchmark - equivalent benefit plans .

these plans are nearly identical to the benefit packages offered through separate chip programs ( described below ) .

for any child under age 21 in one of the major mandatory and optional medicaid eligibility groups , including targeted low - income children , the benefits available through the early and periodic screening , diagnostic , and treatment ( epsdt ) program must be provided , whether through a benchmark plan or otherwise ( per chipra ) .

under epsdt , children receive well - child care , immunizations , and other screening services , as well as medical care necessary to correct or ameliorate identified defects , illnesses , or conditions , including optional services states may not otherwise cover in their medicaid programs .

states that choose to create separate chip programs may elect any of three benefit options: ( 1 ) a benchmark benefit package , ( 2 ) benchmark equivalent coverage , or ( 3 ) any other health benefits plan that the secretary of health and human services determines will provide appropriate coverage to the targeted population of uninsured children .

a benchmark benefit package is one of the following three plans: ( 1 ) the standard blue cross / blue shield preferred provider option plan offered under the federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) , ( 2 ) the health coverage that is offered and generally available to state employees in the state involved , and ( 3 ) the health coverage that is offered by a health maintenance organization ( hmo ) with the largest commercial ( non - medicaid ) enrollment in the state involved .

benchmark - equivalent coverage is defined as a package of benefits that has the same actuarial value as one of the benchmark benefit packages .

a state choosing to provide benchmark - equivalent coverage must cover each of the benefits in the "basic benefits category. .

the benefits in the basic benefits category are inpatient and outpatient hospital services , physicians' surgical and medical services , lab and x - ray services , and well - baby and well - child care , including age - appropriate immunizations .

benchmark - equivalent coverage must also include at least 75% of the actuarial value of coverage under the benchmark plan for each of the benefits in the "additional service category. .

these additional services include prescription drugs , vision services , and hearing services .

states are encouraged to cover other categories of service not listed above .

abortions may not be covered , except in the case of a pregnancy resulting from rape or incest , or when an abortion is necessary to save the mother's life .

all 50 states , the district of columbia , and five territories have chip programs .

the territories , the district of columbia , and 6 states use medicaid expansions ; 18 states use separate state programs ; and 26 states use a combination approach .

among other types of separate chip programs , data from 2005 indicate that most of the benchmark and benchmark - equivalent plans are based on a state employees' health plan , and most secretary - approved plans are modeled after medicaid .

cost - sharing refers to the out - of - pocket payments made by beneficiaries of a health insurance plan .

cost - sharing may include monthly premiums , enrollment fees , deductibles , copayments , coinsurance and other similar charges .

federal law permits states to impose cost - sharing for some beneficiaries and some services under chip .

states that cover targeted low - income children under medicaid must follow the nominal cost - sharing rules of the medicaid program .

under these rules , the majority of such children are exempt .

children who are 18 years of age and enrolled in medicaid expansions under chip may be subject to service - related cost - sharing ( eg , copayments ) at state option .

dra provided states with a new option for premiums and service - related cost - sharing that may be applied to targeted low - income children under chip medicaid - expansion programs .

for children in families with income under 100% fpl , no premiums are allowed and service - related cost - sharing is limited to nominal amounts .

for children in families with income between 100% - 150% fpl , no premiums may be imposed ; however , service - related cost - sharing may be applied up to 10% of the cost of the item or service rendered .

for children in families with income above 150% fpl , premiums are allowed ( no limit is specified ) , and service - related cost - sharing may be applied up to 20% of the cost of the item or service rendered .

for all individuals , the total aggregate amount of all cost - sharing cannot exceed 5% of family income ( on a quarterly or monthly basis as specified by the state ) .

preventive services for children are exempt from dra cost - sharing .

the nominal medicaid cost - sharing amounts in regulation will be indexed by medical care inflation .

special rules apply to cost - sharing for prescription drugs , and for emergency room copayments for non - emergency care .

dra also allows states to condition continuing medicaid eligibility on the payment of premiums .

providers may also be allowed to deny care for failure to pay service - related cost - sharing .

if a state implements chip through a separate state program , premiums or enrollment fees for program participation may be imposed , but the maximum allowable amount is dependent on family income .

for all families with incomes under 150% fpl and enrolled in separate state programs , premiums may not exceed the amounts set forth in federal medicaid regulations .

additionally , these families may be charged service - related cost - sharing , but such cost - sharing is limited to ( 1 ) nominal amounts defined in federal medicaid regulations for the subgroup with income below 100% fpl , and ( 2 ) slightly higher amounts defined in chip regulations for families with income between 100% - 150% fpl .

for a family with income above 150% fpl , cost - sharing may be imposed in any amount , provided that cost - sharing for higher - income children is not less than cost - sharing for lower - income children and subject to the out - of - pocket limit of 5% of family income .

in addition , states are required to inform families of these limits and provide a mechanism for families to stop paying once the cost - sharing limits have been reached .

preventive services are exempt from cost - sharing for all chip families regardless of income .

the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) defines such preventive services to include , at a minimum , the following: all healthy newborn physician visits , including routine screening ( inpatient and outpatient ) ; routine physical examinations ; laboratory tests associated with such routine physical examinations ; immunizations and related office visits ; and routine preventive and diagnostic dental services ( for example , oral examinations , prophylaxis and topical fluoride applications , sealants , and x - rays ) .

chipra 2009 contained several provisions to expand and improve data collection and reporting by both the states and the federal government with respect to chip and , for some initiatives , also for medicaid .

for example , the new law directs the secretary of hhs to develop child health quality measures , a standardized format for reporting such information , and procedures to encourage states to voluntarily report on the quality of pediatric care under both chip and medicaid .

in addition , several reporting requirements were added to states' annual chip reports including , for example , data on eligibility criteria , access to primary and specialty care , and data on premium assistance for employer - sponsored coverage .

gao is to conduct a study of children's access to primary and specialty care under medicaid and chip .

chipra also established a new federal commission , called the medicaid and chip payment and access commission , or macpac .

this commission will review policies under both programs affecting children's access to benefits including , for example , payment policies and their impact on access and quality of care .

regular , on - going reports to congress are to detail these findings and are to include recommendations for improving access and quality of care for children under medicaid and chip .

chipra also required the secretary of hhs to conduct a new , independent federal evaluation of 10 states with approved chip plans that meet certain criteria ( eg , represent different geographic regions , utilize diverse approaches to chip coverage , and have significant portions of uninsured children ) .

this evaluation will be modeled after the first such federal evaluation undertaken in the early 2000s .

as with the first federal evaluation , the new evaluation will examine , for example , effectiveness of outreach and enrollment strategies , the effects of cost - sharing on utilization , and factors related to disenrollment and retention of children .

federal financing of chip includes three major components: ( 1 ) total federal appropriations for states' annual chip allotments of federal funds among the states and territories , ( 2 ) reallocation of unspent federal funds and appropriations for eliminating states' shortfalls , and ( 3 ) other factors affecting federal financing including the federal matching rate and caps on administrative expenses .

bba 97 appropriated a total of approximately $40 billion for chip allotments for fy1998 to fy2007 .

the funding level by fiscal year varied across time .

the total annual appropriation for each of fy1998-fy2001 was a little more than $4.2 billion .

this annual total dropped to under $3.2 billion in fy2002-fy2004 .

then the appropriation rose to about $4.1 billion for fy2005 and fy2006 , with a further increase to roughly $5.0 billion in fy2007 .

the drop in funding for fy2002-fy2004 , sometimes referred to as the "chip dip," was written into chip's authorizing legislation due to budgetary constraints applicable at the time the legislation was drafted .

the 110 th congress passed two bills to "reauthorize" chip — providing chip funding for fy2008 through fy2012 and making other changes to both chip and medicaid .

both h.r .

976 and h.r .

3963 were vetoed by president george w. bush , with the congress unable to override these vetoes .

in lieu of reauthorization , the medicare , medicaid , and schip extension act of 2007 ( mmsea , p.l .

110-173 ) appropriated funds to provide chip allotments for fy2008 and fy2009 , but only to be available through march 31 , 2009 .

because shortfalls of federal chip funds were still projected to occur in certain states , additional funds besides the allotments were also appropriated , as discussed in the next section .

chipra provided a national appropriation for chip allotments totaling $68.9 billion from fy2009 to fy2013 .

the national appropriation available for chip allotments under chipra are $10.562 billion in fy2009 ; $12.52 billion in fy2010 ; $13.459 billion in fy2011 ; $14.982 billion in fy2012 ; and $17.406 billion in fy2013 .

the allotment of the annual federal chip appropriation among the states is determined by a formula set in law .

prior to chipra , of the national appropriation ( $5 billion for each of fy2007 , fy2008 and fy2009 , for example ) , the territories received 0.25% .

the remainder ( $4.9875 billion for each of fy2007 , fy2008 and fy2009 ) was divided , or allotted , among the states based on a formula using survey estimates of the number of low - income children in the state and the number of those children who were uninsured .

these amounts were adjusted by a geographic adjustment factor and were limited by various floors and ceilings to ensure that a state's allotment did not vary substantially from certain past allotments .

rather than dividing a fixed national appropriation on the basis of state survey estimates , a state's allotment is now calculated as described below and if the total of all the states' and territories' allotments does not exceed the national appropriation , that will be the state's allotment .

chip allotments are basically separate , sequential funding accounts .

for each state and territory , the account for a given fiscal year is made available at the beginning of that year and remains available for a certain period of time .

prior to chipra , allotments were available for three years .

however , the chip allotments for fy2009 and after will only be available for two years .

typically , chip payments are taken out of the earliest active account .

once that fiscal year allotment is fully expended , the state can begin drawing from the next available allotment .

fy2009 federal chip allotments for states are the largest of three state - specific amounts: the state's fy2008 federal chip spending , multiplied by a growth factor ; the state's fy2008 federal chip allotment , multiplied by a growth factor ; and the state's own projections of federal chip spending for fy2009 , submitted by states to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) as of february 2009 .

the largest of these three amounts will be increased by 10% and will serve as the state's fy2009 federal chip allotment , as long as the national appropriation is adequate to cover all the states' and territories' fy2009 allotments .

if not , allotments will be reduced proportionally .

for fy2010 , the allotment for a state ( or territory ) will be calculated as the sum of the following four amounts , if applicable , multiplied by the applicable growth factor for the year: the fy2009 chip allotment ; fy2006 unspent allotments redistributed to and spent by shortfall states in fy2009 ; spending of funds provided to shortfall states in the first half of fy2009 ; and spending of contingency fund payments ( discussed below ) in fy2009 , although there may be none .

for fy2011 and fy2013 , the allotment for a state ( or territory ) will be "rebased," based on prior year spending .

this will be done by multiplying the state's growth factor for the year by the new base , which will be the prior year's federal chip spending .

for fy2012 , the allotment for a state ( or territory ) will be calculated as the fy2011 allotment and any fy2011 contingency fund spending , multiplied by the state's growth factor for the year .

at the end of the applicable period of availability , unspent allotments are redistributed to other states .

the rules vary by fiscal year .

bba 97 stipulated that only states that exhausted the relevant allotment within three years were eligible to receive unspent funds from other states .

however , the secretary determined how the funds would be redistributed to states that qualified .

for fy2006 , the amount available for redistribution was inadequate for covering projected federal chip shortfalls in 12 states .

in dra , congress appropriated an additional $283 million to cover the projected shortfalls .

two states ( illinois and massachusetts ) ultimately had higher fy2006 chip spending than anticipated , so they experienced shortfalls totaling approximately $100 million , almost all of that from illinois .

in fy2007 , $147 million in unspent fy2004 original allotments was available for redistribution .

in the closing hours of the 109 th congress , a bill was passed to specify how those funds would be redistributed .

the national institutes of health ( nih ) reform act of 2006 ( h.r .

6164 , p.l .

109-482 , nihra ) required that the funds go to states "in the order in which such [shortfall] states realize monthly funding shortfalls ... for fiscal year 2007. .

the purpose was to delay any state facing a shortfall as far into the year as possible with the available funds .

crs projections indicated that this particular provision would delay shortfalls until the end of march 2007 .

to delay shortfalls even further , the chip provisions of nihra called for an initial redistribution of up to half of unspent fy2005 original allotments as of march 31 , 2007 ( capped at $20 million per state ) — after 2½ years of availability .

for a state to forgo unspent fy2005 funds on that date , nihra required not only that the state have unspent fy2005 balances but that the state's total chip balances ( from the fy2005-fy2007 original allotments ) as of march 31 , 2007 , were at least double what the state projected to spend in federal chip funds in fy2007 .

this was projected to provide an additional $138 million for shortfall states , delaying any state facing a shortfall of federal chip funds until may 2007 .

the shortfalls remaining for the rest of the fiscal year were projected at just over $600 million in 12 states .

on may 25 , 2007 , p.l .

110-28 ( the u.s. troop readiness , veterans' care , katrina recovery , and iraq accountability appropriations act , 2007 ; utra ) was enacted .

in it , congress appropriated up to $650 million to cover shortfalls of federal chip funds in 10 states for the remainder of fy2007 .

table 2 shows cumulative federal chip financing from the bba 97 era of chip — from1998 through fy2007 .

for fy2008 , mmsea required that unspent fy2005 allotments be redistributed to shortfall states on a monthly basis in the order in which these states experience shortfalls .

in addition to this redistribution , mmsea appropriated up to $1.6 billion for states' remaining shortfalls in fy2008 .

actual shortfall funding provided in fy2008 totaled just under $1 billion , as shown in column e of table 3 .

for fy2009 , mmsea also required that unspent fy2006 allotments be redistributed to states projected to face shortfalls in fy2009 before march 31 , 2009 , on a monthly basis in the order in which these states experience shortfalls .

in addition to this redistribution , mmsea appropriated up to $275 million for states' remaining shortfalls through march 31 , 2009 .

the increased fy2009 allotments provided by chipra should prevent any federal chip funding shortfalls for the second half of fy2009 .

under chipra , any unspent funds available for redistribution would first be provided to shortfall states and then , if any redistribution funds still remain , toward bonus payments , which are discussed in the next section .

the creation of a child enrollment contingency fund was an additional chipra measure to prevent states from experiencing shortfalls of federal chip funds .

this fund receives an appropriation separate from the national chip allotment amounts .

direct payments from the contingency fund can be made to shortfall states for the federal share of expenditures for chip children above a target enrollment level .

payments from the contingency fund cannot exceed 20% of that year's national allotment amount and are to be reduced proportionally if necessary .

like medicaid , chip is a federal - state matching program .

for each dollar of state spending , the federal government makes a matching payment drawn from chip accounts .

a state's share of program spending for medicaid is equal to 100% minus the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) .

the enhanced fmap ( e - fmap ) for chip means a state's share of expenditures is 30% lower than under the regular fmap .

one new exception is that the temporary medicaid fmap increases specified in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , h.r .

1 , p.l .

111-5 ) are not considered in calculating the e - fmap .

compared with the medicaid fmap , which ranged from 50% to 75.84% in fy2009 prior to arra , the enhanced fmap for chip ranges from 65% to 83.09% .

all chip assistance for targeted low - income children , including coverage provided under medicaid , is eligible for the enhanced fmap .

the medicaid fmap and the enhanced chip fmap are subject to a ceiling of 83% and 85% , respectively , and a floor of 50% and 65% .

there is a limit on federal spending for chip administrative expenses , which include activities such as data collection and reporting , outreach and education , and other activities .

for federal matching purposes , a 10% cap applies to state non - benefit expenses .

this cap is tied to the dollar amount that a state draws down from its annual allotment to cover benefits and these non - benefit costs under chip , as opposed to 10% of a state's total annual allotment .

in other words , no more than 10% of the federal funds that a state draws down for chip benefit and non - benefit expenditures combined can be used for non - benefit costs including administrative expenses .

under chipra , federal chip bonus payments are available to states that ( 1 ) increase medicaid ( not chip ) child enrollment by certain amounts , and ( 2 ) implement five out of eight specific outreach and enrollment activities .

the source of funding for these payments would be an initial $3.225 billion appropriation in fy2009 as well as unspent national allotment and redistribution amounts .

