the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-246 , 2008 farm bill ) created a set of disaster programs called "supplemental agricultural disaster assistance. .

beginning with 2008 crops and ending september 30 , 2011 , the programs supplement crop insurance coverage and provide disaster assistance for livestock ( including aquaculture and honey bees ) , forage , and tree and nursery crops .

although the programs have expired , they are still making payments for losses that occurred prior to september 30 , 2011 .

the largest component of supplemental agricultural disaster assistance is a crop disaster program called the supplemental revenue assistance payments program ( sure ) .

the program pays producers for crop revenue losses due to natural disaster or adverse weather incurred on or before september 30 , 2011 .

it essentially compensates eligible producers for a portion of losses that are not eligible for an indemnity payment under a crop insurance policy .

the program departs , however , from both traditional disaster assistance and crop yield insurance by calculating and reimbursing losses using total crop revenue for the entire farm ( i.e. , summing revenue from all crops for an individual farmer ) .

this report focuses on the program's mechanics and some implementation and policy issues .

on december 28 , 2009 , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) issued regulations for sure .

at the time , usda officials said it was the most complex program usda's farm service agency had undertaken .

the department has faced a number of issues as it implemented the program .

in the next farm bill debate , congress will likely be interested in the effectiveness of sure , and , if the program is reauthorized , how it will be funded .

sure is one of 37 programs that does not have a continuing budgetary baseline that could be used to pay for extending the program .

in fall 2011 , numerous proposals were developed to revamp the farm safety net , which includes commodity support programs , crop insurance , and disaster programs .

for more information on the proposals , see crs report r42040 , farm safety net proposals and the joint select committee on deficit reduction .

historically , three ongoing federal programs help farmers deal with risk associated with crop losses .

each has permanent authorization and receives regular annual funding .

crop insurance indemnifies participating producers for yield or revenue losses for their farms .

usda's noninsured crop disaster assistance program ( nap ) provides crop - loss coverage for crops not covered by insurance policies .

emergency disaster loans are available to producers when a county has been declared a disaster area either by the president or the secretary of agriculture .

in recent decades , when these programs did not provide sufficient financial assistance to producers , congress has provided "ad - hoc" emergency crop disaster assistance .

in virtually every crop year between 1988 and 2007 , congress provided disaster assistance to farmers and ranchers with significant weather - related production losses .

during this period , federal ad - hoc crop disaster programs provided approximately $1 billion per fiscal year to farmers who experienced a major crop loss caused by a natural disaster .

ad - hoc assistance has been made available primarily through emergency supplemental appropriations to a wide array of usda programs .

in an effort to end the ad - hoc nature of emergency assistance , with legislation enacted after the disaster occurred , congress authorized the sure program in the 2008 farm bill .

part of the motivation was to provide a pre - designed program that farmers could incorporate in their risk management planning .

it would presumably provide more timely payments .

however , the program design as defined in the farm bill has affected the timeliness of payments ( see section on " time lag for payment delivery " ) .

a major distinction of sure is that payments are based on whole - farm crop revenue , not crop - specific losses .

in previous disaster programs , producer payments were based on individual crop losses .

if a farmer experienced a yield loss , the farmer would be eligible for a payment specific to that crop loss , assuming other criteria were met .

revenue losses are , in general , determined by the calendar year of harvest .

under the new program , a farmer's revenue from all crops in all counties is compared with a guaranteed level of revenue that is computed mostly from expected or average yields and prices .

as a result , the program considers the disaster's impact on a farmer's entire enterprise and not on just the crop ( s ) that were adversely affected .

if the actual farm revenue ( including farm program payments and insurance indemnities ) is less than the farm's guaranteed level , the producer receives a payment .

in contrast , if actual whole farm revenue does not fall below the guaranteed level , whereby losses for one crop are offset by revenue gains for another , no disaster payment is made .

payments are limited so that the guaranteed level cannot exceed 90% of expected farm income in the absence of a natural disaster .

the sure program is designed to help fill gaps in other government commodity and risk management programs .

the cost to the farmer is relatively low , and becoming eligible for sure does not affect decisions for other programs .

as a result , interest in sure may have increased demand for crop insurance and nap coverage , resulting in a greater share of u.s. crops covered under crop insurance and nap .

also , farmers who selected higher insurance coverage increased their sure guarantee .

to reduce the possibility of double payments , the sure formulas account for indemnities and farm program government payments , including any ad hoc disaster payments .

for example , payments under usda's crop assistance program in 2010 are added to a farm's actual revenue , which reduces the likelihood and / or size of a sure payment .

sure and the four other disaster programs authorized in the 2008 farm bill receive funding through the agricultural disaster relief trust fund established in the 2008 farm bill .

the trust fund is to receive the equivalent of 3.08% of the amount received each year ( fy2008-2011 ) in u.s. customs receipts collected on certain goods .

at the time of 2008 farm bill enactment , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) estimated the combined total costs of the five programs to be $3.8 billion over the four - year life of the programs .

of this total , cbo estimated that supplemental crop revenue assistance would cost $1.7 billion over the four years , or an average of $425 million per year .

another $1.6 billion would cover increased crop insurance and nap costs associated with the requirement that participants purchase either crop insurance or nap coverage .

the balance of $500 million would cover the combined estimated cost of the other four disaster programs , according to cbo .

if the cost of the programs exceeds the level of funding provided through customs receipts , the 2008 farm bill gives the trust fund the authority to borrow from the treasury such sums as necessary to meet its obligations .

sure provisions in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) are expected to cost an additional $674 million , according to cbo estimates .

about $500-$600 million would be for higher sure program benefits for the 2008 crop , with the remaining for the cost of crop insurance subsidies associated with additional policy purchases .

usda estimated total sure payments at $3.4 billion for 2008-2011 , or $0.85 billion per year .

this is less than average annual payments of $1.14 billion per year under previous ad hoc disaster programs ( 1998-2007 ) .

when the estimate was made , usda expected sure to cost less because losses would be lower when calculated at the farm level , with individual crop losses partially offset by crop insurance indemnities , nap payments , and revenue from other crops .

also the sure guarantee cap of 90% is 5 percentage points lower than previous ad hoc disaster programs .

as of december 13 , 2011 , sure payments for 2008 and 2009 losses totaled $2.8 billion , with just under one - third of the total attributed to changes under arra .

the geographic distribution of sure payments is extensive ( figure 1 and figure 2 ) .

for 2008 losses , sure payments were sent to 2,157 counties , or 69% of the total counties served by usda's farm service agency .

 ( payments for 2010 losses began flowing in november 2011 and total $3 million to date. ) .

also , sure is providing supplemental payments at levels that are roughly proportional to crop insurance indemnities when aggregated to the state level ( see figure 3 ) .

in 2008 , for every dollar of crop insurance indemnities , the sure program paid $0.24 .

the states receiving highest indemnities in 2008 — iowa , north dakota , and texas — also received the highest amount of sure payments .

on december 28 , 2009 , usda issued regulations for sure .

farmer signup for 2008 crop losses began january 4 , 2010 , and usda began making payments shortly thereafter .

the department begin accepting applications for 2009 losses on january 10 , 2011 .

program signup for 2010 losses began november 14 , 2011 .

usda officials say that sure is the most complex program usda's farm service agency ( fsa ) has undertaken .

it has faced a number of implementation challenges in terms of program administration .

in the next farm bill debate , congress will likely be interested in the effectiveness and cost of the sure program .

based on cbo and usda cost estimates , annual sure payments over the four - year life of the program were expected to be less than the typical levels of ad - hoc disaster payments .

however , relatively high first - year ( 2008 ) payments , plus the administration's ad hoc disaster program for 2009 losses for certain crops , have raised the question of whether sure , as it is currently designed , provides an acceptable ( and cost - effective ) level of disaster assistance .

moreover , sure and the other disaster programs in the 2008 farm bill do not have "baseline funding," which means that if congress wants to reauthorize sure , it will need to find either new funding or budget offsets to pay for it ( see " funding sure for losses beyond september 30 , 2011 ," below ) .

a primary policy question is how well this whole - farm approach helps manage farm - level risk .

payment data from 2008 indicate that sure payments have supplemented crop insurance indemnities as intended ( see figure 3 ) , at least in certain parts of the country , including the corn belt and great plains .

nevertheless , some farmers have complained that the whole - farm approach typically does not result in disaster payments for diversified operations because aggregating revenue across a farmer's entire operation substantially reduces the likelihood of receiving assistance .

for these farmers , the sure whole farm approach runs counter to the historical custom of receiving disaster payments that are crop - specific .

also , producers in some regions such as the south say that sure is less effective for them because they tend to purchase lower levels of crop insurance coverage , which limits the revenue guarantee under sure .

in contrast , where farmers have qualified for payments , the initial reaction has been generally favorable .

for example , farmers in north dakota are reportedly fairly satisfied with sure , in combination with benefits provided under crop insurance .

another question is how much overlap exists in federal payments and farm risk reduction among the average crop revenue election program ( acre ) , sure disaster payments , and crop insurance indemnities .

while it may be possible that the same price decline ( resulting in revenue loss ) may affect both acre and crop insurance indemnities , sure payments account for these programs , thereby minimizing overlap with sure .

one outcome of the sure program design is that the loss trigger differs across producers depending on whether or not they produce crops located in a secretarial - disaster - declared county ( or a contiguous county ) .

producers who are located in a disaster county ( or a contiguous county ) must show only a 10% yield loss on one crop before qualifying for a sure payment .

producers in all other counties must show a 50% yield loss .

as a result , sure may address the "shallow loss" problem only in certain counties .

some have also pointed to the "roulette wheel" nature of sure , whereby a small change in yield ( eg , 1 bushel per acre ) might mean the difference between receiving a large sure payment and no sure payment , which can diminish the value of sure as a risk management strategy .

part of the issue is the disaster designation process , which results in some states and counties requesting declarations for many or all counties while others are more selective .

the dichotomy raises concerns that the possibility of sure payments depends too much on the designation process , and that the designation may or may not correspond with an individual farmer's disaster situation .

in november 2010 , usda issued a proposed rule to modify the designation process to simplify and expedite it and to make other changes .

a related policy issue is that a disaster designation for a particular county can bring with it a "lower bar" ( the 10% yield loss rather than the 50% yield loss ) for a much larger amount of acreage , if farmers have substantial acreage outside of the disaster or adjacent county .

basing sure payments on the county where the land is located could make the program less costly , but it would reduce the "whole farm" aspect of the program .

the sure loss calculation , as it is currently designed , builds in downward bias in the revenue determination , which can make it easier to trigger a payment and raise overall program costs .

the revenue determination uses a farm or cash price , which is typically lower than the insurance prices ( based on futures contract prices ) used to calculate many of the guarantees .

putting the prices on the same level ( by adjusting one or the other ) would reduce additional payments inadvertently caused by program design .

also , some producers have relatively high counter - cyclical program yields used by sure because some factors such as irrigation pushed up yields in the 1980s ( when those yields were determined ) .

farmers in this situation can appear to have perpetual losses based on the current sure formula .

the time lag between actual losses and government payments remains a concern ( see " payment timing " ) , as evidenced by the ( unsuccessful ) attempts to pass ad hoc assistance in the 111 th congress and the subsequent disaster payment program established by usda .

in contrast to sure payments , the method for determining losses under the livestock programs is more streamlined , and livestock payments arrive more quickly .

for example , livestock death losses for individual producers immediately trigger livestock indemnity program payments , while the weekly publication u.s. drought monitor is used to determine payments for grazing losses under the livestock forage disaster program .

by its nature , disaster payments using a whole - farm approach like sure can take more time to determine payment levels .

some have suggested that making payments on an individual crop basis using crop insurance "harvest prices" ( which are known immediately after harvest ) could speed up the process and more closely tie disaster payments with need for losses .

such a change would also require provisions to either estimate other government payments ( eg , acre ) or remove them from the sure revenue calculation because they are not known until after the marketing season .

some farmers are encouraging policymakers to consider reimbursing producers for other "losses" related to high input costs .

for example , rice farmers have noted that sure ( like crop insurance ) does not provide any coverage for increased harvest costs associated with "downed rice" following excessive rain or flooding immediately prior to harvest , which was a widespread problem in 2009 .

because sure is based on revenue ( and not costs or margins ) , some farmers in this circumstance do not qualify for sure payments .

one of the motivations for crop disaster bills in the 111 th congress , which preceded the ad hoc disaster program established by the administration for 2009 losses , was higher 2009 costs for rice producers .

one potential outcome of the sure program could be to inadvertently encourage some farmers to increase their farm business risk .

because sure addresses whole - farm crop revenue risk , some analysts expect sure to favor farmers with a single crop produced in a single county or counties with high yield variability .

in contrast , planting multiple crops in multiple locations adds diversity to a farm , thereby reducing the chance that a farm would drop below its guaranteed revenue trigger .

consequently , in order to take advantage of sure , farmers might eliminate crops from their rotations .

an additional concern involves the qualifying conditions for the program , specifically the 50% loss provision and potential outcomes for farmers who are not in a sure - eligible county .

researchers have pointed out that the program criteria may encourage risky behavior or poor production practices ( the "moral hazard" problem ) because producers could receive a bump in revenue simply by allowing a crop to fail ( with at least a 50% yield loss ) rather than taking steps to minimize losses .

the future of sure is also affected by funding .

under the 2008 farm bill , the sure program provides payments to producers for crop revenue losses due to natural disaster or adverse weather incurred on or before september 30 , 2011 .

as a result of the expiring authority and budget assumptions made by the congressional budget office when scoring the 2008 farm bill , sure and several other program do not have "budget baseline" beyond their expiration that could be used to pay for extending the programs .

if policymakers want to continue these programs in the next farm bill , they will need to pay for them with new funding or budget savings ( offsets ) from other programs .

the cost of extending sure ( and four other disaster programs ) is estimated at about $1 billion per year .

finding this level of offsets may be a difficult task in a tight budget environment .

