on june 14 , 2012 , andry rajoelina , the president of madagascar's unelected transitional government , the high transitional authority ( hat , its french acronym ) , agreed to meet with marc ravalomanana , the country's former , most recently elected president .

ravalomanana was ousted by a rajoelina - led coalition of civilian political groups , in league with the military , in early 2009 .

the agreement comes in the wake of renewed pressure on the two men , the two principal protagonists in madagascar's ongoing political crisis , to meet to resolve disputes over a number of issues , discussed below .

their failure to do so has long been seen as a key stumbling block in internationally mediated efforts — as stated in a june 1 southern african development community ( sadc ) heads of state summit communiqué — "to ensure full implementation of the roadmap and create an enabling environment for holding credible , free and fair elections. .

the political environment remains volatile .

it is characterized by regular , relatively low level political disputes — including accusations of hat ill - treatment of ravalomanana - linked political figures ; restrictions on and , in some cases , violent suppression of large public political gatherings ; and selected restrictions on journalists .

nevertheless , substantial progress has been made in the implementation of key provisions of the roadmap , in part based on two meetings of its signatories .

prim e minister appointed .

in late october 2011 , a "consensus" prime minister , jean omer beriziky , a former malagasy diplomat and academic , was appointed from more than a dozen candidates nominated by the various roadmap signatories .

while he was required to be from a region and a political party different than that of rajoelina , as he was ultimately selected by rajoelina , his appointment was not universally supported by all signatories .

he drew notable objections from a ravalomanana spokesman , who alleged that he was from a party that had formerly backed rajoelina .

beriziky , who assumed office on november 2 , has reportedly taken a relatively neutral stance vis - à - vis the differences between rajoelina and ravalomanana , especially regarding the issue of amnesty ( see below ) , and other matters .

this has reportedly insulated him from potential political pressure from rajoelina , as any attempt by the latter to dismiss him would likely be viewed by the international community as an abrogation of the roadmap .

it has also earned him a reputation as a consensus - oriented , moderate leader who may be able to bridge the long - standing divide between rajoelina and ravalomanana .

some international and malagasy actors reportedly believe that the two should agree not to run in the anticipated election , and beriziky is reportedly viewed by some malagasy as a major viable alternative presidential contender .

cabinet appointed .

in late november , a 35-member , national union government cabinet was appointed , days after a roadmap deadline requiring this outcome had passed due to disputes over the proposed makeup of the cabinet .

the cabinet includes 12 opposition members , but not all opposition parties were satisfied by the appointments .

some had reportedly wanted portfolios other than what they were given , and spokespersons from the mouvance ravalomanana and mouvance zafy reportedly boycotted the cabinet's initial meeting , alleging that the cabinet selection process was not in accordance with the roadmap .

legislature appointed .

in early december , the congress of transition ( ct , the lower legislative chamber , akin to the house of representatives ) and the superior council of transition ( cst , the upper legislative chamber , akin to a senate ) were both enlarged , the former from 256 seats to 417 seats , and the latter from 90 seats to 189 seats .

incumbents in the transitional legislature appointed in october 2010 retained their posts , but additional seats were allocated according to the recommendations of signatories to the roadmap .

they were selected under criteria that took into consideration partisan , regional , and gender balance , and the nominations of various political parties .

seats allocated to the mouvance zafy , which did not name any nominees , were not filled .

electoral commission appointed .

on march 12 , 2012 , an independent transitional electoral commission ( the ceni - t , after its french acronym ) was inaugurated .

its members include 10 civil society , 9 political party , and 2 rajoelina administration designees plus a president , béatrice atallah ; an appeals court judge ; and a member of a former national elections council .

provisional electoral timetable adopted .

on may 27 , the ceni - t adopted a partial electoral administrative process timetable , with a projected completion date of november 11 , 2012 , as required by the electoral code .

it requires that the election be held during the dry season , between april 30 and november 30 , unless otherwise mandated due to a court - declared force majeure .

the final scheduling of elections will be dependent on completion of various electoral procedures associated with voter registration , voter education , vetting of the voter rolls , and the like .

some of this work is likely to be challenging ; the current voter registry is reportedly highly inaccurate and is missing large numbers of listings from the southern portions of the island .

the ceni - t , whose work is dependent on central government funding , has pledged to issue biweekly progress updates .

it expects to publish a more specific electoral calendar in august , pending substantial completion of its pre - poll tasks .

amnesty law passed .

in mid - april 2012 the lower and upper houses of parliament passed an amnesty law — albeit belatedly vis - à - vis the roadmap implementation schedule — broadly covering responsibility for possible violations of the law associated with political events between 2002 and 2009 , that is , between the election and deposition of ravalomanana .

madagascar , a former french colony , is the world's fourth - largest island .

located in the indian ocean approximately 280 miles off the mozambique coast , it is about 30% larger than california .

its 22.6 million people are a unique product of historical migrations from africa , arab countries , southeast asia , and polynesia .

they speak a malayo - polynesian language , malagasy , which functions as an official language , along with french .

the use of english has grown in recent years .

approximately three - quarters of the malagasy people live in rural areas , making a living through small - scale commercial and subsistence farming .

the country regularly suffers massive economic losses , physical destruction , and loss of life during the annual cyclone season , and from cycles of drought and floods .

over two - thirds of the population lives below the poverty line .

madagascar is extremely biologically diverse and is unique in many ways ; over 85% of its species are estimated to be endemic .

its ecosystems include tropical forests , sandy coastal plains with vegetation , river ecosystems , mangroves , large marshes , and coral reefs .

along with some neighboring islands , it is famed as the exclusive home of lemurs , a unique and ancient suborder of primates .

madagascar is estimated to have as many as 150,000 species of flora and fauna that are unique to the island .

in part due to a high population growth rate , madagascar faces significant environmental pressures , and flora , fauna , and habitat loss from soil erosion associated with deforestation , agricultural production , and overgrazing ; desertification ; and water pollution .

some reports suggest that illegal logging and endangered wildlife exports have substantially increased since 2009 , when madagascar's democratically elected government was dissolved .

development challenges in madagascar have been compounded by periodic political unrest that has hampered economic growth and limited public investment .

with most donor aid to the government currently suspended due to the 2009 coup , public spending has dramatically decreased .

at the same time , unemployment and food insecurity , exacerbated by droughts and cyclones , have risen .

some analysts predict that these social pressures may ultimately force the opposing political parties to negotiate a solution to the current impasse .

following independence from france in 1960 , madagascar was ruled by a succession of soviet - leaning socialist regimes , and the country suffered episodic political instability .

in the late 1980s , support from the collapsing soviet union waned and popular demands for democratization mounted .

a democratic transition marked by considerable unrest began in 1989 , leading to the approval of a new constitution after a 1992 referendum and presidential elections .

the new government made little headway against madagascar's extreme poverty , and faced strikes , student unrest , and diverse political problems , including the impeachment of president albert zafy in july 1996 .

didier ratsiraka , a former military ruler , won presidential elections in november 1996 .

while he generally maintained a public commitment to democracy , he also attempted to centralize political control and backed constitutional reforms that weakened the legislature and gave him appointment powers over a third of senate seats .

ratsiraka's actions gradually weakened the opposition parties , but also engendered opposition to his rule , as did widespread allegations of corruption within his administration .

madagascar's ongoing political crisis began in december 2008 , when the ravalomanana government closed viva tv , a television station owned by mayor rajoelina , after it aired an interview with former president ratsiraka .

the government asserted that the speech threatened to "disturb public order and security," while critics viewed the move as a sign of increasing intolerance by the ravalomanana government of opposition - friendly media and as an effort to curtail rajoelina's influence .

after the closure , rajoelina issued an ultimatum , demanding , in the interest of press freedom and democracy , that the government allow the reopening of viva tv and other stations by january 13 .

in mid - january 2009 , rajoelina initiated what grew into a wave of public anti - government demonstrations in antananarivo .

the anti - government protests — which were also spurred by dissatisfaction over economic conditions , allegations of government corruption , accusations of state restrictions of freedom of expression , and of unilateral tim political dominance — swelled in size over subsequent days .

rajoelina labeled ravalomanana a dictator and called for further anti - government strikes , which duly ensued , closing down much of the capital .

in late january , the protests turned violent , as elements of the crowds rioted and looted .

the state radio building was ransacked and set alight ; arsonists targeted a ravalomanana - owned radio station , where guards shot a protester ; warehouses of one of his companies ; and other private businesses .

reports in the following days suggested that 70-80 persons had died during the unrest , most due to crowd stampedes and arson , which the government labeled a "civil disturbance which is akin to an attempted coup. .

at the end of january , rajoelina , backed by a group of opposition parties , again called for ravalomanana's ouster and the establishment of a two - year democratic transition that he would lead .

the next day rajoelina — who had not yet attained the age of 40 , the age constitutionally required for presidents — declared that he was taking control of state power as the head of a national transitional government , which he said would be established legally through a parliamentary request for ravalomanana's resignation .

in subsequent days he kept up demands seeking that end , along with claims that he was doing so legally .

on february 3 , 2009 , ravalomanana removed rajoelina from his mayoral office .

rajoelina continued to demand the president's ouster , calling for his impeachment and arrest and the establishment of a transitional government .

while protests waned over the next several days , on february 7 , the presidential guard fatally shot approximately 30 protesters who were marching on the presidential palace and wounded many more , prompting the defense minister to resign in protest .

she was immediately replaced by the military chief of staff .

in subsequent days , ravalomanana supporters engaged in pro - government demonstrations , while rajoelina supporters massed in support of their cause .

talks between the two sides were initiated in mid - february , but broke off weeks later .

they were followed by anti - government protests , some of which were suppressed by security forces , resulting in several fatalities .

in early march , the government unsuccessfully attempted to arrest rajoelina , who sought refuge at the french embassy .

while the september 2011 roadmap has resulted in substantial progress , the impasse over ravalomanana's return and possible amnesty means that the political crisis may continue for months or longer .

the country's economy , which had been on an upward trajectory under president ravalomanana — despite continuing widespread poverty and wide gaps between the poor majority and the wealthy elite — continues to struggle , based in part on a lack of donor confidence and government legitimacy .

most analysts do not expect significant economic recovery until after credible democratic elections takes place .

madagascar's economy , which had been significantly damaged by the 2002 crisis , had recovered quickly after ravalomanana came to power that year , and the recovery was seen as a sign of public and foreign investor confidence in his government .

growth was spurred , in part , by his administration's economic liberalization policies .

madagascar reached the completion point under the heavily indebted poor countries initiative ( hipc ) in 2004 and received cancellation of almost $2 billion in sovereign debt .

the ravalomanana administration sought to diversify the country's bilateral ties , and reduce its reliance on traditional business partners , such as france .

under ravalomanana , madagascar attracted several high - profile foreign investment projects , including a titanium dioxide mine developed by australia's rio tinto estimated at over $800 million and a tar sands project by france's total .

several oil companies began offshore exploration .

a major investment proposal by south korea's daewoo logistics became a rallying point for rajoelina in late 2008 .

ravalomanana critics like rajoelina questioned the government's offer to daewoo of a 99-year lease for 3.2 million acres of land for large corn and palm oil plantations .

the ravalomanana government claimed that the projects would bring infrastructure investments and create hundreds of jobs for malagasy farm workers , but rajoelina argued that the plantations would displace too many farmers from their land .

the proposed deal also raised ethical concerns about allocating almost half of the country's arable land for export crops while the country continues to import rice , a basic staple of the malagasy diet .

despite economic growth under ravalomanana , the majority of madagascar's people have remained poor .

the world bank estimates that per capita income is only approximately $460 per year , and the country ranks low on the u.n. development program's human development index .

some of the country's current economic challenges pre - date the 2009 political crisis .

food prices have increased significantly since 2007 , while purchasing power has decreased .

chronic food insecurity affects over half the population .

increased global competition on the world market for madagascar's primary export crop , vanilla , has adversely affected malagasy farmers in recent years .

the government has distributed coffee , clove , and pepper plants in an effort to diversify cash crops .

the country's shellfish industry suffers from declining fish stocks .

madagascar's economy has been heavily reliant on the tourism industry , which drew an estimated $390 million annually .

the 2008-2009 global economic downturn , combined with the current political uncertainty , has damaged the industry considerably .

the economy has declined under andry rajoelina and the hat , with real gdp growth falling from 7% in 2008 to - 3.7% in 2009 , an estimated 0.5% in 2010 , and an estimated .7% in 2011 according to the economist intelligence unit .

tourism declined by 50% from january 2009 to january 2010 , although it saw a moderate recovery in 2011 which later slowed due to poor european economic performance .

textile exports to the united states are down significantly ( see below ) .

tourism is further affected by an eu ban on flights by air madagascar , whose planes have been deemed no longer in compliance with eu safety standards , to european destinations .

madagascar's dairy industry has also suffered during the political crisis .

unemployment , food insecurity , criminality , and corruption are on the rise .

prior to the coup , foreign aid represented approximately 40% of the malagasy government's budget and 75% of investments in public spending .

madagascar has since lost an estimated $400 million in donor support , according to the world bank .

the government continues to pay public wages and debt payments , but public services have declined , affecting the education and health sectors .

social indicators have fallen .

reports suggest that the government's control over the armed services has also declined .

donor aid cuts have primarily affected infrastructure , productive activities , and institutional support , the world bank reports , while donor aid to social sectors has actually increased since the coup , representing over $260 million in 2010 , up from $180 million in 2008 .

the effectiveness of that aid , however , has been hindered by such factors as decreased donor coordination , weakened government capacity , and deteriorating infrastructure .

the eu has extended its suspension of development assistance , including budget support to the government , worth an estimated $738 million , for another year .

au and sadc sanctions , which do not affect aid flows , include a suspension of trade benefits and a travel ban and asset freeze on more than 100 members of the hat .

china is playing an increasing role in the malagasy economy , particularly in the mining sector , which has reportedly provided rajoelina's government with over $100 million in budget support .

the united states government maintains diplomatic relations with the high transitional authority , but does not regard it as a legitimately established government , and has suspended assistance to the hat government .

according to the state department , "madagascar is ranked as 'tier 3'" — the lowest — in the latest trafficking in persons ( tip ) report , which also places additional funding restrictions on madagascar .

previously , the united states had maintained good diplomatic relations with the government of president marc ravalomanana .

the united states has supported the efforts of sadc , the united nations , the african union , and other international actors to facilitate a peaceful resolution of the crisis .

due to the hat's unconstitutional assumption of power , the obama administration has suspended non - humanitarian assistance to the country , including all assistance programs to the government .

military assistance , good governance , basic education , and environmental programs have been affected , based on legislative and policy restrictions .

the state department has requested $66 million in bilateral aid for madagascar for fy2013 .

u.s. assistance is estimated at $67.6 million in fy2012 and $77.6 million in fy2011 .

in fy2012 , over 81% of such assistance supported health programs and 7% supported nutrition , social protection , sanitation , and other humanitarian aid .

the majority of fy2013 assistance would continue to focus on health programs , an area in which the united states is a leading donor .

madagascar is a target country for the president's malaria initiative , which aims to cut malaria deaths by 50% and "scale up proven preventive and treatment interventions toward achievement of 85 percent coverage among vulnerable groups. .

economic growth assistance ( about 11.3% of aid in fy2012 and 13% of requested levels for fy2013 ) is focused on helping to improve infrastructure , such as irrigation canals and secondary roads , especially those damaged by the regular cyclones that hit the island in most years , and on agricultural productivity programs .

despite current aid restrictions , the u.s. government continues to participate in donor working groups on rural development and the environment , according to the state department .

the peace corps , which temporarily suspended operations in 2009 , had 120 volunteers in 2012 and is projected to have 100 in fy2013 .

volunteers generally work in the areas of education , environmental and agricultural conservation , health , natural resource management , and business development .

the peace corps country program was funded at $3.2 million in fy2012 , and the same level of funding was requested for fy2013 .

prior to march 2009 , u.s. bilateral assistance to madagascar supported democratic governance ; economic growth and socioeconomic development ; and environmental protection .

aid provided by the state department and usaid totaled almost $48 million in fy2007 , $58 million in fy2008 , $71 million in fy2009 , and $91 million in fy2010 .

much of this funding was directed toward health programs .

u.s. assistance also supported the ravalomanana government's environmental preservation efforts to increase the amount of protected land from 1.7 million to 6 million hectares from 2003 to 2008 .

the united states provided almost $140 million in humanitarian aid and disaster response from fy1999 through fy2009 .

the ravalomanana government reportedly supported u.s. counterterrorism goals through law enforcement and financial tracking cooperation , and the country received limited u.s. security assistance focused on border and maritime security through the international military education and training ( imet ) program .

the state department reports that progress on countering terrorism stalled after the 2009 take - over by rajoelina's de facto government , which has reportedly demonstrated a willingness to cooperate on law enforcement matters , but has limited capacity .

the state department finds that madagascar has continued to serve as a source country for women and children subject to forced labor and prostitution and has determined that the current government's anti - trafficking efforts do not meet minimum standards .

congress has expressed concern with natural resource degradation in the country , and in 2009 , the house of representatives passed h.res .

839 , condemning the march 2009 coup and the illegal extraction of madagascar's natural resources .

madagascar signed the first millennium challenge corporation ( mcc ) compact , worth almost $110 million over four years , in april 2005 .

the award roughly doubled u.s. assistance to the country .

the program , developed by the malagasy government in consultation with the public , aimed to raise incomes nationwide by assisting the transition from subsistence agriculture to a market economy .

it complemented madagascar's poverty reduction strategy , which also focused on agricultural development .

mcc assistance focused on securing property rights for land , improving citizens' access to credit through financial sector reform , and improving agricultural production technologies and rural market capacity .

due to the hat's undemocratic assumption of power , mcc operations in madagascar were suspended on march 20 , 2009 , and the compact was terminated in may 2009 .

madagascar was eligible for preferential trade benefits under the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) , including for special apparel benefits , until december 2009 , when the trade benefits were suspended .

the country's nascent textile industry , which had expanded dramatically in the last decade , has been hit hard by the suspension — more than half the industry's income was drawn from exports to the united states , and by some estimates over one - quarter of jobs in the country's formal economy were dependent on agoa exports , which , in 2008 , were valued at $279 million .

agoa had helped madagascar to increase job growth and attract foreign investment prior to the 2009 suspension , and reports suggest that many textile factories have had to cease operations in the past year .

malagasy apparel manufacturing exports to the united states plummeted from almost $280 million in 2008 to $40 million in 2011 , with total malagasy exports to the united states falling from $324 million to $87 million .

the hat is currently attempting to foster bilateral trade development and an eventual restoration of normal trade relations .

its efforts are premised on a successful implementation of the september 2011 roadmap .

it has engaged the services of the u.s. fed group , a lobbying firm , and an associated law firm , toward this end .

