the united states and the european union ( eu ) have engaged in a long - standing and acrimonious trade dispute over the eu's decision to ban hormone - treated meat , dating back to the early 1980s .

despite an ongoing series of dispute settlement proceedings and decisions by the world trade organization ( wto ) , there is continued disagreement between the united states and the eu on a range of legal and procedural issues , as well as the scientific evidence and consensus concerning the safety of hormone - treated beef .

many in the united states perceive the eu's ban as an example of how sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) measures and non - tariff barriers are used as disguised protectionism , primarily intended to restrict imports from other countries .

in january 2009 , the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) for the outgoing bush administration announced changes to the list of eu products subject to increased tariffs under the dispute .

these changes were scheduled to go into effect on march 23 , 2009 .

the eu claimed this action constituted an "escalation" of the dispute and was "more punitive" than current trade sanctions .

the eu decided to hold off further action until the obama administration reviewed the decision .

the administration delayed implementing the changes , pending further negotiations with the eu .

in may 2009 , following a series of negotiations , the united states and the eu signed a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) , which phased in certain changes over the next several years .

as part of this mou , the eu granted market access to u.s. exports of beef raised without the use of growth promotants , and the united states suspended its retaliatory tariffs for imported eu products under the dispute .

however , in december 2016 , ustr took steps to reinstate retaliatory tariffs on the list of eu products under the dispute given continued concerns about u.s. beef access to the eu market .

specifically , under the mou , the eu agreed to create a 45,000 metric ton duty - free quota for imports of non - hormone - fed beef that , according to the u.s. beef industry , has been filled by countries other than the united states , including australia , uruguay and argentina .

a public hearing is scheduled for 2017 .

this issue has also been raised in ongoing trade negotiations between the united states and the eu to establish a free trade area as part of the transatlantic trade and investment partnership ( t - tip ) .

some members of congress continue to push for the eu's hormone ban to be lifted and expect the t - tip negotiations to resolve long - standing trade disputes regarding sps rules between the two trading blocs and enhance disciplines to address sps issues and other non - tariff barriers .

the provisional agreement allows the eu to maintain its restrictions on u.s. beef imports in a manner that many u.s. farm organizations believe to be inconsistent with wto rules , not to mention a scientific consensus supporting the safety to consumers of eating hormone - treated meat .

to date , the eu continues to ban imports of hormone - treated meat and restricts most meat exports to the eu to a limited quantity of beef imports that are certified as produced without the use of hormones , beta agonists , and other growth promotants .

the united states has continued to challenge the eu's beef hormone ban in the world trade organization ( wto ) and to question whether the ban is consistent with the eu's wto obligations under the sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) agreement ( see box ) .

after a series of wto consultations , panel decisions , and appeals in the case , both the united states and the european union claim these formal proceedings have vindicated their respective positions in the dispute .

this case has proven so intractable in part because it involves internal national regulation and domestic policy issues , and rules for dispute settlement and the use of sps measures to restrict trade , rather than routine commercial disputes over trade or customs regulations .

although the wto has issued decisions that have questioned the validity of the ban , the eu has repeatedly voted to maintain it , citing consumer worries , questions of animal welfare , meat quality , and effects of hormones on the eu's beef and milk sectors .

the laws governing the eu's ban have been reissued and / or updated numerous times ( in 1988 , in 1996 , and again in 2003 ) .

the eu claims that its position to maintain the ban is supported by studies on the potential human health risks associated with the consumption of hormone - treated beef .

the united states continues to question whether the eu has conducted an adequate risk assessment to support its position , and maintains there is a clear worldwide scientific consensus supporting the safety to consumers of eating hormone - treated meat .

in retaliation , starting in the late 1980s , the united states imposed trade sanctions — as authorized by the wto — in the form of high import tariffs on selected eu agricultural products .

to further complicate matters , in october 2008 , the wto issued a mixed ruling that allows the united states to continue its trade sanctions , but also allows the eu to maintain its ban .

as a result , the united states has continued to impose its trade sanctions , while the eu has continued to maintain its ban .

a detailed timeline showing a chronology of major events is provided at the end of this report ( appendix d ) .

for a more detailed discussion of the dispute settlement process in the wto , see crs report rs20088 , dispute settlement in the world trade organization ( wto ) : an overview .

many in congress have long maintained an interest in the u.s. - eu hormone dispute in support of the u.s. beef industry and its concern that the eu ban may be a disguised trade barrier , intended to protect eu domestic beef producers by restricting imports .

as discussed , congress enacted the carousel retaliation provision as part of the trade and development act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-200 ) , largely in response to the dispute .

in addition , over the years , the dispute has been invoked at various congressional hearings and has been a subject of introduced legislation , mostly to illustrate how sps measures and other non - tariff barriers are often used to unjustifiably restrict trade .

in addition , in 2000 , former senator max baucus introduced the trade injury compensation act ( s. 2709 ) , intended to establish a beef industry compensation trust fund with the duties imposed on products of countries that do not comply with certain wto dispute resolution decisions ; a senate agriculture subcommittee hearing was held on this matter .

there also have been resolutions intended to express the sense of congress that the administration should continue to take action against the eu under the dispute .

the dispute is regularly noted in ustr's annual trade policy reports as an example of the eu's continued use of non - tariff trade barriers to limit or prevent u.s. beef exports , despite the united states' measures to ensure the safety of the food supply .

in addition , the dispute has been raised as an issue under ongoing t - tip negotiations by members of congress who are hoping to resolve long - standing trade disputes involving sps and other non - tariff barriers , including the eu's hormone ban .

some in congress have further maintained an interest in the u.s. - eu hormone dispute because of the concerns raised by some u.s. importers that may have been affected by the united states' active and ongoing trade sanctions against the eu , which have effectively restricted u.s. imports of selected eu products .

previously , in 1999 and 2000 , former representative menendez introduced two bills that would exempt certain small importing businesses from higher tariffs imposed against eu products under the u.s. - eu beef hormone dispute .

finally , resolution of the hormone dispute could remove a critical irritant to the overall u.s. - eu trade relationship .

in addition , the way in which this dispute is ultimately resolved could have important implications for future wto disputes involving the use of sps measures to restrict trade .

the 1997 wto meat hormone decision was the first to deal with sps measures and , along with subsequent decisions , it provided an affirmation of the sps agreement and its requirements that countries base sps measures on scientific justification and risk assessment .

beyond that , the case is a critical test of the durability of internationally agreed - upon rules and procedures for resolving disputes that are in conflict with popular concerns and national political decisions .

appendix a .

initial retaliation list ( july 1999 ) appendix b .

revised retaliation list ( january 2009 ) appendix c. "reduced" product list ( march 2009 ) appendix d. chronology of the u.s. - eu beef hormone dispute 1981-1988 — the european commission institutes a series of restrictions on livestock production ( directives 81 / 602 , 88 / 146 , and 88 / 299 ) limiting the use of natural hormones to therapeutic purposes , banning the use of synthetic hormones , and prohibiting imports of animals and meat from animals that have been administered with hormones .

between 1986-1987 , the united states raises the eu hormone ban in the committee on technical barriers to trade ( "standards code" ) , and invokes dispute settlement under the tokyo round agreement on technical barriers to trade in the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) .

the eu delays implementing its ban until january 1 , 1989 .

in late 1987 , president reagan announces , and suspends , retaliatory tariffs ( 100% ad valorem ) on about $100 million worth of eu imports .

also during this time , various scientific reviews are initiated , including studies by the commission , the joint expert committee on food additives ( jecfa ) of the world health organization and the united nations food and agriculture organization , the committee on veterinary drugs of the codex alimentarius commission ( "codex" ) , and the u.s. food and drug administration and comparable institutions in other countries .

1989 — the eu fully implements its ban on meat and meat product imports from animals treated with six growth promotants , three of which are naturally occurring — estradiol - 17β , progesterone and testosterone — and three of which are synthetic — zeranol , trenbolone , and melengestrol .

these six hormones are approved for use in the united states .

the eu's ban effectively cuts off u.s. beef exports to the european union .

the united states institutes retaliatory tariffs ( 100% ad valorem ) on eu imports valued at $93 million , which remain in effect until may 1996 , when the eu seeks a wto panel against the u.s. action .

1995 — the gatt uruguay round agreement , including the sanitary and phytosanitary ( sps ) agreement , enters into force .

codex decides maximum residue limits ( mrls ) are not necessary for the three natural hormones and adopts mrls for the two synthetics .

the eu concludes that there is no evidence of health risk from the five hormones approved for use in the united states .

1996 — the eu votes to maintain the ban .

the united states requests a wto dispute settlement panel case against the eu , claiming the ban is inconsistent with the eu's wto obligations .

australia , canada , and new zealand join the united states in the complaint .

the commission issues a new directive 96 / 22 , which repeals the 1981 and 1988 directives , and confirms and extends the prohibitions .

the law becomes effective july 1 , 1997 .

1997 — a wto dispute settlement panel releases its report , ruling that the eu ban on the use of hormones to promote the growth of cattle is inconsistent with its obligations under the sps agreement ( specifically , articles 3.1 , 5.1 , and 5.5 ) , in that the ban is not based on science , that is , on an adequate risk assessment or according to relevant international standards .

the eu appeals the dispute panel's decision and also initiates a series of scientific studies on these six hormones .

1998 — the wto appellate body ( ab ) upholds the dispute panel's decision but overrules some panel findings .

the ab decides the eu had not scientifically proven that the hormones in question posed a cancer risk to consumers ; the ab also acknowledges that countries may adopt stricter standards , if supported by an adequate risk assessment .

the ab rules the eu ban does not constitute a hidden barrier to international trade .

the wto dispute settlement body ( dsb ) adopts the panel decision and the ab rulings on the ban .

the eu says it will implement the wto ruling in "as short a time as possible. .

neither party is able to agree on a "reasonable period of time" for implementation ; the arbitrator decides the eu needs 15 months ( until may 13 , 1999 ) .

1999 — in february , the eu outlines three options to resolve the dispute: ( 1 ) compensation , ( 2 ) removal of the ban coupled with a suitable labeling system , and ( 3 ) the conversion of the ban to a temporary measure .

the united states sends a letter to ec commissioners of agriculture and of trade outlining a possible labeling system .

the united states backed by most of the u.s. beef industry , decides against various compensation measures , preferring instead removal of the ban .

the eu decides it wants to conduct additional risk reviews before considering removing the ban .

in march , the u.s. announces it will consider trade sanctions against the eu and publishes a preliminary list of products that could be subject to increased tariffs if the dispute is not resolved .

in april , the eu issues its first review and opinion based on studies by the eu's scientific committee on veterinary measures relating to public health ( scvph ) on the potential human health risks associated with consumption of hormone - treated beef .

the scvph opinion states that it has evidence to show that a growth hormone ( estradiol - 17β ) used in u.s. cattle production is carcinogenic , among other potential health risks to consumers .

the report draws criticism from the united kingdom's veterinary products committee , as outlined in a report .

the eu deadline for implementing the ab ruling expires on may 13 .

in july , the united states and canada seek wto authorization to suspend tariff concessions and retaliate against the european union .

the wto sets the levels at $116.8 million ( united states ) and c$11.3 million ( canada ) .

the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) announces its decision to impose a 100% ad valorem rate of duty on a specified list of products from certain eu member states , effective july 29 .

the product list includes beef , pork , goose livers , cheese , truffles , onions , carrots , preserved tomatoes , sausage casings , soups , yarn , mustard , juice , chicory , toasted breads , chocolate , jams , glue , and wool grease .

the u.s. list targets france , germany , italy , and denmark , but excludes the united kingdom .

2000 — in may , the eu issues its second review and opinion based on studies by the eu's scvph on the potential human health risks associated with consumption of hormone - treated beef .

the review concludes that the new information does "not provide convincing data and arguments demanding revision of the conclusions" of the scvph april 1999 opinion on the "potential risks to human health from hormone residues in bovine meat and meat products. .

congress passes legislation as part of the trade and development act of 2000 ( p.l .

106-200 ) , requiring the ustr to review and periodically revise the list of products subject to retaliation when another country fails to implement a wto dispute decision .

this periodic revision of the product list has become known as "carousel retaliation. .

2001 — the commission provides documentation of studies and journals for publications .

the united states and european union initiate compensation discussions .

2002 — in april , the eu issues its third review and opinion based on studies by the eu's scvph on the potential human health risks associated with consumption of hormone - treated beef .

the review concludes its review of the 17 studies initiated in 1998 , and again confirms the previous findings of the two earlier reviews ( 1999 and 2000 ) .

2003 — in september , the commission issues directive 2003 / 74 , amending 96 / 22 .

the new law permanently bans the use of estradiol in farm animals and provisionally bans use of the five other hormones , while it seeks more complete scientific information .

the eu declares its effort to replace its original ban with a provisional ban is in compliance with its wto obligations , citing article 5.7 of the sps agreement ( allows for provisional measures when there is insufficient scientific evidence , provided that a risk assessment is conducted within a reasonable time ) .

in october , the eu issues a press release claiming its ban is supported by the 1999 and 2002 scvph reviews , which constitute "a thorough risk assessment based on current scientific knowledge " and thus fulfill its wto obligations .

the united states questions whether the scvph studies constitute a risk assessment .

the eu claims the united states and canada have no legal basis for continuing trade sanctions against the eu .

in december , the eu refers the dispute to the wto for a multilateral decision .

2004-2005 — the eu initiates a new dispute claiming that because it has modified its ban , the united states ( and canada ) should remove its trade sanctions against the eu , as the continued retaliation by the united states and canada is no longer consistent with wto rules .

the united states and canada cases are effectively merged under the one panel cases , given largely identical substance , even though they are technically separate .

australia and mexico join the consultations .

the eu requests that a new wto panel be established and the substantive panel meeting takes place in september 2005 .

it is the first wtp panel open for observation by the public .

2006 — the wto panel announces that due to the complexity of the dispute , and the administrative and procedural matters involved , the panel will not complete its work until october 2006 .

the united kingdom's veterinary products committee issues a second report criticizing the scvph findings .

in october , ustr decides against revising the list of eu products subject to higher u.s. import tariffs under the dispute .

this decision is supported by the national cattlemen's beef association and the u.s. meat export federation .

the u.s. court of international trade determines this action meets requirements under "carousel retaliation. .

2007 — the wto panel again announces that due to the complexity of the scientific issues involved and scheduling difficulties , the panel's final report is delayed until june 2007 .

in june , the european food safety authority ( efsa ) adopts an opinion related to hormone residues in bovine meat and meat products based on its review of the scientific data .

efsa concludes that the new publicly available data do not provide quantitative information for a risk assessment and therefore do not call for a revision of previous risk assessments .

in july , the wto panel issues its interim report , including findings and conclusions .

the expected final report date is delayed until october 2007 , and eventually is issued in december .

2008 — in march , the wto panel report is circulated to members .

the panel announces that it found fault with all three parties ( eu , united states , and canada ) on various substantive and procedural aspects of the dispute .

the panel report claims the eu had not presented sufficient scientific evidence to justify the import ban , including the eu's 2003 risk assessment report .

the panel report faults the united states and canada for maintaining its trade sanctions .

both parties file appeals citing procedural errors and disagreements with the panel findings .

in october , the wto's ab issues a mixed ruling that allows for continued imposition of trade sanctions on the eu by the united states and canada , but also grants that the eu can continue to ban imports of hormone - treated beef from the united states and canada .

the ab reverses the dispute panel decision by stating that the eu's ban is not incompatible with wto law , thus granting the eu more deference in deciding the basis for its food safety regulations .

the ustr announces in october that it is seeking comment on possible modification of the list of eu products subject to increased tariffs under the dispute .

in december 2008 , the eu requests consultations under article 21.5 of the dsu to determine whether it is in compliance with its wto obligations in the underlying beef hormone dispute .

2009 — in january , ustr announces changes to the list of eu products subject to increased tariffs under the dispute , adding countries and raising the tariff on select products , effective march 23 , 2009 .

the eu claims ustr's action constitutes an "escalation" of the dispute , and is "more punitive" than the current trade sanctions .

in may 2009 , following a series of negotiations , the united states and the eu sign a memorandum of understanding ( mou ) in an attempt to resolve this long - standing dispute by further opening up the eu market to non - hormone treated beef .

the terms of this agreement are to be phased in over the next few years .

as part of phase 1 of the mou , the ec adopted regulations opening a tariff quota for 20,000 metric tons imports of high - quality beef ( hqb ) , effective august 2009 .

the united states agreed not to implement its january 2009 revised ( "carousel" ) sanctions , which would have resulted in higher retaliatory duties on selected eu exports to the united states .

trade sanctions would remain in effect on certain eu exports until the final phase of the agreement .

2010 — in october 2010 , a u.s. court of appeals issued a decision in a case regarding duties paid by importers from the eu under the dispute , which could make them eligible for refunds .

201 1 — in may 2011 , ustr announced it was suspending higher duties for imported products listed under the dispute , ahead of the scheduled date under the mou .

201 2 — as part of phase 2 of the mou , in june 2012 , the eu issued regulations increasing the hqb quota to 48,200 mt and changing the quota management system to a "first come , first served" basis , fully effective by august 2012 .

201 3 — in october 2013 , the eu approved a two - year extension of phase 2 of the mou , allowing for access of u.s. beef raised without the use of growth promotants in exchange for continued u.s. suspension of retaliatory import duties on some eu food products .

the extension will remain in place until august 2015 .

earlier that year , the eu had lifted its previous ban to allow the use of lactic acid as a pathogen reduction treatment ( prt ) on beef carcasses , half - carcasses , and beef quarters in the slaughterhouse .

also , in july , the united states and eu entered into formal free trade negotiations as part of the transatlantic trade and investment partnership .

201 6 — in december 2016 , ustr took steps to reinstate retaliatory tariffs on the list of eu products under the dispute .

a public hearing is scheduled for 2017 .

sources: compiled by crs from various usda and wto documents , and other information .

