the european union ( eu ) is one of the united states' chief agricultural trading partners and also a major competitor in world food markets .

both the united states and the eu provide significant government support for their agricultural sectors .

in the united states , a large share of support is concentrated on wheat , feed grains , cotton , oilseeds , sugar , and dairy .

the eu provides more extensive support to a broader range of farm and food products , including grains , cotton , rice , oilseeds , peanuts , dairy , sugar , fresh and processed fruits and vegetables , and livestock products .

according to the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) , the eu and the united states together account for more than 60% of all government support to agriculture among the major developed economies .

although many in congress have historically defended u.s. farm support programs as a means to ensure that the united states has continued access to the "most abundant , safest , and cheapest food supplies in the world," long - standing criticisms and continued debate have challenged the extent of and need for government support of farm programs .

some argue that the failure of the united states and eu to reform their respective farm support programs has contributed to delays in the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations within the world trade organization ( wto ) .

in response to these criticisms , both the united states and the eu have modified their farm programs in part by expanding various types of "non - commodity" support , such as farmland conservation ( or so - called "agri - environment" ) programs and rural development programs , among other programs .

to date , however , non - commodity support still constitutes a very small share of total farm - level support , compared to farm production support , for both the united states and the eu .

information comparing the eu and u.s. farm support programs will continue to be of interest to congress as the doha negotiations move forward .

this report compares farm support in the united states and the eu , given available quantitative data and information for these two economies .

three general sources of information include ( 1 )  the oecd's annual producer support estimate ( pse ) ; ( 2 ) estimates of the aggregate measurement of support ( ams ) for agricultural programs , as notified by the united states and the eu to the wto as part of their member country obligations ; and ( 3 ) annual eu and u.s. budget expenditures for agricultural programs .

the oecd reports that the eu accounts for the majority — about one - half — of all government support to agriculture among the major developed economies .

total eu agricultural support generally is much higher than in the united states .

however , direct spending comparisons are complicated by significant structural differences between the u.s. and eu farm sectors .

the united states has roughly twice the farmland base of the european union , while the eu has six to seven times the number of farm operators spread across each of its 27 member countries .

the eu program also supports a broader range of farm commodities as compared to the united states .

consequently , eu and u.s. farm program support differs in both size and scope , as well as in the manner this support is provided .

three general sources of quantitative data and information compare agricultural program support between the united states and the european union: 1. the annual producer support estimate ( pse ) for agricultural programs by country , as calculated and compiled by the oecd ; 2. annual estimates of the aggregate measurement of support ( ams ) for agricultural programs , as calculated and compiled by individual world trade organization ( wto ) member countries and notified to the wto as part of their membership obligations ; and 3. annual budget expenditures for agricultural programs , as reported by individual countries .

each of these information sources provides estimates of support for agricultural commodities .

these sources also provide , although to a more limited extent , estimates of support for non - commodity programs , such as agricultural conservation programs , rural development , agro - forestry , bioenergy , and related farm programs .

each of these sources is useful for comparing farm program support across countries , but they also have certain limitations , particularly in the area of non - commodity programs , such as agricultural conservation .

the pse and ams data are more inclusive across all program areas and more comprehensive overall than reported budgetary information .

none of these information sources reflect the most recent reforms to the eu's common agricultural policy ( cap ) agreed to by the eu agriculture ministers in late 2008 .

these information sources also highlight differences between the united states and the european union , not only in terms of their respective policy priorities , but also in terms of farm sector differences .

for example , the united states' commodity program focuses its support on a few major commodities ( mostly corn , wheat , rice , soybeans , cotton , dairy , and sugar ) , whereas the eu farm program provides commodity support for a much wider range of products , including grains , cotton , rice , oilseeds , peanuts , dairy , sugar , fresh and processed fruits and vegetables , and livestock products .

farm structures and organization are also vastly different: the united states has roughly twice the farmland base of the european union , with fewer but significantly larger farms than the eu .

the eu has less total land in farming , but as many as six to seven times the number of farm operators .

such differences can affect how the available data and information may be interpreted , and caution is needed when comparing any available data translated into a per - unit basis , such as expenditures per acre or per farm , between these countries .

putting aside limitations of the data , these information sources are useful in comparing farm program support across countries .

the data indicate that , since the mid - 1980s , total farm support in the united states and eu has declined as a share of total gross farm receipts .

in general , support for commodity programs has decreased , whereas the support for non - commodity programs , such a farmland conservation and certain types of rural development programs , has increased .

however , support for non - commodity programs still accounts for a small share ( less than 1% ) of farm receipts .

as a share of overall farm receipts , support for such programs is slightly greater in the united states , where support for non - commodity programs accounts for less than 0.7% of receipts , than in the eu , where it accounts for less than 0.3% of receipts annually .

however , in terms of total spending , the data show that the eu provides more support , in aggregate , than the united states for both production - based programs and non - commodity programs , such a farmland conservation and agri - environmental programs .

the eu is one of the united states' chief agricultural trading partners and also a major competitor in world food markets .

both the eu and the united states heavily support their agricultural sectors .

although many in congress have historically defended u.s. farm support programs as a means to ensure that the united states has continued access to the "most abundant , safest , and cheapest food supplies in the world," long - standing criticisms and continued debate have challenged the extent of and need for government support of farm programs .

in response to these criticisms , both the united states and the eu have modified their farm programs in part by expanding various types of "non - commodity" support , such as farmland conservation and rural development programs , among other programs .

to date , however , non - commodity support still constitutes a very small share of total farm - level support , compared to farm production support .

some argue that the failure of the united states and eu to reform their respective farm support programs has contributed to delays in the doha round of multilateral trade negotiations within the world trade organization ( wto ) .

information comparing the eu and u.s. farm support programs will continue to be of interest to congress as the doha negotiations continue to move forward .

