today mexico is a major producer and supplier to the u.s. market of heroin , methamphetamine , and marijuana and the major transit country for cocaine sold in the united states .

according to the department of state's 2009 international narcotics control strategy report , as much as 90% of the cocaine entering the united states now transits through mexico .

a small number of mexican dtos control the most significant drug distribution operations along the southwest border .

the criminal activities of these mexican dtos reach well beyond the towns and cities of the border , extending along drug trafficking routes into cities across the united states .

the mexican dtos have exhibited many characteristics of organized crime such as being organized in distinct cells and controlling subordinate cells that operate throughout the united states .

in the u.s. justice department's national drug threat assessment 2009 ( published in december 2008 ) , mexican drug trafficking organizations were identified as the greatest drug trafficking threat to the united states worldwide .

today's situation arose with the closing of the caribbean route through which drugs , and particularly cocaine from colombia , was channeled to the united states in an earlier era .

with increased u.s. efforts to interdict narcotic smugglers in the caribbean and florida in the late 1980s and 1990s , the colombian drug cartels began subcontracting with mexican dtos to smuggle cocaine into the united states across the southwest border .

by the late 1990s , mexican dtos had pushed aside the colombians and gained greater control and market share of cocaine trafficking into the united states .

mexican dtos now dominate the wholesale illicit market in the united states .

the mexican dtos , often referred to as "drug cartels," have become increasingly violent .

the national drug threat assessment states that mexico's dtos now "control most of the u.s. drug market," with distribution capabilities in 230 u.s. cities .

mexican president felipe calderón began his assault on organized crime shortly after he took office in december 2006 and made combating the dtos a centerpiece of his policy .

the calderón government has devoted billions of dollars to the offensive against mexico's entrenched drug trafficking organizations , and deployed 45,000 soldiers and thousands of federal police in nearly a dozen of mexico's states in the fight .

more than 5,600 people died in drug trafficking violence in mexico in 2008 , more than double the prior year .

this escalation in the level of violence was matched by a growing ferocity .

beginning in early 2008 , there was an increase in assassinations of high - level law enforcement officials , gruesome murders including beheadings , violent kidnappings , use of a growing and varied arsenal of high - powered weapons , and one incidence of indiscriminate killing of civilians .

the battle for control of the multi - billion dollar drug trade has been — and continues to be — brutal .

while the u.s. and mexican media began to shift their attention away from the sensational crimes allegedly committed by the mexican dtos in late spring , the high numbers of killings have continued , exceeding an estimated 2,000 thus far in 2009 .

while there has been a variance in available statistics on drug - related killings in mexico , the overall trend has been a dramatic increase since 2007 .

newspapers and other media organizations track drug trafficking crime by keeping daily tallies which are considered to be representative of the overall situation .

at times , the mexican government and mexican officials have used different numbers , but the trend has still been in the same upward direction .

for example , in april 2009 the mexican attorney general said at a bilateral security forum in cuernavaca that 5,600 people had been killed in dto violence in 2008 in contrast to a graphic published on the mexican embassy website which indicates there were more than 6,800 drug - related killings last year .

using as a base the mexican attorney general's statistics of more than 5,600 killed in drug trafficking violence in 2008 , this represented a 110% increase over 2007 .

among those murdered were 522 mexican military and law enforcement officials according to recent testimony of the u.s. department of state .

in the first two months of 2009 , the violence grew with almost 1,000 drug - related killings in mexico or 146% more than in the comparable period in 2008 .

according to the same publication , the 1000 th murder in 2008 did not take place until april 22 ( compared to february in 2009 ) , suggesting the pace of killings have continued to rise rapidly .

 ( see figure 3 , for the tally of drug killings 2006-2008 ) .

violence in mexico , much of it centered in states close to the southwest border , has generated widespread concern about spillover into the united states .

secretary of homeland security janet napolitano noted in march 2009 congressional testimony that the united states has a significant security stake in helping mexico in its efforts against the drug cartels and organized crime , with three major roles to play: providing assistance to mexico to defeat the cartels and suppress the flare - up of violence in mexico ; taking action on the u.s. side of the border to cripple smuggling enterprises ; and guarding against and preparing for the possible spillover of violence into the united states .

secretary napolitano noted that there already has been a limited increase in drug - related violence in the united states ( such as a rise in kidnappings and weapons violations in cities close to the border such as phoenix ) , but maintained that the increase is not the same kind or nearly the same scale as in mexico .

through a range of federal agencies including the department of homeland security , the department of justice , and the department of state , the united states has taken numerous measures to increase border security and cooperate with mexico to combat the drug cartels .

initiatives have been started or strengthened to deny the dtos illicit arms , to reduce money laundering and bulk cash smuggling ( the preferred mode of transferring drug proceeds by the mexican dtos ) , to reduce the trafficking of drug precursor chemicals and to suppress human smuggling .

direct assistance to mexico to support its efforts against the dtos is provided under the mérida initiative with implementation led by the department of state .

the u.s. congress has also expressed concern over the situation in mexico and potential "spillover" effects in the united states .

thus far in 2009 , the 111 th congress has held 14 hearings on mexico's drug trafficking violence and border security and u.s. foreign assistance .

 ( see appendix for a listing of the hearings ) .

the united states and mexico issued a joint statement on october 22 , 2007 , announcing a multi - year plan for $1.4 billion in u.s. assistance to combat drug trafficking and other criminal organizations in mexico and central america .

the mérida initiative , named for the location of a march 2007 meeting between presidents bush and calderón , expands bilateral and regional cooperation to combat organized crime , dtos , and criminal gangs .

to carry out the mérida initiative , the bush administration requested $500 million for mexico in a fy2008 supplemental appropriations request and another $450 million for mexico in the fy2009 regular foreign aid request , for a total request of $950 million .

to date congress has appropriated a total of $700 million for mexico under the mérida initiative: with $352 million in fy2008 supplemental assistance and $48 million in fy2009 bridge funds , both funded by p.l .

110-252 , and $300 million in regular fy2009 assistance funded in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , signed into law in march 2009 .

the objective of the mérida initiative , according to the october 2007 joint statement , is to maximize the effectiveness of our efforts to fight criminal organizations — so as to disrupt drug - trafficking ( including precursor chemicals ) , weapons trafficking , illicit financial activities , and currency smuggling , and human trafficking .

the joint statement highlighted efforts of both countries , including mexico's 24% increase in security spending in 2007 , and u.s. efforts to reduce weapons , human , and drug trafficking along the mexican border .

although the statement did not announce additional funding for u.s. domestic efforts , it cited several efforts to combat drugs and crime that are already in place .

those included the 2007 southwest border counternarcotics strategy , the 2008 national drug control strategy , and the 2007 u.s. strategy for combating criminal gangs from central america and mexico .

the bush administration had requested that all proposed funding for the mérida initiative be designated for the international narcotics control and law enforcement ( incle ) account , administered by the department of state's bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( inl ) , but congress ultimately appropriated the assistance within the incle , foreign military financing ( fmf ) , and economic support fund ( esf ) accounts ( see table 1 ) .

congress also stipulated that none of the funds may be used for budget support or as cash payments to mexico .

the law has human rights conditions softer than earlier house and senate versions , in large part because of mexico's objections that some of the conditions would violate its national sovereignty .

as enacted , the secretary of state , after consultation with mexican authorities , is required to submit a report on procedures in place to implement section 620j of the foreign assistance act ( faa ) of 1961 .

that section of the faa "prohibits assistance to any unit of the security forces of a foreign country if the secretary of state has credible evidence that such unit has committed gross violations of human rights. .

an exception to this prohibition in section 620j is if the secretary of state determines and reports to congress that the government of such country is taking effective measures to bring the responsible members of the security forces unit to justice .

the report is a condition to release 15% of the incle and fmf assistance under mérida .

in march 2009 legislative action on p.l .

111-8 , congress provided $300 million for mexico under the mérida initiative within the incle , esf , and fmf accounts , with not less than $75 million for judicial reform , institution building , anti - corruption , and rule of law activities .

the measure has human rights conditions similar to those in p.l .

110-252 .

it requires that prior to the procurement or lease of aircraft , that the director of the defense security cooperation agency , in consultation with the secretary of state , shall submit to the committees on appropriations an analysis of alternatives for the acquisition of all aircraft for the mérida initiative .

on april 9 , 2009 , the obama administration submitted a fy2009 supplemental request that includes an additional $66 million in incle assistance for mexico under the mérida initiative .

according to the request , the assistance would be used to acquire three blackhawk helicopters for mexico's civilian public security secretariat to provide them urgently needed air transport capacity , and to provide spare parts and support .

on may 14 , 2009 , the house approved its version of the fy2009 supplemental appropriations measure , h.r .

2346 , that would increase funding levels to $160 million in incle funding ( an increase of $94 million ) and an additional $310 million in fmf funding for a total of $470 million for mexico .

 ( in addition , the supplemental request and house - approved version of the bill also included $350 million in department of defense operation and maintenance for counternarcotics and other activities , including assistance to other federal agencies , on the u.s. border with mexico. ) .

on may 21 , 2009 , the senate approved its version of the fy2009 supplemental that included $66 million in incle assistance for mexico , the same amount as the administration's request .

 ( the senate bill shifts $350 million requested for the department of defense for southwest border security to domestic agencies , and adds $250 million for related activities. ) .

for fy2010 , the obama administration requested $450 million in the incle account for mexico under the mérida initiative .

it is unclear if congress would fund the full amount requested for fy2010 if it ends up appropriating the $470 million for mexico in the house - approved version of the fy2009 supplemental appropriations bill .

the growth and dramatic character of the violence in mexico and the potential threat for spillover north of the border has focused concern on the pace of the implementation of mérida aid in both countries .

increasing criticism from mexican officials has been reported as well as from members of the u.s. congress about the slowness of delivery of promised assistance to mexico under the mérida initiative .

when secretary of state hillary clinton traveled to mexico on march 25 – 26 , 2009 , she commented on the importance of bilateral cooperation under the initiative and she expressed concern about the slow pace of implementation .

in her testimony before the house foreign affairs committee on april 22 , 2009 , she repeated that concern .

according to the department of state , which is leading mérida initiative implementation , the first pot of $400 million for the foreign aid program provided in p.l .

110-252 includes funding for the following: helicopters ( up to five bell 412 helicopters ) and surveillance aircraft ( up to two casa maritime patrol aircraft ) to support interdiction and rapid response of mexican law enforcement agencies ; non - intrusive inspection equipment , ion scanners , and canine units for mexican customs , the new mexican federal police and the military to interdict trafficked drugs , arms , cash , and persons ; technologies and secure communications to improve data collection and storage ; and technical advice and training to strengthen the institutions of justice , to improve vetting for the mexican police force , to provide case management software to track investigations through the legal process , to support offices of citizen complaint and professional responsibility , and to promote the establishment of witness protection programs .

on december 3 , 2008 , the united states and mexico signed a letter of agreement , allowing $197 million of the first pot of mérida funds to be disbursed .

later in december , the governments of mexico and the united states met to coordinate implementation of the mérida initiative through a cabinet - level high level group reflecting the urgency on both sides of the border to address the growing violence in mexico .

according to the state department , a working - level meeting was held february 3 , 2009 , in mexico city "with the aim of accelerating the implementation of the 48 projects through nine working groups for mexico under the initiative. .

this meeting was followed by another on march 2 , 2009 .

only the initial phases of implementation have begun .

although some programs are scheduled to become operational starting in the spring through the end of 2009 , others that fund military equipment have a longer procurement process .

this is especially true for assistance in the foreign military financing ( fmf ) account that provides for equipment such as bell helicopters and casa surveillance aircraft that may take from one to two years for delivery to mexico .

according to press reports , just $7 million of the initial $400 million pot of assistance has been spent , while u.s. officials have attributed delays to cumbersome u.s. government contracting regulations , negotiations with mexico about what equipment is actually needed , and the difficulty of delivering an aid package that involves so many agencies and has some four dozen programs .

the 111 th congress has expressed interest in cooperating with the mexican government as it battles the dtos and tries to bring the mayhem and violence down to a level that can be managed as a public security rather than a military concern .

the heightened violence in mexico , much of it in cities and states that border the united states , has been the focus of 14 congressional hearings to date .

on april 16 , 2009 , president obama made his first trip to mexico to discuss common security issues and cooperation and other issues in the bilateral relationship .

in advance of the trip , the president added three mexican dtos ( sinaloa cartel , los zetas and la familia michoacana ) to the list of drug kingpins subjecting them to financial sanctions under the u.s. foreign narcotics kingpin designation act ( p.l .

106-120 ) .

the president also urged the senate to provide its advice and consent to the pending cifta treaty .

congressional hearings indicate that further initiatives are likely , including a significant increase of mérida funding in the fy2009 supplemental appropriations bill and in the president's fy2010 budget request .

motivated by concern about mexican spillover violence and the corrosive impact of mexican drug trafficking on the stability of mexico's democracy and economy , further appropriations in the foreign operations and domestic context may be forthcoming .

this compilation of selected hearings , prepared by [author name scrubbed] , information research specialist with the knowledge services group of crs , focuses on increasing violence in mexico as well as u.s. foreign assistance and border security programs .

house u.s. congress .

house .

committee on the judiciary .

subcommittee on crime , terrorism , and homeland security .

escalating violence in mexico and the southwest border as a result of the illicit drug trade .

hearing held may 5 , 2009 .

witnesses: stuart g. nash , associate deputy attorney general , and director organized crime drug enforcement task forces ( ocdetf ) , u.s. department of justice ; salvador nieto , deputy assistant commissioner , office of intelligence and operations coordination , u.s. customs and border protection , dhs ; janice ayala , deputy assistant director , office of investigations , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement , dhs ; anthony placido , assistant administrator for intelligence , u.s. drug enforcement administration , u.s. department of justice ; william j. hoover , acting deputy director , bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives , u.s. department of justice available at: http: / / judiciary.house.gov / hearings / hear_090506.html u.s. congress .

house .

committee on homeland security .

subcommittee on emergency communications , preparedness and response .

examining preparedness and coordination efforts of first responders along the southwest border .

hearing held march 31 , 2009 .

witnesses: richard barth , acting assistant secretary , office of policy , dhs ; janice ayala , deputy assistant director , office of investigations , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement , dhs ; maj. gen. peter aylward , director , joint staff , national guard bureau ; sigifredo gonzalez jr. , sheriff , zapata county , texas ; larry dever , sheriff , cochise county , arizona available at: http: / / www.cq.com / display.do ? dockey= / cqonline / prod / data / docs / html / transcripts / congressional / 111 / congressionaltranscripts111-000003091913.html@committees&metapub=cq - congtranscripts&searchindex=0&seqnum=23#speakers u.s. congress .

house .

committee on appropriations .

subcommittee on commerce , justice , science and related agencies .

drug enforcement administration .

hearing held march 26 , 2009 .

witness: michelle m. leonhart , acting administrator , drug enforcement administration available at: http: / / appropriations.house.gov / subcommittees / sub_cjs.shtml u.s. congress .

house .

committee on appropriations .

subcommittee on commerce , justice , science and related agencies .

federal law enforcement response to us - mexico border violence .

hearing held march 24 , 2009 .

witnesses: bill newell , special agent in charge , atf phoenix division ; joseph arabit , special agent in charge , drug enforcement administration , el paso , tx ; phil gordon , mayor , city of phoenix ; david shirk , assistant professor and director of the trans - border institute available at: http: / / appropriations.house.gov / subcommittees / sub_cjs.shtml u.s. congress .

house .

committee on foreign affairs .

subcommittee on the western hemisphere .

guns , drugs and violence: the merida initiative and the challenge in mexico .

hearing held march 18 , 2009 .

witnesses: david johnson , assistant secretary of state , bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs , u.s. department of state ; roberta s. jacobson , deputy assistant secretary of state , bureau of western hemisphere affairs , u.s. department of state ; m. kristen rand , legislative director , violence policy center ; andrew selee , ph.d. , director , mexico institute , woodrow wilson international center for scholars ; michael a. braun , managing partner , spectre group international , llc available at: http: / / foreignaffairs.house.gov / hearing_notice.asp ? id=1055 u.s. congress .

house .

committee on oversight and government reform .

subcommittee on national security and foreign affairs .

money , guns , and drugs: are u.s. inputs fueling violence on the u.s. - mexico border ? .

hearing held march 12 , 2009 .

witnesses: andrew selee , director , woodrow wilson center mexico institute ; michael braun , former dea assistant administrator ; tom diaz , senior policy analyst , violence policy center ; jonathan paton , arizona state senate http: / / www.cq.com / display.do ? dockey= / cqonline / prod / data / docs / html / transcripts / congressional / 111 / congressionaltranscripts111-000003074885.html@committees&metapub=cq - congtranscripts&searchindex=2&seqnum=109#speakers u.s congress .

house .

committee on homeland security .

subcommittee on maritime and global counterterrorism .

border violence: an examination of dhs strategies and resources .

hearing held march 12 , 2009 .

witnesses: roger t. rufe , jr. , director , office of operations coordination , dhs ; alonzo , pena , attache , u.s. embassy , mexico city , dhs ; john , leech , acting director , office of counternarcotics enforcement , dhs ; salvador , nieto , deputy assistant commissioner , intelligence and operations coordination , customs and border protection ; kumar , kibble , deputy director , office of investigations , immigration and customs enforcement available at: http: / / www.cq.com / display.do ? dockey= / cqonline / prod / data / docs / html / transcripts / congressional / 111 / congressionaltranscripts111-000003074816.html@committees&metapub=cq - congtranscripts&searchindex=2&seqnum=110#speakers u.s. congress .

house .

committee on appropriations .

subcommittee on homeland security .

department of homeland security response to violence on the border with mexico .

hearing held march 10 , 2009 .

witnesses: mark koumans , deputy assistant secretary of homeland security for international affairs ; jayson ahern , acting commissioner , customs and border protection , dhs ; marcy forman , director , office on investigations , immigration and customs enforcement , dhs ; david aguilar , chief , u.s. border patrol available at: http: / / appropriations.house.gov / subcommittees / sub_dhs.shtml u.s. congress .

house .

committee on appropriations .

subcommittee on homeland security .

secure border initiative and control of the land border .

hearing held march 10 , 2009 .

witnesses: jayson ahern , acting commissioner , customs and border protection , dhs ; david aguilar , chief , u.s. border patrol ; mark borkowski , executive director , secure border initiative available at: http: / / appropriations.house.gov / subcommittees / sub_dhs.shtml u.s. congress .

house .

committee on appropriations .

subcommittee on state , foreign operations , and related programs .

merida initiative .

hearing held march 10 , 2009 .

witnesses: thomas shannon , assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs ; david johnson , assistant secretary of state for international narcotics control and law enforcement ; rodger garner , mission director for mexico , agency for international development ; lisa haugaard , executive director , latin american working group ; joy olson , director , washington office on latin america ; ana paula hernandez , general director , colectivo por una politica integral hacia las drogas available at: http: / / www.cq.com / display.do ? dockey= / cqonline / prod / data / docs / html / transcripts / congressional / 111 / congressionaltranscripts111-000003073406.html@committees&metapub=cq - congtranscripts&searchindex=2&seqnum=131 or at: http: / / appropriations.house.gov / subcommittees / sub_sfo.shtml senate u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on foreign relations .

u.s. - mexico border violence .

field hearing held march 30 , 2009 .

el paso , texas .

witnesses: jamie esparza , district attorney , el paso , tx ; william mcmahon , deputy assistant director , us bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives , washington , dc ; joseph arabit , special agent in charge , drug enforcement administration , el paso , tx ; ricardo garcia carriles , former police chief of ciudad juarez , el paso , tx ; the honorable harriet c. babbitt , former ambassador to organization of american states , washington , dc ; howard campbell , professor , university of texas at el paso available at: http: / / foreign.senate.gov / hearings / 2009 / hrg090330a.html u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

southern border violence .

hearing held march 25 , 2009 .

witnesses: janet napolitano , secretary of homeland security ; james b. steinberg , deputy secretary of state ; david w. ogden , deputy attorney general , department of justice available at: http: / / www.cq.com / display.do ? dockey= / cqonline / prod / data / docs / html / transcripts / congressional / 111 / congressionaltranscripts111-000003084334.html@committees&metapub=cq - congtranscripts&searchindex=7&seqnum=7#speakers u.s. congress .

senate .

committee on homeland security and governmental affairs .

southern border violence: state and local perspectives .

field hearing held april 20 , 2009 .

phoenix , arizona .

witnesses: janice k. brewer , governor , state of arizona ; terry goddard , attorney general , state of arizona ; phil gordon , mayor , city of phoenix , arizona ; octavio garcia - von borstel , mayor , city of nogales , arizona ; ned norris , jr. , chairman , tohono o'odham nation ; jack f. harris , public safety manager , city of phoenix , arizona ; clarence w. dupnik , sheriff , county of pima , arizona ; larry dever , sheriff , county of cochise , arizona available at: http: / / hsgac.senate.gov / public / index.cfm ? fuseaction=hearings.detail&hearingid=f259bf1c - 934d - 41af - 8ff3-72140882b3c3 u.s. congress .

senate .

senate judiciary committee .

subcommittee on crime and drugs ; with the senate caucus on international narcotics control .

law enforcement responses to mexican drug cartels .

joint hearing held march 17 , 2009 .

witnesses: terry goddard , attorney general , state of arizona , phoenix , az ; william hoover , assistant director for field operations , bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ; anthony p. placido , assistant administrator and chief of intelligence , drug enforcement administration ; kumar kibble , deputy director , office of investigations , immigration and customs enforcement , dhs ; denise eugenia dresser guerra , professor , department of political science , instituto tecnologico autonomo de mexico , mexico city , mexico ; jorge luis aguirre , journalist , el paso , texas available at: http: / / judiciary.senate.gov / hearings / hearing.cfm ? id=3718 or at: http: / / www.cq.com / display.do ? dockey= / cqonline / prod / data / docs / html / transcripts / congressional / 111 / congressionaltranscripts111-000003078495.html@committees&metapub=cq - congtranscripts&searchindex=9&seqnum=2#speaker .

