in the wake of a rapidly deteriorating economic picture and year - long recession that the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has called the most severe since world war ii , congress passed the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) .

this report discusses arra's "general oversight provisions" and several related issues for congress .

for purposes of this report , the term "general oversight provision" means an oversight - related provision that addresses multiple programs , agencies , or appropriations accounts .

provisions that are specific to a single program or appropriation ( eg , appropriations set - asides and reporting requirements ) are excluded from the report's scope .

the provisions provide for , among other things , establishment of a recovery accountability and transparency board , numerous reporting and evaluation requirements , and increased resources for agency inspectors general ( igs ) .

the topic of subsequent implementation of the oversight provisions , including actions by executive agencies and the office of management and budget ( omb ) , is not included in the scope of this report .

nevertheless , even before considering experience with implementation , several broad issues related to arra oversight may be of interest to congress .

these include assessments of arra's role in achieving economic objectives .

typical objectives of a fiscal stimulus policy relate to increasing economic activity in the short term , compared to what would have happened without a stimulus .

in addition , some stakeholders have emphasized that stimulating the economy in the short term alone is not a sufficient definition of "success. .

from this perspective , the manner in which spending , tax , and other public policies are implemented , and also the impacts of these policies , may be important .

all of these perspectives appear to have been included among the law's explicit purposes and "general principles. .

given arra's direction to "commenc[e] expenditures and activities as quickly as possible consistent with prudent management" ( p.l .

111-5 , section 3 ) , difficult trade - offs among goals may be inevitable .

over time , congress may consider whether existing management and oversight mechanisms , in combination with arra's additional provisions , adequately support effective management and oversight of arra implementation .

the experience with arra also may offer lessons learned for the "normal" systems of oversight that correspond to non - arra - related funding and operations .

beyond the immediate situation , additional oversight issues for congress may relate to longer - term questions .

these include how to build capacity within agencies to respond effectively to crises .

questions also may arise regarding how to build capacity in agencies and government overall to anticipate crises , mitigate their risks , and avoid preventable crises .

this report analyzes these and other issues after reviewing how the oversight provisions were developed and providing an overview of the enacted provisions themselves , including related appropriations and reporting requirements .

examination of how arra and its general oversight provisions were developed may provide perspectives on congressional objectives associated with the legislation .

in addition , reflection on the development of the provisions may suggest opportunities to make enhancements in arra's existing oversight provisions or to address any perceived gaps in the provisions' coverage of significant matters .

with enactment of arra , a flurry of activity commenced in executive agencies and the executive office of the president .

further requirements and guidance concerning arra implementation were forthcoming from the white house and omb .

these documents focused especially on issues related to oversight , accountability , and transparency .

some of the requirements also went beyond arra's statutory requirements .

on february 18 , 2009 , omb issued to agencies "initial implementing guidance" regarding arra , including numerous reporting requirements , in a 62-page document .

some of the required information is to be posted on recovery.gov and agency - specific arra - related websites .

a month later , president obama issued a presidential memorandum entitled "ensuring responsible spending of recovery act funds. .

the memorandum directed agencies in how to use "available discretion" when allocating and spending certain arra - related funding .

the memorandum also directed agencies to disclose certain communications with federally registered lobbyists .

on april 3 , 2009 , omb issued "updated implementing guidance" to agencies in a 175-page document .

further guidance from omb and ratb is expected .

in addition , the white house announced the designation of ratb's chairperson ( department of the interior ig earl e. devaney ) and the board's full membership in february and march 2009 , respectively .

the obama administration also identified a number of leadership roles for purposes of arra implementation ( eg , the appointment of mr. edward deseve to a white house coordination role for arra implementation ) .

several congressional committees have incorporated arra into their oversight agendas and convened hearings .

based on experience with arra implementation and other emerging developments , congress may revisit the structure and contents of arra's general oversight provisions .

even before considering experience with implementation , however , several broad issues related to arra oversight may be of interest to congress .

in the event of a crisis to which congress , the president , and federal agencies feel compelled to respond , several challenges may present themselves .

some challenges might be characterized as relatively short term .

others may involve a longer - term orientation .

among the short - term challenges , in the present context , is the question of how to balance speed ( to address macroeconomic objectives ) with "prudent management" ( eg , to minimize waste and fraud ) .

other challenges in formulating a response to a crisis occur when allocating funding during budget execution .

when allocating resources to specific projects and priorities , how should the federal government reconcile values of accountability , efficiency , effectiveness , transparency , public participation , fairness , and equity ? .

oftentimes in such circumstances , values "trade off" against each other .

in making these judgments , agencies and policy makers typically have little time for planning or reflection .

for purposes of oversight , prioritization likely will be necessary .

the need to prioritize raises a number of difficult questions .

which policy areas ( eg , transportation , health care information technology ) or processes ( eg , contracting , grant management ) should receive initial attention ? .

which should receive the most attention ? .

also , what types of oversight activity will be most effective at preventing future problems , catching current problems when changes still may be made , or identifying problems after the fact ? .

some of these shorter - term issues are explored in greater detail under subsequent headings .

some longer - term issues include questions of how to build the capacity of federal agencies , congress , and the president to better prepare for and respond to crises .

for example , concerns have been expressed by some observers for years about the adequacy of agency capabilities and workforces in areas such as contract management and program evaluation .

to address longer - term issues like these , congress might explore advantages and disadvantages of options for assessing ( or grading ) the adequacy of agency management capabilities , both under "normal" circumstances and for contingencies .

if congress wished to consider related options , congress might explore how systematic , periodic , and transparent such assessments could be .

in addition , and arguably no less significant , questions arise of how to anticipate , avoid , and mitigate preventable crises .

for example , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states , generally known as the 9-11 commission , described an aspect of this capability as "institutionalizing imagination. .

organizational , procedural , and system - related options might be explored to address any of these questions .

a typical purpose of oversight is to assess the extent to which an agency , program , or law is meeting its objectives .

through a variety of tools and approaches , congress may learn what seems to be working well or not well , where more study may be necessary , and about consequences that may not have been intended .

furthermore , both oversight activity and the prospect of scrutiny may prompt behavior changes by agencies and nonfederal actors to address areas of concern .

as noted earlier , arra specified several explicit purposes and "general principles concerning use of funds" ( see box 2 , earlier in this report ) .

these purposes and principles might be thought of as falling into three general categories: macroeconomic objectives ( eg , creating or saving jobs ; other indicators of economic activity affected by a reduction of the gdp gap , compared to situation without stimulus ) ; programmatic , microeconomic , and other discrete policy objectives ( eg , impact on public policy outcomes in myriad policy areas addressed by arra ) ; and process objectives ( eg , quick action ; transparency ; prudent management ; low levels of waste , fraud , error , and abuse ) .

arra also could be examined through the lens of additional or different criteria , which may be based on corresponding views about the proper goals of public policy .

for example , alternative criteria could be used if an observer perceived the law's specified purposes as not being sufficiently comprehensive .

certain non - governmental and non - arra activities , such as scams perpetrated on the public by impersonators of federal agencies and personnel , also may be of concern for oversight purposes .

for objectives related to the first two general categories , many quantitative and qualitative data may be informative , including data from metrics , studies , and program evaluations .

for example , in testimony before the senate budget committee , cbo identified three criteria for judging the effectiveness of a fiscal stimulus policy: timeliness ( i.e. , the increase in aggregate demand caused by a stimulus should match the period when there is a gdp gap ) ; cost - effectiveness ( i.e. , for a given budgetary cost , the increase in aggregate demand should be maximized , in order to bring real gdp as close as possible to potential gdp and thereby diminish the gdp gap ) ; and consistency with long - term budget objectives ( i.e. , a short - term stimulus should not significantly exacerbate the nation's long - run fiscal imbalance ) .

for the third general category , relating to process objectives , a typical inference is that effective implementation ( eg , balancing speed with prudent management ) increases the probability of achieving objectives associated with the first two categories .

nevertheless , some aspects of speed or prudent management may prove to be more important than others , or to trade off against each other ( see related discussion further below ) .

experience with implementation may yield corresponding "lessons learned. .

in assessing the extent to which arra meets its objectives , several related considerations likely will be significant .

for example , a frequent challenge with metrics and evaluations is estimating the impact of a policy .

that is , did a policy intervention such as arra ( or one of its constituent parts ) change the state of affairs for the better , compared to what would have happened without the policy intervention ? .

the task of validly estimating an answer to this question may require grappling with another , related question: to what extent are observed outcomes due to the policy intervention , as opposed to other factors ? .

in order to estimate arra's impact , it therefore may be necessary to make comparisons between observed data , on one hand , and estimates of what would have happened in the absence of arra , on the other .

from a macroeconomic perspective , for example , what impact is arra having on gdp , employment , and other indicators of economic activity , compared to what would have happened without a fiscal stimulus ? .

what often makes this evaluation difficult is that experience without a fiscal stimulus , under identical conditions , is not observed .

in addition , other factors unrelated to the stimulus may affect macroeconomic results or modify the stimulus' potential impact .

for example , cbo cited the importance of an assumption in its march 2009 economic forecast , which included the estimated impact of arra .

specifically , the forecast assumed "that financial markets will begin to function more normally and that the housing market will stabilize by early next year .

the possibility that financial markets might not stabilize represents a major source of downside risk to the forecast. .

because a number of such factors may influence overall economic results , some level of uncertainty arguably is unavoidable in making any estimates of arra's impact .

another potential consideration relates to trade - offs among arra's multiple objectives .

a frequent complication of multidimensional goals ( eg , speed , effectiveness , efficiency , transparency , fairness , and accountability ) is that some goals may trade off against each other .

for example , the use of speed in the obligation of funds has been seen as essential for economic recovery .

greater speed may promote economic stimulus , but at a cost of some efficiency in the use of tax dollars to achieve public policy outcomes in discrete areas .

speed also may increase the risk of waste or fraud , particularly when agency capacities to handle a sudden infusion of funding may be in question .

on the other hand , greater scrutiny and accountability may diminish speed and therefore economic stimulus .

they also may increase or decrease efficiency and effectiveness , depending on whether the nature and level of scrutiny are adequately calibrated .

when governmental decision makers evaluate policy options and make choices , they implicitly make trade - offs .

decision making regarding arra most likely will be no exception .

the reconciliation of trade - offs in decision making may be informed by policy analysis and management of risks .

ultimately , however , judgments about trade - offs arguably always are informed by an observer's priorities , beliefs , values , and ethics .

a third consideration relates to assessing what is realistically achievable in the short to medium term for each of the three general categories of objectives that were outlined above ( i.e. , macroeconomic , policy - specific , and process ) .

with respect to process objectives , for example , a subject of considerable attention has been how to build the capability of the recovery.gov website to provide full transparency for federal funds .

data availability , however , hinges on a number of complex factors , including legacy information technology systems , disparate state and federal systems and data definitions , uneven data quality , and a need for effective project management across a variety of jurisdictions .

in that light , it is unclear how much capability may be realistically achievable by the end of fy2010 , at which point cbo estimated nearly half of arra's discretionary spending will have been spent .

in building the capacity of recovery.gov , the experience of implementing the usaspending.gov website may in some ways be instructive with regard to data availability and quality .

an obama administration official has called arra "the largest peacetime economic expansion program in the country's history. .

the administration and congress negotiated numerous general oversight provisions for inclusion in the legislation .

arra's oversight provisions — a collection of new institutions , processes , systems , and resources — supplement the federal government's existing systems of oversight in numerous respects .

some of arra's provisions cover all government operations funded by division a ( eg , many provisions in title xv ) .

others operate in specific policy areas ( eg , specific appropriations set - asides ) .

over time , congress may consider whether existing management and oversight mechanisms , in combination with arra's additional provisions , adequately support effective management and oversight of arra implementation .

in so doing , several topics and questions that are specific to arra might be examined .

does the combination of existing and new oversight mechanisms adequately address arra's objectives and risks ? .

are there some potential oversight topics that are not explicitly addressed in arra ? .

does the combination of new and existing oversight systems leave gaps ? .

is there a point at which oversight efforts and scrutiny become counterproductive ? .

if so , in what sense ( s ) ? .

how are competing imperatives ( transparency , accountability , flexibility , cost , etc. ) .

to be reconciled ? .

are some approaches to oversight more helpful than others ? .

do some approaches produce unintended consequences ? .

does the experience with arra offer lessons learned for the "normal" systems of oversight ? .

if so , are some changes in the "normal" system of oversight advisable ? .

what approaches to oversight work well in a separation of powers system , in which federal government branches compete for control over public policy , and in a federal system , in which the federal government and states have potentially overlapping lines of authority ? .

if congress wishes to assess the overall oversight framework for arra , several overarching considerations about federal oversight may be relevant to assessing questions like the foregoing .

a number of these considerations are analyzed below .

as a threshold matter , the federal government might be viewed as embodying a system of "nested" oversight .

that is , multiple entities engage in simultaneous and multi - tiered oversight activities .

for example , congress oversees the president , eop ( including omb ) , agencies , and nonfederal entities .

furthermore , congress has established , structured , and funded executive agencies to allow for oversight of agency actions .

congress also has passed a variety of "general management laws" for executive agencies to establish procedures that may be overseen .

at the same time , igs and congressional support agencies such as gao provide assistance to congress , agencies , and the president with oversight .

within the executive branch , omb has a statutory responsibility to provide management leadership for many agencies , including monitoring and oversight of their activities .

agencies oversee their own activities , the activities of regulated entities , and the activities of recipients of federal funds .

agencies undertake these tasks through a variety of organizational and procedural arrangements , often as congress has mandated via statute .

when state governments receive federal dollars , they may oversee the activities of local governments .

all of the foregoing entities also oversee in many respects the activities of industries , firms , and other nongovernmental actors .

viewed together , for example , gao may attempt to oversee omb's oversight of an agency's oversight of a state agency , which in turn attempts to oversee the use of funds it made available via contract or grant to a firm , local government , or nonprofit organization .

throughout , tools such as monitoring , analysis , and evaluation may be utilized .

in assessing and potentially considering how to modify an oversight framework , there also are multiple perspectives on the potential objectives of oversight .

these include the following: compliance with applicable laws and regulations ( eg , adherence to legal requirements and avoidance of fraud ) ; implementation that is faithful with congressional intent , when an agency or the president exercises discretion ; avoidance of mismanagement ( eg , adherence to sound management practices ) ; avoidance of undesired bias in funding allocations and policy execution ( eg , fair allocation of resources and fair implementation of policy , with intended equity ) ; effectiveness of funded activities ( eg , achievement of programmatic missions and purposes ) ; and efficiency of funded activities ( eg , minimization of avoidable "waste" and unnecessary redundancy ) .

the ways in which ratb , igs , gao , omb , implementing agencies , and nonfederal recipients of funds ( eg , state governments ) approach these perspectives on oversight , in the context of arra , may reveal lessons learned and patterns over time .

assessments of arra's implementation and oversight framework likely will be informed by an observer's values , short - versus long - term orientation , and perspectives on the proper structure and objectives of oversight .

nonetheless , as a point of departure , some initial observations still might be made regarding topics that do not appear to be explicitly addressed by general oversight provisions in arra .

almost all of arra's general oversight provisions apply to provisions included in division a of the legislation .

very few appear to apply explicitly to division b ( eg , regarding tax expenditures ) .

at the same time , however , some provisions in division b are subject to study or oversight in specific cases .

in addition , although some appropriations to igs in division a specified that funds were to be used for oversight of activities related to division a ( thereby restricting their use to that purpose ) , other appropriations to igs and gao did not contain a specification of purpose related only to division a .

therefore , some appropriations presumably could be used for oversight of activities and funding associated with division b .

consideration of the extent to which arra's general oversight provisions cover division b may raise questions .

for implementation purposes , will division b receive the same level of oversight as division a ? .

will existing oversight mechanisms provide adequate oversight for all of arra's provisions , notwithstanding the focus of arra's general oversight provisions on division a ? .

state and local governments will receive a surge of many billions of dollars under arra , raising the potential issue of whether these governments will have capacity to effectively manage the influx of funds .

arra authorized agencies that receive funds under division a to "reasonably adjust applicable limits on administrative expenditures for federal awards to help award recipients defray the costs of data collection requirements initiated pursuant to [division a]" ( division a , title xv , section 1552 ) .

however , it is not clear if state and local oversight entities ( eg , state - level auditors general ) will have access to increased resources , if they are needed in order to accommodate a surge in activities funded by arra .

to what extent might this be an issue that state and local governments confront ? .

in addition , many of the general oversight provisions in division a focus on transparency regarding final allocations of funds and the outcomes of expenditures .

however , not as much attention in arra appears to focus on the process within executive agencies for deciding how to allocate funds in the first place .

when early versions of arra were being developed , then president - elect obama and vice president - elect biden indicated an obama administration position that arra should contain no congressionally originated earmarks .

the president later made a policy statement on the general subject of congressionally originated earmarks , outside the context of arra .

he said that "on occasion , ... [p]rojects have been inserted [in legislation and report language] at the 11 th hour , without review , and sometimes without merit , in order to satisfy the political and personal agendas of a given legislator , rather than the public interest. .

some of the same concerns , however , might be raised in the context of omb and agency decision making during budget execution under arra .

agencies frequently are granted considerable discretion during budget execution .

given this discretion , to what extent might political appointees within agencies cause certain projects to be funded , without substantial review or merit ? .

similar concerns about "presidential earmarking" and "executive earmarking" sometimes have been raised .

at the same time , the obama administration has issued presidential memoranda regarding agency use of discretion under arra and in contracting .

experience with arra's implementation may indicate what level of transparency regarding executive agency and omb decision making ultimately will be forthcoming .

appendix a. cbo january 2009 estimate of gdp gap , without enactment of arra graphical displays may assist with visualizing the concept of a gdp gap .

cbo's january 2009 testimony before the senate budget committee included such a graphic , showing an estimate of the gdp gap without enactment of a stimulus law .

based on cbo's economic forecast , which assumed no changes in policy , cbo projected "that the economy will produce about $1 trillion less output per year than its estimated potential in each of 2009 and 2010 and significantly less than its potential in 2011 and 2012 as well. .

see figure a - 1 .

appendix b .

table of selected arra general oversight provisions appendix c. detail of arra appropriations to igs , gao , and ratb igs are listed in alphabetical order of their parent departments , followed by igs located within independent agencies .

gao and ratb are listed at the table's end .

the table indicates the division and title of arra in which the appropriation was included , the funding amount , the period of availability for the funds , and , in the last column , whether appropriations language specified that resources be used only for the purpose of overseeing arra - provided funds .

appendix d. early cbo estimates of gdp gap , including impact of arra congress required in arra's division a that the law's impact on economic indicators be evaluated ( title xv , section 1513 ) .

congress may conduct oversight over the federal government's attempts to diminish the recession's gdp gap and arra's contribution to the effort .

graphical displays may assist with visualizing the concept .

after arra was enacted , cbo prepared a year - by - year estimate of the short - term economic impacts of the law .

cbo noted that "[t]he macroeconomic impacts of any economic stimulus program are very uncertain," and that "[e]conomic theories differ in their predictions about the effectiveness of stimulus. .

nonetheless , cbo developed a range of estimates of the impacts of arra "that encompasses a majority of economists' views. .

cbo's letter included a graphic that showed the estimated impact of arra on actual gdp .

cbo explained that the previous figure "shows three different projections of the economy's actual output: cbo's january baseline projection of gdp ( which does not include the effects of arra ) , gdp using cbo's high estimate of the effects of the legislation ; and gdp using cbo's low estimate of the effects of the legislation. .

cbo subsequently updated its economic forecast of the gdp gap in its analysis of the obama administration's preliminary budget proposals for fy2010 .

in two graphics , cbo showed "the middle of the range of the agency's [march 2009] estimates of arra's impact on gdp and employment. .

in brief , cbo estimated arra likely would contribute to helping end the recession , in concert with actions by the federal reserve and department of the treasury .

the current recession , which began in december 2007 , took a sudden and severe turn for the worse late last year .

of the 4.4 million jobs lost since the recession began , more than half have been lost in just the past four months .

according to the congressional budget office's economic projections , the economy will continue to deteriorate for some time , although the adoption of the american recovery and reinvestment act and very aggressive actions by the federal reserve and the treasury will help end the recession this fall .

cbo performed similar analysis regarding the unemployment rate .

see figure d - 3 , below .

cbo noted , however , that the range of estimates of arra's impact "is quite large," and that cbo's "current [economic] forecast , particularly for the near term , is subject to a greater than normal degree of uncertainty. .

