health care reform is again an issue .

for the first time since 1994 , when sweeping changes proposed by president clinton and others failed to be enacted , there is demonstrable interest in reforming health care in the united states .

surveys and studies show persistent problems , political leaders are debating issues and solutions , and interest groups of all persuasions are holding conferences and staking out positions .

some states have enacted their own reforms , and others are considering doing so .

president obama says that it is his top priority , and bills have been prepared , and in some cases approved , by the congressional committees with principal jurisdiction .

interest in reform is being driven by three predominant concerns .

one is coverage .

by a commonly cited estimate , more than 45 million people were uninsured at some point in 2007 — more than one - seventh of the population .

the recession may have increased this number .

without private insurance or coverage under government health programs , people can have difficulty obtaining needed care and problems paying for the care they receive .

a second concern is cost and spending .

health care costs are rising for nearly everyone — employers , workers , retirees , providers , and taxpayers — sometimes in unexpected , erratic jumps .

costs are a particular source of anxiety for families that are planning for retirement or where someone is seriously ill. national health care spending now likely exceeds $2.5 trillion , more than 17% of the gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

spending has climbed from over 12% of gdp in 1990 and 7% in 1970 .

third , there is concern about quality .

although the united states spends substantially more on health care per person than other industrialized countries , it scores only average or somewhat worse on many quality of care indicators .

medical and medication errors harm many people annually , sometimes resulting in death .

the three concerns raise significant challenges .

for one thing , each is more complex than might first appear , which makes it difficult to find solutions , or at least simple or uniform solutions .

second , solutions to the three concerns may conflict with one another .

under many scenarios , for example , providing coverage to the 45 million uninsured would likely drive up costs ( as more people seek care ) and expand public budgets ( since public subsidies would be required to help them get insurance ) .

attempts to restrict costs may impede efforts to increase quality , since new initiatives often require additional , not fewer , resources .

it is possible , however , that cost savings might allow those initiatives to be funded .

other challenges involve significant stakeholder interests that reform might threaten , including those of insurers , hospitals and other health care facilities , and doctors and other providers , many of whom have substantial investments in present arrangements .

in 2007 , for example , nearly one - third of total health care expenditures occurred in hospitals ( see table c - 1 in appendix c ) , which cannot be quickly built , easily shut , or transformed simply by their own choice into different kinds of health care providers .

in addition , if debates over the clinton plan are still a guide , some people may be uneasy about moving from an imperfect but known system to something that is potentially better but untried .

this report provides an introduction to health care reform .

it focuses on the three predominant concerns just mentioned — coverage , cost and spending , and quality — and some of the legislative issues within which they likely will be debated , including the scope of reform ( particularly whether medicare and medicaid should be included ) ; the choice between public and private coverage ; whether employment - based insurance should be strengthened , weakened , or left alone ; and what role states might play .

the report does not attempt to identify , let alone discuss , all the relevant concerns about health care in the united states , even though others may also be important and will likely contribute to the complexity of the reform debate .

the report may be updated to include other health care reform issues as the debate in congress unfolds .

the three concerns discussed below — coverage , cost and spending , and quality — loom large in the emerging debate over health care reform .

some members might not consider every one important , but all have been included in recent congressional debate and proposals .

other concerns about health care in the united states that are not discussed in this report include the following: problems in the private insurance market , particularly for individual and small - group insurance , problems with shortages of health care providers , problems with public health programs , funding , and administrative oversight , problems of economic concentration among insurers and providers , problems of equity in access to care and the type of care received , and problems of equity in public subsidies .

the reform debate in the 111 th congress has raised some perennial issues about national health care policy .

these include deep - seated disagreements about whether insurance should be public or private ; whether employment - based insurance should be strengthened , weakened , or left alone ; and what role states should play .

the scope of reform is itself an issue .

the legislative issues discussed below will affect attempts to deal with the three predominant concerns raised at the beginning of the report .

for example , even if there were a consensus that everyone should have coverage — something some members actually might not consider a priority — that would not resolve questions of whether the coverage should be public or private , whether employer - provided coverage should in some way be favored , or whether states should have the principal responsibility for enrolling people in plans and subsidizing those who need assistance .

disputes over any of these issues could derail attempts to meet coverage goals .

the discussion below does not cover all issues currently being debated .

other controversies include the following: how much health care reform might cost , and how it should be financed , whether there should be individual or employer mandates , or possibly both , how much individuals and families might be expected to pay for coverage from their own resources , and how insurance benefit standards might be set and updated .

the cost of reform and how to pay for it have become important issues in the current debate .

reform is likely to be expensive .

the principal proposals under consideration could cost the federal government more than $1 trillion over the next 10 years , depending on their scope and details .

the largest part would be for subsidies to help people under age 65 pay for health insurance or be covered by public programs .

not only is reducing the number of uninsured a major goal for many , but individual mandates for coverage ( i.e. , requirements that one must have coverage ) are practical only if people with little money are given assistance .

health care reform may increase costs for others as well , including the states , employers , employees , consumers , health care providers , and taxpayers .

if their expenditures do not increase , their income may go down , leaving them in a worse position financially .

at the same time , reform would likely have the opposite effect for some of these parties , making them better off .

under current congressional budget enforcement rules , health care reform legislation must not increase the federal deficit .

projected spending increases and revenue reductions are to be offset by reductions in spending or increases in revenue .

conceptually there are a number of ways this could be accomplished , including increasing general tax rates , reducing various tax subsidies , reducing spending for federal health programs , reducing other federal program spending , and increasing borrowing .

currently , the principal offsets under consideration are medicare reductions and tax increases .

the medicare changes at issue include reducing the annual updates of medicare's many fee - for - service payment rates , reducing spending in medicare advantage by basing payments on spending in fee - for - service medicare , and requiring drug manufacturers to provide rebates and discounts in specific circumstances under the part d prescription drug program .

the largest tax increases being considered include limiting the tax rate that high - income taxpayers can use to reduce their tax liability by itemized deductions , an income tax surcharge on high - income taxpayers , and caps or other limits on the exclusion for employer - provided health care .

for analyses of some of the proposals , see crs report r40648 , tax options for financing health care reform , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report r40673 , limiting the exclusion for employer - provided health insurance: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

other options were outlined last year by the congressional budget office .

the committees of jurisdiction for health care have prepared comprehensive reform proposals .

the senate help committee approved a measure on july 15 ( affordable health choices act ) , whereas the senate finance committee has not yet released a proposal , though earlier it provided a range of policy options and many of its debates have been publicized .

h.r .

3200 , a coordinated measure by three house committees ( education and labor , ways and means , and energy and commerce ) , was approved by the first two committees with some variations on july 17 and by energy and commerce on july 31 .

other comprehensive reform bills introduced in the 111 th congress include h.r .

15 ( dingell ) , h.r .

193 ( stark ) , h.r .

676 ( conyers ) , h.r .

1200 ( mcdermott ) , h.r .

1321 ( eshoo ) , h.r .

2399 ( langevin ) , h.r .

2520 ( ryan of wisconsin ) , h.r .

3000 ( lee ) , s. 391 ( wyden ) , s. 703 ( sanders ) , s. 1099 ( coburn ) , s. 1240 ( demint ) , s. 1278 ( rockefeller ) , and s. 1324 ( demint ) .

in general , these bills would provide coverage for nearly all people in the united states , sometimes for everyone under new insurance plans and sometimes only for people not covered by medicare or some other current plans and arrangements .

many would have an individual mandate ( i.e. , a requirement that everyone have coverage ) .

some would address quality , administrative simplicity , and other issues as well .

the administration has not proposed a health reform bill of its own .

however , it has been working continually with the house and senate committees that have prepared ( or are still preparing ) the legislation mentioned above , and it has been negotiating with some of the principal stakeholders .

the fy2010 budget that it released in february included broad principles for reform ; it also proposed a number of tax changes that would raise $300 billion over the next 10 years , mostly from limiting the tax rate that high - income taxpayers can use to reduce their tax liability by itemized deductions .

the budget also proposed more than $280 billion in medicare savings and $22 billion in medicaid savings .

on june 13 , the president announced more than $300 billion additional possible savings from medicare .

additionally , the administration transmitted legislation to congress called the independent medicare advisory council ( imac ) act of 2009 on july 17 .

the imac would consist of five members who are either physicians or possess specialized expertise in medicine or health care policy .

the council's primary function , beginning in fiscal year 2015 , would be providing annual recommendations to the president for changing federal payments for various services covered by medicare .

these recommendation packages would have to be created so that implementation would not exceed aggregate medicare spending over the subsequent 10 year period , compared with expected spending without any changes .

upon the president's approval , recommendations would become active no sooner than 30 days thereafter , unless congress enacts a joint resolution to disapprove .

on july 25 , cbo had scored the savings of such proposal to be $2 billion over the 2016-2019 period .

cbo notes there is a possibility of considerably more savings beyond 2019 contingent on the scope of imac recommendations .

appendix a. overview of health insurance coverage the following table provides an overview of the sources of health insurance that people have as well as estimates on the number of uninsured .

estimates for 2009 likely have changed somewhat because of additional population growth and the recession .

appendix b. characteristics of the uninsured people under age 65 who were uninsured in 2007 had the following diverse characteristics: age : young adults ages 19 to 24 represented 9.2% of this population but 16.2% of the uninsured , race and ethnicity : hispanics represented 16.6% of this population but 32.4% of the uninsured , citizenship: more than one - quarter were not native - born u.s. citizens , employment : more than half were full - time , full - year workers or their spouses and children .

about a quarter were part - time or partial - year workers or their spouses or children .

less than one - fifth of the uninsured were in households with no attachment to the labor force .

income : about 57% of household insurance units had incomes below $25,000 , 27% between $25,000 and $49,999 , 9% between $50,000 and $74,999 , and 3% between $75,000 and $99,999 .

about 4% had incomes of $100,000 or more .

poverty status: three - quarters had family incomes above poverty thresholds .

uninsurance rates for people under age 65 vary widely among the states .

based upon current population survey data for 2006 and 2007 , states with the highest rates were texas ( 27.4% ) , new mexico ( 25.6% ) , florida ( 24.3% ) , louisiana ( 23% ) , arizona ( 21.8% ) , and california ( 20.4% ) .

states with the lowest rates were massachusetts ( 8.9% ) , hawaii ( 9.2% ) , wisconsin ( 9.6% ) , and minnesota ( 9.9% ) .

appendix c. distribution of national health care expenditures the following table provides an overview of how the nation's $2.2 trillion in spending for health care was distributed among various services , products , and activities in 2007 .

the estimates were prepared by the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) of the department of health and human services .

cms estimates that aggregate growth between 2007 and 2008 was 6.1% , which would bring total expenditures for the latter year to over $2.3 trillion .

the following table provides an overview of how the nation's $2.2 trillion in health care spending in 2007 were distributed by source of funds .

