on june 11 , in response to the global spread of a new strain of influenza , the world health organization ( who ) raised the level of influenza pandemic alert to phase 6 , the highest level , which indicates the start of an actual pandemic .

this change in alert level reflected the spread of the new virus , not its severity .

in late april 2009 , human cases of infection with a novel influenza a ( h1n1 ) virus were identified .

since then , the virus has become widespread .

although currently the pandemic is of moderate severity with the majority of patients experiencing mild symptoms and making a rapid and full recovery , the virus and its effects may change over time .

this report provides a brief overview of selected legal issues including emergency measures , civil rights , liability issues , and employment issues .

questions relating to employment are among the most significant issues presented by an influenza pandemic , since , if individuals fear losing their employment or their wages , compliance with public health measures such as isolation or quarantine may suffer .

controlling or preventing an influenza pandemic involves the same strategies used for seasonal influenza .

these strategies are vaccination , treatment with antiviral medications , and the use of infection control measures .

cdc states that vaccination planners should assume that shipping of h1n1 vaccine will begin mid - october , although some vaccine may be available for shipping earlier .

therefore , the use of other infection control measures may be critical .

these measures can include having workers stay home when they are sick .

however , this is difficult for the large number of private sector workers who do not have paid sick leave .

the uses of quarantine and isolation , as well as social distancing and "snow days," are discussed in the homeland security council's pandemic influenza implementation plan as ways to attempt to limit the spread of influenza .

quarantine is defined as the "separation of individuals who have been exposed to an infection but are not yet ill from others who have not been exposed to the transmissible infection. .

isolation is defined as the "separation of infected individuals from those who are not infected. .

social distancing is defined as "infection control strategies that reduce the duration and / or intimacy of social contacts and thereby limit the transmission of influenza. .

social distancing can include the use of face masks , teleconferencing , or school closures .

"snow days," a type of social distancing , are the recommendation or mandate by authorities that individuals and families limit social contacts by remaining within their households .

the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) issued interim planning guidance for communities to mitigate the impact of pandemic influenza .

this guidance introduced a pandemic severity index , which ranks the severity of a pandemic like the categories given to hurricanes and links the severity to specific community interventions .

the community interventions include isolation and voluntary quarantine , school dismissals , and the use of social distancing measures to reduce contact .

the social distancing measures include the cancellation of large public gatherings and the alteration of workplace environments and schedules to decrease social density .

the guidance noted the importance of workplace leave policies that would "align incentives and facilitate adherence with the nonpharmaceutical interventions. .

strategies to minimize the impact of workplace absenteeism were discussed in some detail and included the use of staggered shifts and telework .

unemployment insurance was mentioned as potentially available , as was disaster unemployment assistance .

the guidance also observed that the family and medical leave act may offer some job security protections .

the national governors association center for best practices ( nga center ) conducted nine regional pandemic preparedness workshops during 2007 and 2008 to "examine state pandemic preparedness , particularly in non - health - related areas such as continuity of government , maintenance of essential services , and coordination with the private sector. .

a report analyzing the information gained during these workshops identified areas in which new or improved policies and procedures are necessary to improve pandemic preparedness .

one of these areas was workforce policies .

the nga center concluded: every sector examined in this report will be affected by the availability of workers during a pandemic .

in general , states and the private sector should develop and test policies affecting the willingness and ability of personnel to perform their duties , whether in traditional or alternative settings .

potential strategies and or guidance addressing telecommuting , alternative schedules , or modified operating hours for retail establishments and internet or distance - learning programs for school children would be particularly useful .

during a pandemic , almost everyone will be susceptible to the illness .

a central disease control strategy will be keeping sick people away from others to minimize the spread of infection .

employers should examine their human resource policies and , if needed , create new policies that would allow sick workers to stay at home during a pandemic .

when possible , states and private sector employers should collaboratively develop policies that effectively balance the need of some workers to care for sick ( or healthy ) family members for extended periods of time with the requirements government and private sector continuity of operations plans .

the employment - at - will doctrine governs the employment relationship between an employer and employee for most workers in the private sector .

an employee who does not work pursuant to an employment contract , including a collective bargaining agreement that may permit termination only for cause or identify a procedure for dismissals , may be terminated for any reason at any time .

although the employment - at - will doctrine provides the default rule for most employees , it has been eroded to some degree by the recognition of certain wrongful discharge claims brought against employers .

in general , these wrongful discharge claims assert tort theories against the employer .

a cause of action for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy is one such claim .

if isolation or a quarantine were used to attempt to limit the spread of a pandemic influenza virus and an employee was terminated because of absence from the workplace , a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy might arise .

a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy is grounded in the belief that the law should not allow an employee to be dismissed for engaging in an activity that is beneficial to the public welfare .

in general , the claims encompass four categories of conduct: refusing to commit unlawful acts ( eg , refusing to commit perjury when the government is investigating the employer for wrongdoing ) ; exercising a statutory right ( eg , filing a claim for workers' compensation , reporting unfair labor practices ) ; fulfilling a public obligation ( eg , serving on jury duty ) ; and whistleblowing .

although most states appear to recognize a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy , it is possible that a state may allow a claim only under certain circumstances .

for example , texas recognizes such a claim only if an employee is terminated for refusing to perform an illegal act or inquiring into the legality of an instruction from the employer .

while the four categories of conduct identified above represent the classic fact patterns for a claim of wrongful discharge in violation of public policy , other actions could be deemed beneficial to the public welfare and result in a wrongful discharge claim if an employee is terminated for engaging in such actions .

some courts have broadly defined what constitutes "public policy. .

for example , in palmateer v. international harvester co. , the illinois supreme court indicated that [t]here is no precise definition of the term .

in general , it can be said that public policy concerns what is right and just and what affects the citizens of the state collectively .

it is to be found in the state's constitution and statutes and , when they are silent , in its judicial decisions .

similarly , in boyle v. vista eyewear , inc. , the missouri court of appeals stated that public policy "is that principle of law which holds that no one can lawfully do that which tends to be injurious to the public or against the public good. .

these broad definitions suggest that an employee's isolation or quarantine during a pandemic in some states could possibly provide a public policy exception to the at - will rule of employment .

it would seem possible for a court to conclude that the isolation or quarantine of individuals during a pandemic serves the public good and that the termination of individuals who are isolated or quarantined violates public policy .

some observers insist , however , that no court has ever held that it violates public policy to discharge an individual because he or she missed work because of a quarantine .

if the government were to mandate individuals to isolate or quarantine themselves either because they were infected or because of the risk of infection , it would seem that such an action would constitute an even stronger argument for the public policy exception to the at - will rule of employment .

in such case , the government would appear to be identifying a significant policy that would benefit the public good .

however , even if the government merely recommended isolation or quarantine rather than mandated such actions , a strong argument for a public policy exception to the at - will rule would still seem possible .

in its guidance for employers to plan and respond to the 2009-2010 influenza season , the cdc recommends that all sick people should remain at home and away from the workplace during an influenza pandemic .

the cdc further recommends that employees with influenza - like illness should avoid the workplace until at least 24 hours after they are free of fever or the signs of a fever without the use of fever - reducing medications .

one might suggest that the cdc recommendations establish a policy in furtherance of the public's best interests , and that these recommendations could support a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy .

the family and medical leave act ( fmla ) guarantees employees 12 workweeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period for one or more of the following reasons: because of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee and in order to care for such son or daughter ; because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for adoption or foster care ; in order to care for a spouse or a son , daughter , or parent of the employee , if such spouse , son , daughter , or parent has a serious health condition ; and because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the position of such employee .

the fmla applies to any employer in the private sector that engages in commerce , or in any industry or activity affecting commerce , that has at least 50 employees who are employed for each working day during each of 20 or more calendar workweeks in the current or preceding calendar year .

to be eligible for family and medical leave benefits , an individual must have been employed for at least 12 months by the employer from whom leave is requested , and must have been employed for at least 1,250 hours of service with such employer during the previous 12-month period .

the fmla also covers public agencies , including federal , state , and local governments .

unlike employers in the private sector , public employers do not have to employ at least 50 employees to be subject to the fmla .

employees of public agencies , however , must have worked generally for a specified number of weeks to be eligible for benefits .

during an influenza pandemic , the fmla would seem to provide infected employees and employees who care for certain infected relatives with the opportunity to be absent from the workplace .

the fmla defines a "serious health condition" to mean "an illness , injury , impairment , or physical or mental condition" that involves either "inpatient care in a hospital , hospice , or residential medical care facility ; or ... continuing treatment by a health care provider. .

an employee who was affected by a pandemic influenza virus may be found to have a serious health condition .

if the fmla's eligibility requirements were met , such an employee would likely be granted leave under the statute .

in addition , because the fmla grants leave to an employee to care for a spouse , child , or parent with a serious health condition , an employee could be granted leave to care for a relative who was affected by a pandemic influenza virus if the employee met the statute's eligibility requirements .

while on leave , the employee with the serious health condition or the employee caring for a spouse , child , or parent with a serious health condition could be isolated or quarantined without the fear of termination for at least 12 workweeks .

an employee who was not infected by a pandemic influenza virus or who was not responsible for the care of a spouse , child , or parent infected by such a virus would not be protected by the fmla .

if such an employee sought isolation or quarantine to avoid exposure and was absent from the workplace , the fmla would not prohibit the employer from terminating the employee .

the u.s. office of personnel management ( opm ) has attempted to help federal agencies with planning for pandemic influenza .

planning for pandemic influenza highlights the availability of various leave flexibilities that could assist affected federal employees .

for example , the guidance discusses the availability of donated leave and leave without pay if an employee has exhausted his or her sick leave .

on august 26 , 2009 , opm proposed new regulations that would permit an agency to advance up to 240 hours of sick leave to a full - time employee when he or she would , as determined by the health authorities having jurisdiction or by a health care provider , jeopardize the health of others by his or her presence on the job because of exposure to a communicable disease .

the proposed regulations would also allow an agency to advance 104 hours of sick leave to a full - time employee to provide care to a family member who has been exposed to a communicable disease .

in addition to the proposed regulations , opm has indicated that the 2009 h1n1 vaccine will be offered to federal employees and that this vaccination program will follow the acip guidelines for priorities .

at least six states , recognizing the lack of statutory protection for employees in a situation where isolation or quarantine may be necessary , have enacted legislation that explicitly prohibits the termination of an employee who is subject to isolation or quarantine .

in delaware , iowa , kansas , maryland , minnesota , and new mexico , an employer is prohibited from terminating an employee who is under an order of isolation or quarantine , or has been directed to enter isolation or quarantine .

under minnesota law , an employee who has been terminated or otherwise penalized for being in isolation or quarantine may bring a civil action for reinstatement or for the recovery of lost wages or benefits .

two additional states have enacted legislation that addresses the treatment of employees who are subject to quarantine or isolation .

under new jersey law , an affected employee must be reinstated following the quarantine or isolation .

under maine law , an employer is required to grant leave to an employee who is subject to quarantine or isolation .

the leave granted by the employer may be paid or unpaid .

although federal law does not protect from termination employees who may be absent from the workplace because of isolation or quarantine , there are examples of employee protections that are arguably analogous .

the fmla , for example , does grant leave to an eligible employee who has a serious health condition or who provides care to a spouse , child , or parent with a serious health condition .

moreover , an expansion of the fmla to allow paid leave because of a serious health condition or to care for a spouse , child , or parent with such a condition has been proposed .

the availability of paid leave would likely minimize concerns about lost wages during an influenza pandemic .

the uniformed services employment and reemployment rights act ( userra ) provides another example of employee protection .

userra requires the reemployment of an employee who has been absent from a position of employment because of service in the uniformed services .

userra and the fmla illustrate congress's awareness of events that may necessitate an employee's absence from the workplace .

