although the most recent figures for 2007 indicate a drop , the number of uninsured persons generally has grown during the past several years , as health care costs to consumers , employers , and the government have also grown .

state legislators and policymakers have responded to these trends by proposing a spectrum of reforms to address concerns regarding coverage , cost , and other issues .

state governments are in a unique position to impact the availability and affordability of health insurance .

they are the primary regulators of this industry , and provide funding toward the coverage of millions of residents .

states can be receptive to local economic , labor , and other conditions , and adopt policies tailored to their own needs .

given this , health reforms vary greatly from state to state .

for instance , some states may pursue comprehensive reform , while others may design reform initiatives that are more narrow in scope .

these more limited reform efforts may focus on a particular component of the health care system , such as the availability of private health insurance options , the delivery of health care , or public financing for health coverage .

reform strategies also vary in terms of the target stakeholder group ( eg , children ) and policy lever used ( eg , tax code ) .

this report identifies general approaches proposed at the state level to reform health insurance , and describes specific strategies to illustrate the breadth of possible reform options .

it discusses a selection of current reform strategies ; it is not meant to be inclusive of all health reforms .

while the states have implemented a wide range of reforms to address concerns about both coverage and the health care delivery system , most health reform discussions focus primarily on health insurance .

under this broad policy area , coverage and cost concerns are paramount .

the primary objective related to coverage is reducing the number of uninsured persons .

reforms may target a specific group ( eg , small businesses ) , or address the uninsured population as a whole .

cost reforms primarily address concerns about the affordability of health insurance for individuals , families , and employers .

this typically results in policies that invest public resources to assist consumers and firms with the cost of health insurance .

below are general descriptions of select reform strategies that have been proposed or implemented at the state level .

since an all - inclusive analysis of state reforms is beyond the scope of this report , these descriptions include examples of both common and innovative initiatives to illustrate the breadth of reforms .

the selected strategies reflect the current diversity of reform approaches , in terms of scope of reforms , policy levers used , and populations affected .

the reform strategies have been identified according to targeted stakeholder groups: consumers , employers , purchasers of health coverage , and health plans .

in addition , the report explores key design and implementation challenges related to coverage and cost , and provides a succinct state example for each reform strategy .

the above - mentioned state reforms ( and other strategies ) are policy levers that are available to federal legislators and policymakers .

but while state experiences provide some insight , they are not directly generalizable to the nation as a whole .

the differences between state - level reform and national reform relate not only , or even primarily , to scope , but also involve fiscal and legal constraints , the regulatory environment , economic conditions , labor market supply , and other factors .

the complexity of national reform poses unique challenges and opportunities .

for example , each state sets regulatory standards with which insurance carriers licensed in their state must abide , such as benefit mandates , rating rules , and solvency standards .

some states establish very strict standards , others impose less restrictive requirements , and some not at all , depending on the regulatory area and segment of the health insurance market .

given that state laws and regulations vary , any new standard imposed nationwide would place unequal burden on insurance carriers , depending on which state they already operate in .

on the other hand , only federal law applies to health coverage that is self - insured .

given that self - insured plans provide coverage to approximately half of all workers with health insurance , federal action is necessary if the objective is to apply health reforms broadly .

in addition , while individual states have achieved some measureable successes in their efforts to expand coverage or make health insurance more affordable , those successes have had their limitations and trade - offs .

for example , while massachusetts has achieved near - universal coverage two years after enactment of comprehensive health reform , the costs associated with reform have exceeded initial estimates and long - term financing is an ongoing concern .

moreover , the increase in newly insured residents has highlighted a common feature in health care delivery in massachusetts and other states: severe physician labor shortages , particularly in primary care .

overall , the massachusetts experience exemplifies the eventuality that any national reform will involve consideration of trade - offs .

and in the climate of limited resources , such consideration will necessitate priority setting .

