historically , airline passenger screening functions have focused on checkpoint screening using magnetometers to detect metallic weapons on passengers and x - ray systems to examine carry - on items .

these methods have changed little since they were first implemented at commercial airports in the united states during the early 1970s .

recently , however , new initiatives to expand the role of tsa personnel beyond traditional physical screening of passengers and their belongings , as well as initiatives to improve screening efficiency and effectiveness through the deployment of new technologies , have been implemented and are being tested .

these changes are coming about largely in response to recommendations and statutory requirements to address threats posed by explosives carried by passengers or in their carry - on items .

addressing the identified need to effectively detect explosives on passengers and in carry - on items will likely require considerable investment and resources .

however , policymakers and aviation security planners have not yet agreed upon a clear strategy and well - defined plan for evolving airline passenger screening functions to incorporate new technologies , capabilities , and procedures to more effectively and efficiently detect explosives , weapons , and other threat objects as well as individuals who may pose a threat to aviation security .

over the next several years , the tsa will likely face continuing challenges to address projected growth in passenger airline travel while maintaining and improving upon the efficiency and effectiveness of passenger and baggage screening operations .

addressing these challenges raises a number of significant policy issues related to allocating resources and funding passenger screening initiatives , adequately addressing human performance issues in the design of future passenger screening systems , and developing effective strategies for deploying next generation screening technologies .

the tsa faces a number of ongoing challenges to maintain and improve upon the effectiveness and efficiency of passenger screening functions .

these challenges include: addressing projected airline passenger traffic growth and its potential impacts on screening operations ; optimizing screening efficiency and throughput and minimizing passenger wait times ; identifying and addressing potential airport space constraints for screening checkpoints and equipment ; improving the capability to detect explosives at passenger checkpoints as recommended by the 9 / 11 commission and called for in legislation ; developing strategic plans for addressing identified technology and human factors needs related to passenger screening ; and defining funding requirements to implement these strategic plans .

there are numerous policy issues regarding the strategies and approaches for addressing these ongoing challenges .

some of the key issues are briefly discussed below .

the aviation security system is a human system involving extensive reliance on human perception , performance , decision making , and judgment .

this is particularly true with regard to checkpoint screening functions where passenger and carry - on screening involve human resource intensive activities to detect and resolve potential threat items .

an underlying challenge related to proposed checkpoint expansion and enhancements is addressing ongoing human performance concerns to improve the detection of dangerous items at checkpoints and incorporate human factors considerations in the design and operator training for next generation checkpoint technologies and procedures .

screener performance is a continuing concern as covert testing results have repeatedly demonstrated existing weaknesses in screening procedures and capabilities that could potentially be exploited by terrorists or criminals seeking to attack the aviation system .

these weaknesses may reflect a combination of policies , procedures , technology capabilities , and screener human performance , although weakness in screener human performance has been emphasized as a particular concern which can be affected by various factors .

a wide range of human factors considerations pertaining to screening procedures , training , fatigue and alertness , human perception and detection capabilities , and judgment and decision making can have a significant effect on the overall effectiveness of passenger checkpoint screening as well as baggage screening operations .

passenger checkpoint screening activities at all passenger airports are carried out by about 30,000 screeners who make up about 60-65% of the total tsa screener workforce .

the humans that operate the system , particularly the screening workforce , have long been regarded as a potentially highly fallible and vulnerable element of the aviation screening system .

this should not be construed as a reflection on the dedication and commitment of individual screeners to performing this critical job function .

rather it reflects a combination of the complex challenges faced by screeners , limitations in human perception and performance , resourceful adversaries who may employ artful concealment methods , and competing job pressures to accurately detect threat objects while maintaining an efficient flow of passengers through security checkpoints .

adversaries seeking to carry out hijackings or bombings by carrying explosive devices , bomb making components , or handheld weapons through screening checkpoints may attempt to exploit various limitations on human perception and performance that may compromise security .

a variety of factors may contribute to these human performance limitations , including inadequate training , lack of motivation and job satisfaction , fatigue , and workplace conditions , as well as general human perception and performance limitations .

balancing individuals' rights and expectations of privacy with screening effectiveness is a human performance challenge .

criminals and terrorists have been known to conceal items in private areas of the body , especially in the small of the back above the buttocks and high on the thigh .

screeners are to carefully inspect these areas during pat downs to adequately check for dangerous items .

also , underwire bras can set off magnetometers , and bras have been used to conceal dangerous items .

one of the most intrusive and most controversial aspects of secondary screening is the use of pat - down inspections to check selected passengers or to resolve magnetometer alarms .

specific complaints over pat - down techniques have centered on allegations of inappropriate touching and unprofessional or rude conduct by screeners .

more general complaints have focused on privacy concerns and perceptions that the pat - down procedures were intrusive and humiliating .

a 2005 , dhs oig investigation and audit of pat - down screening procedures found that the tsa adequately advised passengers of their rights under the pat - down procedures , and appropriately accommodated those rights .

the dhs oig also found that tsa screeners were adequately trained in pat down inspection procedures and , based on tsa records , additional screening procedures were performed on proportionate numbers of male and female passengers .

finally , the dhs oig found that the tsa had implemented procedures to investigate and resolve passenger complaints regarding the screening process .

the tsa maintains a screening performance management information system ( pmis ) where recorded complaints are logged .

operations research analysis teams and federal security directors review complaints logged in the database to track trends and identify areas of concern and take appropriate actions , including possible disciplinary actions , to resolve specific issues .

complaints involving allegations of discrimination based on color , race , gender , religion , or national or ethnic origin are forwarded to the tsa's office of civil rights for further investigation .

despite considerable concern raised by some regarding inappropriate behavior during pat - down screening procedures , the dhs oig found no systematic problems with the technique .

nonetheless , privacy groups , such as the american civil liberties union ( alcu ) , continue to express concern over potential intrusion on individual rights and alleged cases of sexual harassment and abuse of passengers , particularly female passengers , by tsa screeners .

these concerns , however , raise a significant challenge for the tsa: to maintain high levels of security , which necessitate resolving all alarms and screening in detail those passengers ascertained to pose an elevated security risk , while maintaining the privacy rights and dignity of passengers identified for these secondary screening measures .

the principal option under consideration for addressing these concerns is the use of whole body imaging technologies , discussed below .

while these technologies offer a potential alternative to pat - down screening techniques , they too , raise privacy concerns because the images generated by these systems can reveal private areas , physical characteristics that individuals may wish to keep private , as well as prosthetics and other assistive medical devices .

in the fast - paced environment of the passenger checkpoint , pat - down searches may be rushed and certain areas may be overlooked .

the difficulty in detecting threat items on passengers is compounded by the requirements to respect the privacy of individuals discussed above , as well as social and cultural norms and individual differences regarding interpersonal contact and expectations of privacy and modesty .

some have also noted cultural sensitivities toward handicapped and disabled individuals and point out that screeners are sometimes hesitant to perform intrusive searches , particularly on individuals wearing various prosthetics .

terrorists and criminals can and have exploited these aspects of individual privacy by concealing prohibited items in body cavities and near private areas of their bodies , and could also exploit a screener's reluctance to perform thorough searches of prosthetic devices .

covert testers also use these methods to conceal simulated threat items in an effort to test screeners' abilities to detect items under real - world conditions and identify vulnerabilities in checkpoint screening that can potentially be reduced through procedural modifications and / or changes to screener training .

these covert tests have revealed weaknesses in screener performance to detect weapons , simulated explosives , and components of explosive devices .

much of the concern over the performance of airport screening operations has arisen from information that has been made public regarding the results of covert testing operations .

covert testing using rudimentary mock bombs and guns started soon after screening checkpoints were first established in the early 1970s .

following the bombing of pan am flight 103 in december 1988 , the faa began more sophisticated "red team" tests to identify weaknesses in screening performance and other aspects of aviation security .

the term red team harkens back to the cold war era military exercises where red teams – so designated in reference to the soviet union's red flag and the association of red with communist groups – adopted strategies and tactics of an enemy force in simulations and war games .

the use of aviation security red team testing was suspended for a period of time following the 9 / 11 attacks , largely over concerns that red team practices could potentially put testers in danger or cause significant panic among passengers because of the acute focus on aviation security and the lingering public fear following the attacks .

in 2003 , the tsa's office of internal affairs and program review ( oiapr ) resumed covert testing of passenger screening checkpoints , checked baggage screening operations , and airport access control measures .

at present , this function falls under the responsibility of the tsa's office of investigations ( tsa - oi ) .

in addition to nationwide covert testing conducted by the tsa - oi , federal security directors ( fsds ) at each airport are to perform local covert testing .

the local testing was initially called the screener training exercises and assessments ( stea ) , but is now known as the aviation screening assessment program ( asap ) and has been revamped to better reflect the types of threat objects that may be used by terrorists based on the latest intelligence and threat information .

while specific performance metrics for covert testing are considered security sensitive , various media reports of test results suggest that failure rates are often quite high , particularly with respect to screeners missing simulated improvised explosive devices and explosive components .

for example , it has been reported that during tests conducted in 2006 , tsa screeners missed fake bombs 75% of the time at los angeles international airport ( lax ) , and 60% of the time at chicago o'hare airport ( ord ) .

the tsa contends that the results , on the surface , appear discouraging , but are a reflection of highly sophisticated concealment methods being used by testers to uncover specific system vulnerabilities so that corrective action can be taken .

according to the tsa "... as security officers adapt and begin to consistently discover covert testing methods , testers start all over again , creating more difficult and harder - to - detect tests .

this years' long game of cat and mouse more closely simulates real terrorist probing and operations and keeps officers alert and informed of the latest techniques and improvements. .

the tsa points out that this type of testing is fundamentally different from the static , unchanging performance evaluations that were employed prior to the 9 / 11 attacks .

since the present day test protocols are constantly changing , the tsa has primarily used them to provide a snapshot of specific vulnerabilities in the system .

it has not systematically assessed whether screener performance is improving or getting worse over time , although it asserts that improvements have been made .

according to the tsa , the covert testing methods are primarily used as a tool for assessing and identifying areas where performance improvements are needed and are potentially achievable through additional training , operational emphasis , or procedural redesign .

the tsa plans to complete more than 2,500 covert tests of passenger screening checkpoints annually during fy2008 and fy2009 in an effort to continually identify vulnerabilities and take corrective action to improve checkpoint screening based on the latest intelligence and information regarding terrorist weapons and explosives that pose a threat to commercial aviation and methods for concealing these threat objects .

while specific test results are considered security sensitive information , it has been reported that current failure rates are comparable to those observed in 1987 when screeners failed to detect about 20 percent of concealed items during on - the - job performance testing .

however , the tsa asserts that the testing methods used at that time was in no way comparable to current covert testing methods .

concerns over advance warning given prior to covert testing and screener performance evaluations has been a longstanding issue .

while media reports have suggested that some recent tsa covert tests were leaked to screeners , the tsa maintains that its procedures are designed to minimize the likelihood that screeners will be tipped off regarding a covert test operation , while providing appropriate notification to tsa airport level management and local law enforcement to ensure that the tests are conducted safely .

nonetheless , cases of screeners being tipped off regarding covert testing have been documented .

for example , in 2004 , the dhs ig found that screeners at the jackson - evers international airport in mississippi had been given information regarding upcoming covert tests , including details about the gender and race of the testers , the type of test items being used , and the location of test items on the tester and in carry - on and checked baggage .

also , it was revealed that in april 2006 , tsa headquarters staff used an internal electronic communications system to provide field level personnel with heads up information regarding possible covert testing operations , providing details regarding testing methods .

the tsa responded that it was investigating the allegations , but preliminary findings indicated that the internal communication regarding the testing was considered suspicious by a headquarters official who decided to forward it to federal security directors at airports across the country , but the email was recalled 13 minutes after it was sent .

based on these findings , the tsa concluded that the dissemination of information regarding the upcoming covert test did not appear to be a deliberate attempt to tip off screeners or screening supervisors .

former tsa administrator kip hawley testified that there was nothing to indicate that anyone within the tsa attempted to tip off airport security screeners regarding covert testing in this incident .

in addition to concerns over possible advance warning of covert tests , concerns have also been raised that the tsa does not have adequate processes in place to systematically document causes of covert testing failures and carry out appropriate remedial action .

a gao audit of tsa's covert testing programs , including covert testing of passenger screening , baggage screening , and airport access control systems , found that the tsa - oi has failed to systematically record , document , and inform management of causes for test failures as would be expected if federal government standards for internal control were fully implemented .

the gao further noted that the tsa lacks a systematic process to ensure that recommendations by tsa - oi are fully considered , and management decisions for adopting or rejecting these recommendations are appropriately documented .

while the tsa - oi made numerous recommendations to the tsa's office of security operations during the period reviewed ( march 2003-june 2007 ) , the gao found that often , in more than 40% ( 18 out of 43 ) of cases , tsa management either took no action or it was unclear how the action taken addressed the recommendation .

the lack of a formal process made it difficult to assess how the recommendations related to covert testing results , and in turn , how actions taken remedied problems identified by the tsa - oi .

the gao concluded that without such a process , the tsa's ability to strengthen aviation security based on the findings and recommendations of covert testers is limited , and it recommended that the tsa establish a system for documenting the results and recommendations stemming from covert testing and to track actions taken in response to these recommendations .

in addition to the internal covert testing by the tsa's office of inspections , both the department of homeland security office of inspector general and the gao independently conduct periodic audits and inspections of tsa screening functions that often include covert testing methods .

while many of the details of these audits are considered security sensitive , the results of these tests have provided congress and observers with important insights regarding the persisting vulnerabilities at airport passenger screening checkpoints .

most notably , in a series of covert tests conducted in 2007 , gao investigators demonstrated that , even when proper procedures were followed , checkpoint screening often failed to detect concealed explosives and components that could be used to construct an explosive device potentially capable of downing an airliner .

for these tests , the investigators constructed two improvised devices: an improvised explosive device ( ied ) , consisting of a liquid explosive that would be triggered by a low - yield detonator ( i.e. , a blasting cap ) ; and an improvised incendiary device ( iid ) , constructed from commonly available products including a liquid component .

the investigators obtained the materials to construct these devices at local stores and over the internet , spending less that $150 .

the investigators then employed various methods to conceal these items on their persons and in carry - on baggage , demonstrating that it is possible to pass either a constructed device or the components to build an ied or an iid through airport screening checkpoints without detection .

in all cases , screeners failed to detect or prohibit the carriage of ied and iid components , including liquid components .

the gao noted that the specific security weaknesses exploited in these covert tests , which were not divulged for security reasons , were identified by reviewing publicly available information , including information often shared through the internet and readily available to terrorist groups .

by exploiting these weaknesses , the investigators were able to pass these components , including banned liquid items , through various security checkpoints .

while the investigators were subjected to secondary screening for unrelated reasons in some instances , pat - down searches and other secondary screening methods failed to detect the improvised explosives or prohibited items .

in other instances , screeners challenged the investigators for failing to fully comply with various procedures , including procedures regarding permissible quantities and packaging of liquids .

the gao concluded that its "tests clearly demonstrate that a terrorist group , using publicly available information and few resources , could cause severe damage to an airplane and threaten the safety of passengers by bringing prohibited ied and iid components through security checkpoints. .

in reviewing these results , the tsa has acknowledged checkpoint vulnerabilities related to human performance , screening procedures , and checkpoint technologies .

the gao asserted that improvements in these areas may further reduce the risks to commercial aviation posed by ieds and iids .

while the gao's specific recommendations focusing on ways to improve screener detection of threat objects made to the tsa were not publicly divulged , the gao also urged the tsa to take the following actions to enhance checkpoint screening operations: establish dedicated airport screening lanes to handle those passengers posing an elevated risk and for those passengers with special needs ; introduce more aggressive , visible , and unpredictable checkpoint procedures , such as random pat - down and hand - wand screening ; and continue to develop new technology at checkpoints to better detect concealed items .

these recommendations for action reflect a continuing concern that , despite considerable investment in checkpoint screening technologies and personnel since the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , significant vulnerabilities persist in checkpoint screening operations .

in testimony before the house committee on homeland security on november 14 , 2007 , former dhs inspector general clark kent ervin stated that "[t]he sad fact is that for all the dollars and attention that has been focused on screener performance since 9 / 11 , study after study ... shows that it is just as easy today to sneak these deadly weapons past screeners [as] it was on 9 / 11. .

while ervin's conclusions have been somewhat controversial and widely disputed by the dhs and the tsa , his general recommendations parallel various initiatives put forward by congress and the bush administration to improve screener performance .

specifically , ervin recommended extensive training and frequent retraining of screeners under simulated real - world conditions ; remedial action for screeners and supervisors that fail performance tests and termination of those employees that habitually perform on a sub - par level ; and systemwide deployment of next generation screening technologies , such as whole body imaging and advanced x - ray systems .

these recommendations reflect specific needs for improvements in human factors and training for screening personnel as well as investment in screening technologies .

the tsa is actively pursuing an approach to address checkpoint screening technology and human factors through its recently launched checkpoint evolution initiative .

in addition to covert testing , which tests screener performance in detecting concealed threat items on passengers and in carry - on items under operational conditions , the performance of screeners that inspect x - ray images of carry - on items is routinely monitored and evaluated using a technology called threat image projection ( tip ) .

this technology provides the capability to overlay virtual , computer - generated , threat objects over x - ray images of passenger's screened property during normal screening operations or to present virtual images of baggage containing concealed threat items .

tip was first fielded by the faa in 1999 .

following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , tip was discontinued as an operational performance tool over concerns that screener responses to tip images would increase delays amidst the heightened focus on aviation security threats .

however , viewing the technique as a valuable operational testing and performance tool , the tsa reintroduced tip in 2003 using a greatly expanded database of threat images said to be more representative of weapons and concealment tactics that may be used by terrorists .

in comparison to the faa tip system prior to the 9 / 11 attacks which had about 200 images in its database , the tip system in use by the tsa today has over 2,000 images , with new images constantly being added based on identified threats and concealment methods identified through intelligence and field operations .

fielded x - ray equipment in use at screening checkpoints is tip - ready .

that is , these machines are designed to store and display tip database images , and are therefore referred to as tip - ready x - ray or trx equipment .

these systems are networked , and linked into tsa laboratories that create and distribute new tip imagery periodically based on intelligence regarding new threat items and concealment methods .

on trx equipment , images of weapons and explosives are projected on the x - ray images of actual bags being screened .

this is done for several purposes .

first , by providing periodic threat images to the screeners , the system promotes alertness and acts as a mitigation for boredom and complacency , two factors that can have a significant negative impact on human performance .

second , the ability to collect data regarding screening performance and screener sensitivity in real - world settings serves as an invaluable tool for human factors researchers studying screener performance .

for example , these researchers can look at performance as a function of time of day and time on shift , to optimize the scheduling of shifts and breaks for screeners .

researchers can also use the tip data to identify particular threat items or methods of concealment that are often missed , and in response can tailor recurrent screener training and re - qualification to emphasize and correct specific weaknesses , either on a systemwide , an airport - by - airport , or even on an individual screener level .

third , tip provides a quantifiable means to evaluate the performance of screeners at individual , work group , airport , or systemwide levels of analysis .

as such , it can be used to track progress over time and can be used to document deficient levels of individual performance that establish grounds for dismissal .

tip has been one of the most significant technology changes to carry - on screening since x - ray screening techniques were first implemented in the early 1970s , and directly addresses human performance aspects of checkpoint screening functions .

however , tip is limited in its scope and provides data on only one aspect of screening operations: screener preliminary threat identification of x - ray images .

tip does not provide data on whether proper procedures were carried out once a threat object was suspected and flagged by the x - ray screener , whether explosive trace detection ( etd ) systems were properly used to conduct secondary evaluations of suspected explosives , and so on .

also , tip does not provide any data on the screening of passengers themselves or their checked baggage ; it only provides data on the screening of carry - on baggage .

nonetheless , tip is widely regarded as an important screener evaluation tool , and it will likely remain an integral part of advanced technology ( at ) x - ray equipment deployment in the future .

current generation x - ray systems provide significantly higher resolution than systems that were deployed at airports in the 1990s and prior .

however , these systems only provide a single view angle , typically an overhead view , of screened items .

nonetheless , in addition to increased image resolution , image coloration and other image enhancement features allow screeners to more easily differentiate organic and metallic materials and provide the capability to use color contrast to better differentiate certain elements of the x - ray image .

for example , the coloration allows organic materials to stand out from inorganic materials making it easier to detect dense organic matter that may be indicative of an ied , and provides differential coloration of metals to allow for easier detection of metallic weapons .

in addition to selective coloration , newer x - ray systems allow for a wide array of image enhancement functions to highlight or turn off and declutter certain features in a process known as image "stripping. .

however , some research has shown that individual image enhancements do not necessarily improve ied detection compared to viewing of the original x - ray image , suggesting that the greatest advantage derived from current single - view x - ray systems may be their improved image resolution .

nonetheless , viewing multiple image enhancements in combination – such as stripping out organic items or metallic items , or displaying a negative image – can potentially help resolve image ambiguities and possibly improve detection .

while currently deployed x - ray systems have these capabilities , time pressures at busy screening checkpoints may often preclude detailed examination using various combinations of these image enhancement capabilities .

object orientation in the x - ray view is often a key determinant to whether an object will be recognized or detected .

prohibited items , such as guns and knives , presented at odd viewing angles can often be missed , even by highly trained screeners .

at present , the main tool to address detection performance of objects presented at difficult - to - recognize view angles is through the use of computer - based training using tip imagery of threat items presented at various view angles .

since threat object recognition and detection is a skill that is likely to continually improve with experience and exposure to both tip imagery and artfully concealed real - world threat items , retention of high - performing experienced x - ray screeners is likely to remain a key component of maintaining high levels of screening performance .

research has also shown that pre - employment screening to assess aptitude for interpreting x - ray images , recognizing objects and detecting prohibited items can substantially increase x - ray screening performance .

thus , with regard to establishing and maintaining effective x - ray image screening performance , it appears that a specific emphasis should be placed on screener selection and training , as well as initiatives to retain high - performing x - ray image screening personnel .

besides improvements in screener selection and training in methods of performing pat - down searches and interpreting x - ray images , addressing additional human factors issues related to the screener work setting – including fatigue , motivational factors , and environmental considerations , such as lighting , noise , and operations tempo – may also yield improvements in the ability to detect threat items and individuals with hostile intent .

with regard to advancements in screening technology , next generation advanced technology ( at ) x - ray systems are capable of providing multiple image views , usually two views that provide both a overhead view and a profile view of the x - rayed item .

some of these systems also incorporate computer image interpretation algorithms that automatically search for , and either highlight or alert the operator to , suspected threat items such as explosives and weapons .

these features , however , can often be viewed negatively by operators and can slow the screening process if they generate high numbers of false alarms or false positives .

the specific performance characteristics of at x - ray systems being acquired and deployed by the tsa , including information about their false alarm rates , is not publicly available , but remain important considerations in the selection of systems and system features for operational deployment .

policy considerations regarding the acquisition and deployment of at x - ray systems are further discussed in the section on " next generation checkpoint technologies . .

while the ability to detect threats is the primary metric for evaluating passenger checkpoint system performance , maintaining checkpoint efficiency has also been given a high priority .

however , the well documented phenomenon of speed - accuracy trade - offs in human performance highlight the fact that increasing system throughput can lead to missed threats and a deterioration of system effectiveness .

therefore , policymakers and aviation security strategists have generally focused on striking a balance between maintaining reasonable wait times and high levels of threat detection .

while research and engineering has focused on optimizing screening lane efficiency and effectiveness , longstanding wait time objectives have been set by policy , largely based on what is regarded as reasonable to expect by the traveling public .

to address the challenges of improving screening performance , enhancing the capability to detect explosives , and increase checkpoint efficiency and throughput , the tsa is testing new checkpoint concepts that integrate emerging screening technologies and address various operational and human factors needs .

in march 2008 , the tsa launched an initiative called checkpoint evolution encompassing a variety of planned improvements to airport screening checkpoints .

former tsa administrator kip hawley noted that "[t]his is the first significant change to the checkpoint since the 1970s," a reference to the fact that the layout of airport screening checkpoints in the united states , has remained relatively unchanged since they were first implemented in the early 1970s .

a checkpoint evolution team at the tsa has developed a prototype concept for the checkpoint of the future that is showcased on the tsa website .

the prototype future checkpoint concept entered operational testing and evaluation at baltimore washington international thurgood marshall airport ( bwi ) , in terminal b , which services southwest airlines , in april 2008 .

this prototype includes multiview at x - ray equipment , millimeter wave whole body imaging ( wbi ) portals used for continuous random screening , and liquid bottle scanners .

however , the investment strategy and deployment schedule for deploying various future checkpoint concepts currently under evaluation remains unclear .

in addition to potentially improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the screening process , proposed changes to the screening checkpoint may help reduce congestion at "soft target" locations such as airport lobbies .

various design elements of the proposed future checkpoint provide potential mitigation of the threat of explosives carried through the security checkpoint and possibly for the threat of shootings or bombings in and near the checkpoint queue .

by designing more streamlined queuing process , and queuing areas that are better separated from the public spaces in the airport terminal , the tsa hopes to achieve enhanced capabilities for surveillance and behavioral detection of potential threats of this kind .

the tsa is also seeking to implement methods to make the screening checkpoint a calmer , less chaotic environment in hopes that this will allow screeners and behavioral detection officers ( bdos ) to more easily spot suspicious behaviors .

former tsa administrator kip hawley noted that "[c]alm allows things to stand out more .

it creates a better environment to observe hostile intent. .

according to the tsa , a calmer checkpoint environment can also help to ease perceived time pressures and other distractions that may hinder screener performance .

elements of the future screening checkpoint queuing area design include mood lighting , soothing music , improved signage to direct and instruct passengers , and museum - style storyboards that convey personal stories of various tsa screeners .

in the prototype , panels and informational boards also function as barriers to better separate the checkpoint queue from the rest of the passenger terminal .

the queuing area also includes a "prep stop," giving passengers a location to discard or recycle any trash or prohibited items , such as beverages , and organize and bag other items prior to screening .

travel document checking stations , staffed by tsa document checkers , are to be positioned at the transition between the queue and the screening lanes .

in the screening lanes , various technologies and procedures to streamline the screening process are included in the future checkpoint concept .

for processing carry - on bags , the prototype system integrates an automatic conveyor and bin return system .

the proposed automated conveyor system is to have the capability to separate alarm items ( i.e. , suspicious items that require additional scrutiny ) from cleared carry - on items .

cleared items are to proceed down the conveyor to a collection area where passengers can gather their possessions .

one highlighted feature of the prototype system is the use of sensitive cameras in the collection area to identify and alert passengers when items , including items as small as coins , are left behind in the conveyor bins .

once the bins are emptied , the system would automatically return them via a reverse - direction conveyor belt to the beginning of the conveyor for reuse , thus eliminating the labor - intensive function of moving and stacking bins currently performed by tsos .

on the back end of the future checkpoint configuration , the tsa plans to install "re - composure benches," to allow passenger to reassemble their items that may have been removed or opened during the screening inspection process , and an "end zone" where travelers can regroup with their families or others traveling with them before proceeding to their boarding gate .

two significant challenges to implementing the proposed checkpoint evolution concept are acquisition and sustainment costs and airport space requirements .

the bush administration's budget request for fy2009 specified $11.5 million for checkpoint reconfiguration and expansion costs , matching fy2008 levels .

however , much of this has been slated for expanding the number of screening lanes at various airports across the country to meet the expected growth in passenger air travel rather than for reconfiguring existing screening lanes .

future funding needs to implement checkpoint evolution concepts beyond initial field testing is yet to be determined .

these checkpoint evolution concepts are currently being field tested in conjunction with other initiatives to deploy next generation checkpoint screening technologies aimed at addressing lingering concerns over the limited ability to detect explosives on passengers and in carry - on items .

since the early 1970s , passenger screening checkpoints have relied almost exclusively on the use of magnetometers , or walk - through metal detectors ( wtmds ) , as the sole means for primary screening for weapons or other prohibited or dangerous items being carried by passengers .

these machines induce pulsed magnetic fields and sense any interruption or disturbance in those fields , usually caused by the presence of metallic objects , as individuals pass through these fields .

these devices , however , are not capable of detecting explosives or nonmetallic threat items .

also , checkpoint screening of carry - on items for explosives , weapons , and other threats is carried out using x - ray systems are limited in their ability to assist human operators detect objects or make determinations regarding potential threat objects based on the x - ray image .

in its final report , the 9 / 11 commission recommended that "[t]he tsa and the congress must give priority attention to improving the ability of screening checkpoints to detect explosives on passengers. .

congress responded by including language in the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act ( p.l .

108-458 ) , directing the department of homeland security to "... give a high priority to developing , testing , improving , and deploying , at airport screening checkpoints , equipment that detects nonmetallic , chemical , biological , and radiological weapons , and explosives , in all forms , on individuals and in their personal property. .

the legislation also directed the tsa to develop a strategic plan for deployment of explosives detection equipment at airport checkpoints , including technologies such as walkthrough explosives detection portals , document scanners , shoe scanners , and x - ray backscatter devices .

these various technologies are discussed in further detail below .

the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007 ( p.l .

110-53 ) reiterated the requirement for developing this strategic plan , and also established a checkpoint screening security fund , requiring that $250 million collected from passenger and airline security fees be deposited in this fund in fy2008 .

funding for checkpoint support , which encompasses checkpoint technology acquisition has been maintained at the $250 million level for fy2009 ( see p.l .

110-329 ) .

over the past few years , the tsa has been field testing a wide variety of checkpoint technologies aimed at improving the screening of passengers and carry - on items , particularly to address the need for improving the detection of explosives at passenger checkpoints .

a summary of some of the key emerging checkpoint technologies that are now reaching technical maturity for field testing and deployment in airport settings is provided in table 1 .

a more comprehensive examination of screening technologies and technical approaches follows .

these technical approaches include explosives chemical trace detection methods ; whole body imaging systems ; advanced technology x - ray capabilities ; and other methods , such as computed tomography ( ct ) - based explosives detection systems ( eds ) and the use of magnetic resonance imaging ( mri ) technologies for detecting explosives and other threat objects in carry - on items .

the lack of mandatory screening for airport workers has been an issue of debate for some time .

at most airports , identification checks , along with random or targeted screening , are used in lieu of 100% physical screening for airport workers .

it has been estimated that nationwide about 600,000 such workers access secured areas of airports each day .

in 2003 , representative defazio expressed particular concern over these practices , noting that this lack of checkpoint screening of airport workers creates vulnerabilities in which workers , or individuals with counterfeit or stolen worker identification , could pass threat objects into secured airport areas or travel on aircraft without security screening by using electronic tickets .

the tsa and airport operators have voiced concerns that full checkpoint screening of airport workers would be very time consuming and would significantly impact limited security screening resources and tsa's ability to process airline passengers through screening checkpoints .

while procedures vary from airport to airport , prior to 2007 , only miami international airport had implemented a system requiring 100% physical screening of all airport workers accessing secured areas .

however , a security incident in the spring of 2007 brought the issue to national attention .

on may 5 , 2007 , the tsa was alerted to possible weapons on board a delta airlines flight from orlando , florida to san juan , puerto rico after orlando police received a tip from their anonymous crime hotline .

the tsa ordered that the flight be reverse - screened upon arrival in san juan .

in other words , all passengers , carry - on items , and checked baggage were screened again as the passengers disembarked in san juan .

the search unveiled 14 guns – 13 semiautomatic handguns and a .22 caliber rifle – and eight pounds of marijuana in a carry - on bag toted by a comair employee traveling on the flight .

he and others accomplices , also employees of comair in orlando , were able to smuggle these items onboard the airplane because their access credentials allowed them to bypass passenger screening checkpoints .

the incident highlighted the long debated insider threat posed by airline employees that are not routinely screened before accessing sterile and secure areas of airports .

following the incident , the tsa ramped up employee screening and security measures .

however , neither the tsa nor congress has required airports to implement 100% screening of all airport employees .

as noted above , only miami international airport had a program in place prior to this incident to screen 100% of airport employees accessing secured areas .

following the incident , orlando international airport implemented a similar program .

however , at other airports , screening is conducted only on certain airport workers or , more typically , is done on a random basis , if at all .

the tsa is currently testing various techniques for random and targeted screening of airport workers accessing secured areas of airports under its aviation direct access screening program ( adasp ) .

the adasp was initiated in july 2006 , and according to the tsa , the program places an emphasis on unpredictable , random screening of airport employees , items carried by them , and vehicles passing through airport access points .

the airports council international - north america ( aci - na ) asserts that the random , unpredictable nature of worker screening under the adasp will make it difficult for terrorists to ascertain and exploit operational patterns .

moreover , the tsa emphasizes that its personnel can be "surged" on very little notice to step up airport worker screening in response to threat intelligence or other indicators of heightened risk .

therefore , both the tsa and the industry support the risk - based , random screening concept being developed under the adasp as opposed to a more costly and resource intensive effort to conduct 100% screening of airport employees , similar to what was implemented in miami and orlando .

as noted above , both miami international airport ( mia ) and orlando international airport ( mco ) have implemented full screening programs for airport workers , requiring all those accessing sterile and secured areas to undergo physical inspection .

additionally , a trial program at boston logan international airport ( bos ) requires 100% physical screening of airport workers and vehicles accessing the airfield .

while 43 tsa screeners were added to staff five airfield checkpoints at bos , an airport official speculated that a full - time requirement to screen all airport workers at airport perimeter checkpoints and at designated terminal checkpoints prior to accessing sterile area may require as many as 1,300 additional tsa screeners at bos alone .

however , it is important to point out that , unlike the statutory requirement for tsa screening of passengers , no such requirement exists for airport worker screening , so this function could be conducted by private screening vendors .

in any case , system - wide implementation of 100% airport worker physical screening may require tens of thousands of new screener personnel , whether they be tsa screeners or private screeners .

the tsa maintains that through a layered security approach – relying on extensive background checks , access controls , surveillance , and law enforcement presence at airports – adequate security can be established and no specific need for 100% screening of all airport workers has been identified .

the tsa believes that stepped up random screening of workers can provide an additional layer of security to augment these other longstanding layers of airport security .

in addition to random selection techniques , additional steps are under consideration , including the use of behavioral profiling techniques for targeting physical inspections of airport workers .

for example , at several florida airports and in san juan , puerto rico , the tsa has augmented the adasp program with saturation security teams ( ssts ) that rove through sterile and secure areas of airports using behavioral observation techniques to evaluate and select airport workers for on - the - spot random inspections .

the tsa has also been mulling the idea of creating a voluntary program , allowing certain "certified employees" that undergo more extensive background checks to be exempt from routine , but not random , inspections .

some familiar with airport operations observe that certain categories of workers , such as maintenance workers , who must routinely pass into and out of sterile and secured areas , often carrying tools , knives , and other dual - use items that could be used as a deadly weapon .

repeatedly screening such individuals throughout the day may be labor intensive and arguably ineffective against preventing certain kinds of weapons from being carried into sterile and secured areas .

additional background checks and vetting of these workers may provide an option for exempting them from routine screening every time they access sterile and secured areas of airports .

while the tsa has been testing various procedures for screening airport employees , it has also moved forward to develop a system for validating the identity of airline crews as a means for sterile area access in lieu of physical screening at security checkpoints .

the 9 / 11 act ( p.l .

110-53 ) required the tsa to assess the feasibility of creating a credentialing and identity verification system to allow airline flight crews access to the sterile areas of airports , and if feasible , initiate implementation of such system .

since the 9 / 11 attacks , flight and cabin crews have been required to undergo physical screening at airport checkpoints , largely over concerns that terrorists or criminals could gain access to secured areas of airports or to air carrier aircraft by impersonating airline crew members , particularly pilots .

pilots and flights attendants and organizations representing these groups have complained that while they were required to pass through screening checkpoints whenever accessing sterile areas of airports , other airport and airline workers have been allowed to bypass screening , pointing out that pilots and flight attendants were subject to the same background checks as airline workers .

nonetheless , the tsa had expressed specific concerns about the level of access pilots , as well as flight attendants , had to aircraft and cockpits , fearing that an imposter dressed as an airline crew member could gain access allowing them to sabotage or hijack an aircraft if such an individual were allowed to bypass screening checkpoints .

similar concerns had also been raised about allowing crew members from other airlines from riding on the cockpit jumpseat .

prior to the 9 / 11 attacks , it had been a longstanding industry practice to allow flight crew personnel from other airlines to ride in the cockpit as a means of transportation to position pilots , and sometimes flight attendants , for their flight assignments .

most major airlines had reciprocal agreements with the other airlines to allow for this .

however , after the 9 / 11 attacks , the practice was terminated because there was no industry - wide system to authenticate the credentials of flight crews from other airlines .

airline crews were , therefore , often required to fly standby on a space - available basis to commute to and from their flight assignments .

as a result of an industry need to provide jumpseat access privileges on other airlines' aircraft in order to maintain efficient crew positioning , an industry - wide database called the cockpit access security system ( cass ) was developed .

it was field tested beginning in 2003 and received tsa approval for full operational deployment in september 2005 .

this database is maintained by arinc , inc. using human resources data provided by the individual airlines .

the system provides gate agents identity verification of flight crew members by transmitting an up - to - date photograph and background information to compare to employee credentials using a secure internet - based interface .

for the sterile access area testing , the tsa has leveraged the investment in the development of cass .

for flight crew sterile area access , called crewpass , the system relies on secure internet access to the cass database via tsa checkpoint computer terminals positioned at exit lanes to validate the identity of airline flight crew members .

the testing is being conducted at bwi , pittsburgh international airport , and columbia ( s.c. ) metropolitan airport , and it is currently limited in participation to uniformed flight crew members .

further evaluation of the program , including whether to extend participation to cabin crew members , is to be made based on the results of this testing .

the tsa is continuing to study ways to further enhance airline crew identity validation , and is assessing how this program may be able to enhance security by reducing the number of individuals requiring physical screening , allowing screeners and behavioral detection officers to better focus their efforts on detecting suspicious items and suspicious behaviors .

nonetheless , flight crew members participating in crewpass are subject to random screening and behavioral observation .

additionally , in september 2008 , the tsa launched a separate test of a biometrics - based access control system for flight crews .

the system , known as securescreen , is being tested on about 200 southwest airlines pilots based at bwi airport .

the pilots participating in the testing are being issued biometric identity cards that store fingerprint , digital photograph , and personally identifiable security information .

card readers have been installed at tsa security checkpoints at bwi to verify pilot identities , allowing pilots to bypass routine security screening .

however , pilots participating in the test may still be subject to random or targeted screening as a secondary layer of security .

