although the appointment of the chairman of the national intelligence council ( nic ) does not require the advice and consent of the senate , the planned designation of retired ambassador charles freeman to the position in march 2009 focused attention on the nic by members of congress and by many in the public .

most believe congressional criticism was undoubtedly a factor in mr. freeman's ultimate decision to withdraw his name from consideration .

in may 2009 , then - director of national intelligence dennis c. blair announced the appointment of christopher a. kojm as nic chairman .

mr. kojm had earlier served as deputy director of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( the 9 / 11 commission ) , in the state department's bureau of intelligence and research , and as a professor of international affairs practice at george washington university .

the nic is responsible for the u.s. intelligence community's most authoritative assessments of major issues affecting the national security .

the nic is a component of the u.s. intelligence community that is not well known even though it is less shrouded in secrecy than most other intelligence offices .

inherent to intelligence efforts is analysis of data collected .

the first statutory responsibility of the dni is to ensure that national intelligence is provided to the president , department heads , military commanders , and the congress .

although this responsibility along with intelligence appropriations is sufficient to permit the dni to establish analytical offices , the national security act also specifically establishes the nic and defines its role at the center of the government's intelligence analysis efforts .

by law , the nic is to consist of "senior analysts within the intelligence community and substantive experts from the public and private sector , who shall be appointed by , report to , and serve at the pleasure" of the dni .

the senior analysts are known as national intelligence officers ( nios ) .

there is no statutory requirement that a chairman of the nic be designated .

the nic is to produce "national intelligence estimates for the united states government , including alternative views held by elements of the intelligence community. .

national intelligence estimates and other nic products are defined as setting forth the judgment of the intelligence community as a whole on a matter covered by such product .

members of the nic serve on a full - time basis as the senior intelligence advisers of the intelligence community to the rest of the federal government .

they are part of the office of the dni ( odni ) and are not assigned to any other intelligence agency .

by law the odni cannot be co - located with any other element of the intelligence community ; currently the odni headquarters is located in a separate building in the virginia suburbs of washington , dc .

in 2011 the nic consisted of a chairman , vice chairman , counselor , chief of staff , director of a strategic futures groups , and a senior advisor on global health security , in addition to some 14 nios .

currently , nio positions are responsible for the following geographic and functional areas: africa cyber issues east asia economic issues europe military issues near east north korea russia and eurasia science and technology south asia transnational threats weapons of mass destruction and proliferation western hemisphere at present , the national security act , as amended , provides that the dni appoints the members of the nic and they serve at his pleasure , unlike the preponderance of career analysts in the various agencies .

in recent years these appointments have been balanced among individuals who have served in the foreign service , the defense department , and the intelligence community , along with a number of persons from academic life or nongovernmental organizations .

none of the nic appointments require the advice and consent of the senate .

the responsibilities of the nic are further set forth in intelligence community directive number 207 , national intelligence council .

directive 207 requires that the nios , acknowledged experts in their areas of responsibility , provide intelligence assessments to the national security council , military decision - makers , and congress .

to accomplish this , nios may task agencies to provide analytical support .

they may also work with officials in the odni to establish requirements for collection efforts by the various agencies ( changing collection efforts can involve the major realignments of technical systems such as satellites ) .

the nic provides necessary preparatory and briefing materials for the dni in his capacity as head of the intelligence community .

there can be tension among these duties ; involvement in preparing national intelligence estimates ( nies ) and other assessments requires wide - ranging substantive expertise , participating in managing the collection effort requires detailed understanding of sophisticated technical systems , and providing staff support to the dni can be time - consuming .

in the past 15 years there has been a tendency to include more nios who have served in non - governmental positions in think tanks or universities along with ambassadors and retired military leaders .

some argue that such backgrounds help ensure the relevance of analytical products but do not necessarily provide the detailed understanding of the limitations of collection capabilities .

others maintain that it is only essential that nios understand which intelligence collection disciplines are most useful in answering which analytical questions and that detailed knowledge of technical systems is not required .

another potential danger is that the nios might become so committed to supporting the dni in meetings and testimony that they have insufficient time for more detailed analytical work .

the nic produces coordinated assessments of the intelligence community's views , including nies , the nic's "flagship product," that "provides the authoritative written judgments of the [intelligence community] on national security issues for the united states government. .

nies are initiated by senior civilian or military policymakers , congress ( by request or mandated in legislation ) , or by the nic itself .

after terms of reference are approved , the nic assigns analysts to produce a draft .

the nic evaluates the draft , which is subsequently forwarded to intelligence agencies .

representatives from the agencies then meet "to hone and coordinate line - by - line the full text of an nie. .

nies are reviewed by the dni and the heads of relevant intelligence community agencies .

once approved , nies are disseminated to the president and to senior executive branch officials and congress .

in general , the members of the nic are not public spokesmen for the intelligence community .

they may testify before congressional committees and give occasional public talks to think tanks or academic meetings , but they are not policymakers and are not charged with informing the public .

their work is essentially internal to the federal government .

on occasion some nies or specially prepared summaries are released to the public and become part of policy debates .

in december 2007 , an unclassified summary of an nie on iran's nuclear programs was released inasmuch as it included judgments at variance with an earlier assessment .

older nies of historical interest are occasionally published by cia's center for the study of intelligence or are included in the state department's foreign relations of the united states series .

the ultimate goal of the nation's intelligence effort is to assist policymakers in understanding conditions affecting our national security .

this is an achievable goal .

it is also to be hoped that analysts can provide warning of imminent threats , but this is not always achievable given the multitude of players and the variety of threats .

nevertheless , the members of the nic serve as "the senior intelligence advisors of the intelligence community for purposes of representing the views of the intelligence community. .

as such they have access to the full extent of information obtained by all u.s. intelligence agencies and they have access to all intelligence analysts in the government .

they will in addition hopefully have understanding of ways that a particular issue fits into the entire international environment .

although any able analyst who spends years on a narrow issue may have unique insights , the nios should be able to provide the sense of context and a degree of perspective that comes from the service on the nic .

most observers would probably agree that the role and missions of the nic and of the national estimative process have not yet been fully developed .

the nic supports the dni and reflects the views of the intelligence community in interagency discussions .

they keep abreast of the work of intelligence agencies in their subject areas .

they must avoid the classic temptations of either preparing academic treatises unrelated to policymaker concerns or becoming so close to the policy dialogue that they are unable to provide perspective or to offer evidence that might undermine the chosen policies of a given administration .

few nios or chairs of the nic in recent years have fully met the outlines of the position as envisioned by earlier intelligence leaders or by the drafters of statutory language regarding the nic .

as issues become more challenging and interrelated , the role of the nic may grow .

in addition , congress may perceive a need for increased scrutiny of nic products and for more extensive legislative branch oversight of the intelligence community's analytical efforts .

arguably congress can have a broadened role in supporting the nic .

congressional oversight can test analysts' conclusions from the multiple perspectives usually found within congressional committees .

the back - and - forth that may result from oversight hearings may be uncomfortable for analysts and nios , but , given the inherent uncertainties in most intelligence analysis and the importance of the issues at stake , some observers suggest that rigorous exchanges can serve the national interest and maintain that their absence in the past led to policy errors or unfairly exposed the intelligence community to ex post facto criticism .

all should recognize , however , that all intelligence is an intellectual activity that inevitably carries with it some degree of uncertainty .

appendix a .

50 u.s.c .

403-3b ( extract ) ( a ) national intelligence council there is a national intelligence council .

 ( b ) composition ( 1 ) the national intelligence council shall be composed of senior analysts within the intelligence community and substantive experts from the public and private sector , who shall be appointed by , report to , and serve at the pleasure of , the director of national intelligence .

 ( 2 ) the director shall prescribe appropriate security requirements for personnel appointed from the private sector as a condition of service on the council , or as contractors of the council or employees of such contractors , to ensure the protection of intelligence sources and methods while avoiding , wherever possible , unduly intrusive requirements which the director considers to be unnecessary for this purpose .

 ( c ) duties and responsibilities ( 1 ) the national intelligence council shall - ( a ) produce national intelligence estimates for the united states government , including alternative views held by elements of the intelligence community and other information as specified in paragraph ( 2 ) ; ( b ) evaluate community - wide collection and production of intelligence by the intelligence community and the requirements and resources of such collection and production ; and ( c ) otherwise assist the director of national intelligence in carrying out the responsibilities of the director under section 403-1 of this title .

 ( 2 ) the director of national intelligence shall ensure that the council satisfies the needs of policymakers and other consumers of intelligence .

 ( d ) service as senior intelligence advisers within their respective areas of expertise and under the direction of the director of national intelligence , the members of the national intelligence council shall constitute the senior intelligence advisers of the intelligence community for purposes of representing the views of the intelligence community within the united states government .

 ( e ) authority to contract subject to the direction and control of the director of national intelligence , the national intelligence council may carry out its responsibilities under this section by contract , including contracts for substantive experts necessary to assist the council with particular assessments under this section .

 ( f ) staff the director of national intelligence shall make available to the national intelligence council such staff as may be necessary to permit the council to carry out its responsibilities under this section .

 ( g ) availability of council and staff ( 1 ) the director of national intelligence shall take appropriate measures to ensure that the national intelligence council and its staff satisfy the needs of policymaking officials and other consumers of intelligence .

 ( 2 ) the council shall be readily accessible to policymaking officials and other appropriate individuals not otherwise associated with the intelligence community .

 ( h ) support the heads of the elements of the intelligence community shall , as appropriate , furnish such support to the national intelligence council , including the preparation of intelligence analyses , as may be required by the director of national intelligence .

 ( i ) national intelligence council product intelligence for purposes of this section , the term "national intelligence council product" includes a national intelligence estimate and any other intelligence community assessment that sets forth the judgment of the intelligence community as a whole on a matter covered by such product .

appendix b .

heads of the board of national estimates and the national intelligence council chairmen of the board of national estimates william langer 1950-1952 sherman kent 1952-1967 abbot smith 1968-1971 john huizenga 1971-1973 deputies to the dci for national intelligence officers george carver 1973-1976 richard lehman 1976-1977 robert bowie 1977-1979 chairmen of the national intelligence council richard lehman 1979-1981 henry rowen 1981-1983 robert gates 1983-1986 frank horton iii , 1986-1987 fritz ermarth , 1988-1993 joseph nye 1993-1994 christine williams 1994-1995 richard cooper 1995-1997 john gannon 1997-2001 john helgerson 2001-2002 robert hutchings 2002-2005 c. thomas fingar 2005-2008 peter lavoy 2008-2009 christopher kojm 2009- ( source: national intelligence council ) .

