recent congresses have considered legislation to establish a national water commission modeled after the 1968-1973 national water commission ( nwc ) .

interest in a commission stems from basic concerns about how water is being used to support the nation's people , economy , and environment , as well as the appropriate role of the federal government in water resources management .

questions about whether a commission would be effective at addressing the nation's water resources challenges and what topics it would be charged with have raised interest in assessing the status of recommendations in the nwc's 1973 final report , water policies for the future .

in its report , the commission made more than 200 recommendations for improving federal and state water resources actions .

as congress considers whether to establish a new "twenty - first century water policy commission," questions arise about the scope and effect of the 1973 nwc report .

after a brief introduction to u.s. water policy and the nwc , this report presents a general summary of the nwc report , its recommendations , and how these issues have evolved since 1973 .

the issues are organized into five categories: ( 1 ) " governance and institutional issues " ; ( 2 ) " water and the natural environment " ; ( 3 ) " "users pay" or "beneficiary pays" approach " ; ( 4 ) " improvements to water quality " ; and ( 5 ) " water rights . .

the remainder of this crs report provides greater detail on issues that fall under each of the five broad categories .

the report provides an overview of key issues and recommendations identified by the nwc ; it neither covers the entire nwc report nor provides an exhaustive assessment of progress made on commission recommendations .

in june 1973 , the national water commission completed its five - year term and published its final report , water policies for the future .

the commission found that many of the country's water policies were based on outdated goals and objectives ( eg , settlement of the west , territorial expansion of navigation ) and on flawed assumptions about future water needs .

the commission viewed itself as being at the cusp of a shift in water resources management , as the era of large dam construction and other large - scale development investments tapered off ; this put the commission in a unique position to take stock of past policies , assess implementation of then - current programs , and make recommendations for future federal , state , and local policies in water resource and water quality management .

the report was based on hundreds of documents , special studies contracted by the commission , eight public hearings , and other meetings conducted since its inception in 1968 .

early chapters of the report describe the long history of water resource development and federal activities related to water supply and water quality , as well as water demand projections .

the following sections provide an overview and analysis of the commission's recommendations .

each section includes a brief discussion of issues identified by the commission , a listing of key recommendations , and a discussion of whether certain recommendations have been implemented .

in many cases , a discussion of how issues identified may have evolved is also included .

the commission found that future water requirements could not be fully assessed without taking into account how water resources are governed and what institutional structures guide their management , use , and allocation .

the commission emphasized that policy choices would greatly influence future water use and water "needs" or "requirements" — that future water "demands" would depend on multiple factors and future polices .

a persistent tendency of water resources planning has been the issuance of single valued projections of water use into the future under a continuation of present policies , leading to astronomical estimates of future water requirements... .

the amount of water that is actually used in the future will depend in large measure on public policies that are adopted .

the national water commission is convinced that there are few water "requirements.".. .

but there are "demands" for water and water - related services that are affected by a whole host of other factors and policy decisions , some in fields far removed from what is generally considered to be water policy .

with regard to government programs and institutions affecting water policy , the commission made many recommendations related to ( 1 ) water resources project planning and evaluation ; ( 2 ) accounting for the environment in project development ; ( 3 ) public participation in water resources planning ; ( 4 ) federal water resources coordination ; and ( 5 ) water resources authorization , budget and appropriations .

the commission's report ( primarily in chapter 2 ) addressed the environmental impacts of water projects and water resource agency activities .

the commission noted negative impacts ( eg , alteration of stream habitat ) as well as positive ones ( eg , recreational benefits of a reservoir ) .

it found that the federal government insufficiently addressed ecological processes and environmental values in its water project and permitting decisions .

yet the commission also noted that economic values and public safety often were at stake when choosing among water resource alternatives .

the commission identified three areas for improvement: understanding and predicting the primary environmental impacts of water programs , uses , projects , and their alternatives ; assessing the secondary and broader environmental effects of these actions ; and incorporating environmental values and processes into decision - making .

the report specifically discussed the environmental effects of reservoir development , flood policy , water development in estuarine and coastal ecosystems , water project effects on fish and wildlife , and channelization .

a related topic is the commission's recommendations for addressing fish and wildlife values in project planning .

the commission's overarching concern that environmental impacts be analyzed in the decision - making process also is addressed in "accounting for the environment in project development," above , which discusses implementation of nepa .

since 1973 , water resources development has slowed , and federal appropriations shifted from development to environmental preservation and operation and maintenance of infrastructure .

many of the concerns raised by the nwc have been addressed via implementation of environmental laws .

many large federal water actions are for ecosystem restoration and stream rehabilitation .

whether these changes and efforts have adequately addressed the commission's concerns is a matter of disagreement .

the degree to which development and environmental protection tradeoffs are evaluated and weighed remains central to many current water resources conflicts .

while progress has been made on many of the problems identified by the commission , few actions can be directly traced to the commission's 1973 recommendations .

instead , it appears that water policy has continued to evolve — albeit in some areas , much as the commission predicted — and that this evolution has had many underlying drivers , including but not limited to the findings of the commission .

many of the problems identified by the commission remain today .

project planning has moved away from the recommended multi - objective or river basin planning approach recommended by the commission .

water resource projects today are still largely authorized in piecemeal fashion , and water programs are rarely coordinated .

shifts in organizations and institutional arrangements since 1973 have reduced coordination of federal water agencies and planning .

available funding and political clout in some cases appear to be the significant factors in successfully pursuing projects , instead of overall benefits to the nation .

state - federal tensions over proper and respective roles and responsibilities in water resource development , management , and allocation , continue to cloud resolution to the most difficult water resource issues .

expectations for a commission to directly achieve changes in a system resistant to transformation may be unreasonable .

instead the influence of a commission may be how its recommendations combine with other drivers to create sufficient support for an evolution in policy .

signed into law on january 1 , 1970 , the national environmental policy act ( nepa ; p.l .

91-190 , 42 u.s.c .

§4321 et seq. ) .

declared a national policy to protect the environment .

to implement this policy , nepa requires federal agencies to provide a detailed statement of environmental impacts , subsequently referred to as an environmental impact statement ( eis ) , for every recommendation or report on proposals for legislation and other major federal action significantly affecting the quality of the human environment .

although nepa also created the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) in the executive office of the president , it did not authorize ceq to promulgate regulations to implement the eis requirement or to enforce the law .

nepa establishes the basic framework for integrating environmental considerations into federal decision making .

however , the law itself does not detail how this process should be accomplished .

with an initial absence of regulations specifying implementation procedures , and no agency authorized to enforce its requirements , federal agencies reacted in different ways to nepa's requirements .

in the 1970s , many agencies had difficulty complying with the law .

in addition to the courts , ceq played a significant role in determining how nepa would be implemented although it had no enforcement authority .

during the 1970s , ceq issued non - binding guidelines for basic requirements of eis preparation .

ceq left nepa implementation largely to the federal agencies , which were to use the ceq guidelines to prepare their own procedures .

during the early 1970s , there were frequent complaints regarding the delays that the nepa process was perceived to cause .

some observers attributed these problems to a lack of uniformity in nepa implementation and uncertainty regarding what was required of federal agencies .

also , in response to increasing nepa - related litigation , agencies often produced overly lengthy , unreadable , and unused eiss .

in an effort to standardize an increasingly complicated nepa process , president carter directed ceq to issue regulations that would be legally binding on federal agencies ; final regulations became effective on july 30 , 1979 .

the ceq regulations were intended to be generic in nature .

each federal agency was required to develop its own nepa procedures that would be specific to typical classes of actions undertaken by that agency .

separately , ceq regulations directed federal agencies to review their existing policies , procedures , and regulations to ensure that they were in full compliance with the intent of nepa .

