concern about shareholder value , corporate governance , and the economic and social impact of escalating pay for corporate executives has led to a controversy regarding the practices of paying these executives .

in a stated attempt "to provide investors with a clearer and more complete picture of compensation to principal executive officers , principal financial officers [and] the other highest paid executive officers and directors," the securities and exchange commission ( sec or commission ) issued rules in 2006 concerning the disclosure of executive compensation .

the rules , however , have created a controversy of their own .

separate from the sec , congress has also examined ways to address concerns relating to executive compensation .

both the 110 th and 111 th congresses enacted significant legislation with executive compensation provisions .

in tax law , executive compensation is limited by either denying the payer a deduction for a payment to an executive or by imposing a tax on either the payer or the payee .

the former is used as a means of limiting salary deductions .

both are used to limit "golden parachutes. .

provisions to limit executive compensation , including golden parachute payments , have existed within the internal revenue code ( irc ) for many years ; however , new provisions affecting entities receiving funds from the troubled assets relief program ( tarp ) were introduced in the 110 th congress by the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ) .

these provisions have some similarities to the earlier provisions in the code , but differ sufficiently that the eesa provisions will be described separately from the earlier provisions , which are still in effect for publicly held corporations that have not received tarp funds .

eesa and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ) also introduced restrictions outside of the irc on golden parachute payments .

these are discussed in the corporate governance section of this report .

in 2005 , congress enacted the bankruptcy abuse prevention and consumer protection act of 2005 ( bapcpa ) .

although many of its most publicized changes involved consumer bankruptcies , bapcpa also made changes to business bankruptcies .

among the changes was a new subsection that limited the extent to which "key employee retention plans" ( kerps ) could be paid as administrative expenses of the debtor .

this restriction generally is more applicable in chapter 11 reorganizations than in chapter 7 liquidations , but is not limited to chapter 11 .

chapter 11 reorganizations are designed to allow the debtor to remain in possession of the business and continue to operate the business while negotiations are conducted with creditors .

generally , a trustee is not appointed .

the legislative history of the bankruptcy act of 1978 indicates that chapter 11 presumes that reorganization is apt to be more successful if the debtor's management leads it through the reorganization and that the continuity of business operations will benefit both the creditors and the public .

prior to bapcpa , kerps were used to provide retention bonuses and severance pay to management employees who remained with the debtor business to manage it through its reorganization .

however , there was a perception that kerps were being abused to favor insiders .

this perception of abuse led to bapcpa's restrictions on retention pay and bonuses as administrative expenses in a bankruptcy .

administrative expenses have a high statutory priority in bankruptcy and generally must be paid before other priority claims as well as non - priority unsecured claims .

as a result of bapcpa , administrative expenses generally cannot include either allowances or payments of inducements to remain with the debtor company if those inducements are transfers to an insider of the debtor or obligations incurred for the benefit of the insider .

the bankruptcy code does establish standards under which such inducements may be allowed or paid .

however , there is some question as to whether the standards can realistically be met within the context of a pending bankruptcy .

to be allowed , the court must find , based on evidence in the record , that ( 1 ) the inducement "is essential to retention of the person because the individual has a bona fide job offer from another business at the same or greater rate of compensation" and ( 2 ) the person's services are "essential to the survival of the business. .

in addition , the court must compare the amount of the inducement to other similar transfers or obligations to nonmanagement employees , for any purpose , within the same calendar year .

to be allowed , the inducement to the insider may be no more than 10 times the mean of the nonmanagement transfers or obligations .

in the case where there have been no similar transfers or obligations to nonmanagement employees within the calendar year , the amount of the insider's inducement must be no more than 25% of any similar transfer or obligation , for any purpose , benefiting the insider during the previous calendar year .

severance payments to insiders may be allowed as administrative expenses in a post - bapcpa bankruptcy only if "the payment is part of a program that is generally applicable to all full - time employees. .

such a payment will not be allowed if it is more than 10 times the mean severance pay for nonmanagement employees during the same calendar year .

bapcpa further prohibited other transfers and obligations benefitting officers , managers , or consultants who were hired post - petition if made "outside of the ordinary course of business and not justified by the facts and circumstances of the case. .

since bapcpa's passage , there has been a move toward paying managers incentive payments , which are not restricted .

though some of these incentive pay schemes have been rejected by the courts as actually being retention bonuses that did not meet bapcpa's requirements , others have been upheld as incentive bonuses and , therefore , not subject to the restrictions imposed by the post - bapcpa bankruptcy code .

recent congresses have offered a number of proposals concerning executive compensation .

some of these involve additional disclosure of executive compensation to shareholders .

recently , several proposals have been made involving tarp recipients .

other areas in which bills involving executive compensation have been introduced include tax and bankruptcy .

bills introduced in the 111 th congress on executive compensation include s. 1074 , which would apply a say - on - pay rule to all publicly traded companies , and s. 1006 , which would require 60% of shareholders to give their approval to pay packages larger than 100 times the average annual compensation of a company's employees .

the house committee on financial services circulated a discussion draft of h.r .

3269 , the corporate and financial institution compensation fairness act of 2009 .

the draft had four major parts: say - on - pay , independent compensation committee , incentive based compensation disclosure , and compensation standards for financial institutions .

on july 31 , 2009 , the house passed an amended version of the bill .

section 2 of the house - passed bill , concerning shareholder votes on executive compensation disclosures , would amend section 14 of the securities exchange act by adding subsection ( i ) , which would require every annual shareholder meeting to have a separate shareholder vote to approve the compensation of executives .

the shareholder vote would not be binding and could not be construed as overruling a decision made by the board of directors .

in addition , any proxy or consent solicitation material in which shareholders are asked to approve an acquisition , merger , consolidation , or proposed sale of an issuer would have to disclose any agreements or understandings that executive officers have concerning compensation based upon the acquisition , merger , consolidation , or sale of the issuer , so - called golden parachute agreements .

there would have to be a nonbinding shareholder vote on this compensation .

every institutional investment manager would be required to disclose how it voted on executive compensation and golden parachutes .

the sec could exempt certain categories of issuers from the shareholder vote requirements and , in determining these exemptions , would need to take into account the potential impact upon smaller companies .

section 3 of the house - passed bill would require that every national securities exchange or association prohibit the listing of equity securities of an issuer not having a compensation committee of the board of directors .

every member of the compensation committee would have to be independent , meaning that he or she could not accept any consulting , advisory , or other compensatory fee from the issuer .

a compensation committee would have the authority to retain a compensation consultant and independent counsel .

a compensation consultant or other adviser to an issuer's compensation committee would have to meet the independence standards established by the sec by regulation .

section 4 of the house - passed bill would require federal regulators to issue regulations requiring covered financial institutions to disclose the structures of all incentive - based compensation arrangements offered by the institutions so as to determine whether the structures are aligned with sound risk management , structured to consider risks over time , and meet other criteria to reduce unreasonable incentives offered to employees to take excessive risks that could threaten the safety and soundness of financial institutions or could have adverse effects upon economic conditions or financial stability .

the federal regulators covered are the board of governors of the federal reserve system , the office of the comptroller of the currency , the board of directors of the federal deposit insurance corporation , the director of the office of thrift supervision , the national credit union administration board , the securities and exchange commission , and the federal housing finance agency .

covered financial institutions are a depository institution or depository institution holding company , a broker - dealer , a credit union , an investment adviser , the federal national mortgage association , the federal home loan mortgage corporation , and any other financial institution that the federal regulators determine should be treated as a covered financial institution .

the comptroller general would be required to carry out a study to determine whether there is a connection between compensation structures and excessive risk taking .

bills concerning executive compensation limits have been introduced in the 111 th congress .

among these bills are h.r .

851 , which would require any institution provided with assistance under the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 to meet standards for executive compensation and corporate governance , and h.r .

857 and s. 360 , which would prohibit any officer or employee of an entity receiving funds under tarp from being compensated more than the president of the united states .

with the acknowledgment by aig of the payment of bonuses to a number of its employees , bills have been introduced to recover at least some of the bonuses paid .

these bills would use different ways of recovering the bonuses .

for example , h.r .

1575 would authorize the attorney general to recover excessive compensation paid by entities which have received federal financial assistance on or after september 1 , 2008 .

h.r .

1664 , passed by the house , would amend the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 to prohibit unreasonable and excessive compensation and compensation not based on performance standards paid by companies receiving direct capital investments of taxpayer money .

a bill that would limit the deductibility of employee compensation for all employers , corporate or noncorporate , was introduced in the 111 th congress .

h.r .

1594 proposed limiting the deduction for compensation paid to an employee in excess of the greater of $500,000 or "an amount equal to 25 times the lowest compensation for services performed by any other full - time employee during such taxable year. .

since it applies to all employers and is not limited to a few top executives , the provision is broader than either the § 162 ( m ) provisions in eesa or the provisions that pre - date eesa .

following aig's bonus announcement in 2009 , both the house and senate introduced bills that would have imposed high taxes both retrospectively and prospectively on bonuses paid by entities receiving tarp funds or other federal emergency economic assistance after december 31 , 2007 .

h.r .

1586 , which was passed by the house , would have imposed a 90% income tax on the bonuses to the extent that the bonuses increased the recipient's adjusted gross income to more than $250,000 .

the 90% rate would have been instead of , rather than in addition to , the taxpayer's regular income tax rate .

other taxable income would be taxed at the regular tax rates .

s. 651 proposed imposing an excise tax on "excessive bonuses. .

the 35% excise tax would be imposed on both the payer and the recipient resulting in a total 70% of the bonuses being paid as excise tax .

the excise tax would have been in addition to , rather than instead of , the recipient taxpayer's normal income tax rate .

in the 109 th congress , h.r .

5113 and its companion s. 2556 proposed expanding the prohibition on retention payments introduced by bapcpa as 11 u.s.c .

§ 503 ( c ) .

the bills would have included performance and incentive payments and other bonuses as well as "any other compensation enhancement. .

the bills would also have extended the reach of 11 u.s.c .

§ 503 ( c ) ( 3 ) to include payments made within the ordinary course of business as well as those outside of the ordinary course of business .

in the 110 th congress , h.r .

3652 and its companion s. 2092 also proposed expanding the general restrictions on retention payments to include both performance and incentive payments , but went on to include "bonus[es] of any kind , or other financial returns designed to replace or enhance incentive , stock , or other compensation in effect" before the bankruptcy petition was filed .

the proposed modifications to § 503 ( c ) of the bankruptcy code also extended paragraph 503 ( c ) ( 3 ) to payments made within the ordinary course of business .

the bills also proposed restricting compensation to officers and directors of the reorganized debtor , making the compensation subject to court approval as reasonable when compared to compensation paid to others in the industry in similar positions at similar jobs .

however , even if found reasonable , to be approved the compensation could not be disproportionate when compared to economic concessions from nonmanagement workforce during the bankruptcy case .

the bills also included a number of provisions that would indirectly limit executive compensation by linking it to compensation provided to other employees .

crs anticipates that bills will be introduced in the 111 th congress addressing further limitations on executive compensation for companies involved in chapter 11 bankruptcies , but , as of the date of this report , no such bills have been found .

however , although it did not propose a change to the bankruptcy code , h.r .

1575 , discussed in the section on " proposals to impose limitations on tarp recipients ," incorporated language similar to that in § 548 of the bankruptcy code , which addresses fraudulent transfers .

 table a - 1 lists selected provisions in federal law that address executive compensation .

some of these provisions are not discussed in the body of the report , but are listed here for reference .

executive compensation is used broadly in the context of this table to describe various types of compensation including retention payments and "golden parachutes. .

the table focuses on limitations on executive compensation in four areas of law: bankruptcy , banking , securities , and tax , but it includes some provisions outside those areas .

the table includes provisions from both the emergency economic stabilization act of 2008 ( eesa ; p.l .

110-343 ) and the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

eesa's provisions are listed as originally enacted , but with a notation if they have been modified by arra .

