in 2007 , pharmaceutical companies spent $4.774 billion on dtc advertising .

it was the first year such spending had declined , but it was still six times as much as the industry had spent in 1996 .

dtc advertising of prescription drugs attracted enough congressional attention to warrant at least six bills in the 110 th congress as well as concerns from members in the 111 th .

beyond the sheer size of this marketing operation , what are the issues that concern members ? .

what actions do critics propose — and supporters of dtc ads oppose ? .

is there common ground between both groups ? .

there is a spectrum of opinion about dtc ads .

proponents of dtc advertising say the ads: educate consumers about medical conditions ; alert them to treatments that exist ; fairly present risks as well as benefits ; detail non - drug approaches to improve health ; remind and motivate consumers to comply better with drug therapy regimes ; and help to de - stigmatize conditions .

critics of dtc advertising say the ads: minimize the risks of some medications while promoting their benefits ; lure patients into expensive drugs when cheaper ones work as well , thus increasing healthcare costs ; persuade patients to ignore other medications with fewer side effects and more established safety track records ; provide information that would be more credible coming from non - industry sources ; and are susceptible to marketing needs that interfere with objective presentations .

not all of these views necessarily conflict .

it is possible to educate about medical conditions and omit information about alternate therapies , for example .

as congress considers arguments for and against dtc advertising of prescription drugs , context becomes important .

all pharmaceuticals carry some risks .

human drugs , by their definition , are substances intended to affect the structure or function of the body .

consumers can take too much — or too little .

they can take drugs that interact with each other in ways not yet understood .

researchers do not know all risks at the time fda first approves a drug for marketing .

in fact , one effect of the 2005 controversy over vioxx was that it heightened public awareness of how incomplete the data really are before tens of thousands of consumers use a drug in real - life conditions , which include use beyond the carefully controlled limits of clinical trials .

scientists then attributed approximately 100,000 excess heart attacks and sudden cardiac deaths to an unanticipated cardiovascular side effect of that heavily advertised blockbuster drug and others in its class ( cox - 2 inhibitors developed to treat pain without the associated stomach side effects common to other nonsteroidal anti - inflammatory drugs ) before they were withdrawn from the market .

while critics and supporters of dtc ads sharply disagree on many things , people all along the spectrum often seem united in their belief that dtc ads should meet four criteria .

they must be: accessible .

we want consumers to have access to information that could — along with the treating physician — help them make the healthcare decisions they face .

to do so , the information must be understandable , accurate ( true ) , balanced , and up - to - date .

understandable .

although researchers — whether in academia , government , or industry — disagree about what it is that viewers need to learn from advertisements ( drug , brand , disease recognition ; risks ; benefits ; indication ) , they agree ads should present the information so that average americans can understand it .

accurate and up - to - date .

there is little disagreement about whether dtc ads should be accurate and up - to - date .

there is , however , disagreement about exactly what those terms mean .

when should ads change to include postmarket findings ? .

when risks or benefits vary by age or disease stage and other treatments , how much of these details should the ads present ? .

balanced .

most players in the debate acknowledge the need for some discussion of the balance between risks and benefits of a drug .

they often disagree over the breadth of comparisons ( for example , whether to consider other drugs or other treatments or cost ) or methods to use .

appearing on tv and radio , and in popular magazines and pop - up windows on the internet , dtc ads are an anomaly when it comes to federal regulation .

the federal trade commission ( ftc ) regulates most advertising in the united states .

in 1962 , however , congress assigned the regulation of prescription drug advertising to the food and drug administration ( fda ) .

in doing so , though , it did not give the agency enforcement authority similar to that granted to the ftc .

according to some critics of dtc ads , this has prevented effective oversight , and created a phenomenon more misleading than educational .

to other critics , however , fda's organizational structure , reliance on industry fees , and inadequate appropriations are more important factors in what they see as the agency's less than rigorous enforcement of law and regulation .

nevertheless , support for some form of dtc ads from industry and consumers is strong: industry wants to increase sales , and consumers want to actively participate in decisions about their own health .

that , combined with advances in information technology and possible relevance to constitutional protections of free speech , makes an outright ban on dtc ads unlikely .

the concerns about dtc ads already expressed by members of the 111 th congress are similar to those that have surfaced in the past .

interest in the 109 th congress was sparked by some members who had seen its growth and noted controversies over heavily advertised drugs such as vioxx .

senate and house committees in the 110 th congress considered drug safety bills that included restrictions on dtc advertising .

the food and drug administration amendments act of 2007 ( fdaaa , p.l .

110-85 ) included some of those provisions , such as new industry fees for the advisory review of dtc television ads ; expanded authority of the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to require certain disclosures and statements ; and civil monetary penalties for false or misleading ads .

so far , members of the 111 th congress have indicated interest in dtc advertising in the context of drug safety , tax treatment of advertising expenses , risk communication , and general fda - activity authority and oversight , sometimes in the context of broader discussions of health care costs and reform .

this report examines these and other issues .

it ( 1 ) describes the current status of dtc drug advertising ; ( 2 ) analyzes issues surrounding it ; and ( 3 ) discusses potential options for congress .

specifically , part i – current picture describes the types , history , and extent of direct - to - consumer drug advertising in the united states ; reviews the authority congress has given fda to regulate dtc advertising and how fda has used that authority ; and describes voluntary guidelines of some interested groups .

part ii – issues explores what manufacturers , clinicians , and consumers want the ads to achieve ; examines how dtc ads affect consumers , clinicians , and drug manufacturers ; and discusses the major issues now debated by proponents and opponents of dtc drug advertising .

part iii – potential options discusses potential oversight and legislative options for congress ; and concludes by relating dtc drug advertising to some of the larger issues affecting u.s. health care: cost , access , safety , among others .

most of the controversy over dtc advertising revolves around five questions: does dtc advertising create an adequately informed consumer ? .

does dtc advertising increase communication between doctor and patient ? .

does dtc advertising lead to better diagnosis , treatment , or disease management ? .

does drug use influenced by dtc advertising harm patients ? .

does dtc advertising affect consumer spending ? .

these questions are addressed below .

the expectations consumers bring to dtc ads may lead them to inaccurate conclusions .

a 1999 study found that 43% of the public believed that only "completely safe" drugs could be advertised and half believed that such ads had been submitted to fda for approval .

neither belief is correct .

many fda - approved drugs carry risks for certain consumers and may be harmful if used inappropriately by anyone .

dtc ads do not have the imprimatur of the agency .

nevertheless , both industry and consumers strongly support some form of dtc ads .

industry wants to increase sales , and consumers want to actively participate in decisions about their own health .

that , combined with advances in information technology and possible relevance to constitutional protections of free speech , makes an outright ban on dtc ads unlikely .

however , members of the 111 th congress have indicated interest in dtc advertising in the context of drug safety , tax treatment of advertising expenses , risk communication , and general fda - activity authority and oversight , sometimes in the context of broader discussions of health care costs and reform .

legislators with concerns about dtc advertising still have a range of options to address those concerns .

some would require new statutory authority and some fda could institute with its current authority .

in his book protecting america ' s health: the fda , business , and one hundred years of regulation , philip hilts describes the early days of patent medicines as "one of the first fully national markets that used nationwide marketing. .

dtc advertising is not new , and the government's role — to protect the public's health — has not changed .

but , as biologic , chemical , and manufacturing knowledge has increased , so too have societal medical and social standards .

current law gives government responsibility for assuring that drugs are safe and effective , yet many now ask increasingly complex questions: just how safe and how effective do we want these drugs to be ? .

how much information does the consumer or the doctor need ? .

should they rely completely on the government's assessment of the balance of known risks and expected benefits ? .

is it possible to satisfy the expectation that we summarize what some scientists study for decades in a 60-second television commercial clearly enough for the general u.s. public — to understand ? .

finally , we can analyze dtc advertising while paying attention to its role as part of a larger picture .

dtc advertising — and the issues it raises of accuracy and balance of safety and effectiveness information — is one piece of the healthcare picture .

widening the focus one step brings us to advertising and other promotion to healthcare providers and the issue of the continuing education of doctors .

other safety and effectiveness issues include drug approval ; comparative effectiveness research ( among drugs and between drugs and other kinds of treatment ) ; and consideration of off - label prescribing and changing patterns of use .

even broader concerns involve drug research and development and incentives toward the development of drugs that address major public health conditions ( measured by number of people affected and seriousness of the disease ) ; risk communication ; and access to medical care , including drugs .

