adults may go missing for a variety of reasons .

in some cases , the disappearance of an individual may be a personal choice .

however , adults may go missing as a result of a disabling condition , a natural catastrophe , or a crime such as an abduction and other instances when foul play is involved .

unlike children , adults have the legal right to go missing under most circumstances .

as a result , families of missing adults may receive limited assistance from state and local law enforcement agencies in recovering their loved ones .

media attention to cases of missing adults — particularly seniors with dementia who have been found deceased after wandering from home either on foot or in a vehicle — has prompted policymakers to consider expanding the federal government's role in helping to recover vulnerable adults who go missing .

congress has recently proposed measures to assist in such recovery efforts .

at the start of the 111 th congress , the house passed legislation ( h.r .

632 ) to establish a grant program to encourage states to establish , expand , and coordinate alert systems for vulnerable adults who may go missing due to cognitive or physical disabilities , among other reasons .

a companion bill ( s. 557 ) was introduced in the senate on march 10 , 2009 .

the proposed program is similar to a federal grant program that funds training and technical assistance for what are known as amber ( america's missing: broadcast emergency response ) alert systems .

each state has developed an amber alert system to enlist the support of law enforcement agencies and the public in recovering children who are believed to have been abducted .

in response to the increased congressional focus on alert systems for missing adults , the congressional research service ( crs ) gathered data on existing state alert systems in 11 states .

crs conducted a review of state laws , regulations , or executive orders that established the systems , and contacted officials in the 11 states to learn more about how they are carried out .

these systems were established beginning in 2006 , and are administered by local and / or state law enforcement agencies .

the systems are intended to alert law enforcement entities and / or the public that vulnerable adults are missing and may need assistance .

many states activate the alerts on behalf of targeted groups of individuals who may be at high risk of going missing , such as those persons with cognitive or mental impairment , including alzheimer's and other forms of dementia , as well as persons with developmental disability .

this report provides an overview of the alert systems in 11 states .

it begins with background information on current federal efforts to recover missing adults , followed by a description of the methods crs used to obtain data from each state identified as having an alert system .

subsequent sections of this report provide an overview of each state's alert systems , including ( 1 ) the legal authority to establish the systems ; ( 2 ) the target population for the alerts ; ( 3 ) administrative responsibility for the alerts , including coordination with amber alerts ; ( 4 ) training of law enforcement agencies and other entities about the alerts ; ( 5 ) the process for activating alerts ; ( 6 ) coordination of alerts with other states ; ( 7 ) system costs ; ( 8 ) use of the systems ; and ( 9 ) any information about outcomes of the individuals who were believed to be lost and for whom alerts were activated .

the last section of the report provides a discussion of issues for congress to consider with respect to the federal role , if any , in developing state alert systems for missing adults .

individuals can go missing for a variety of reasons .

they may become lost or disoriented due to a mental or cognitive impairment , developmental disability , or physical disability .

natural disasters , such as hurricanes or floods , may cause individuals to become displaced from their families and communities .

individuals may voluntarily go missing to escape domestic abuse , law enforcement , or for other reasons .

policymakers and advocates for the missing have identified persons with alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia as being particularly vulnerable to missing episodes .

increases in longevity among the older population and the aging of the baby boom generation have contributed to interest in establishing these systems .

wandering from home can be a frequent behavior that may pose a significant , sometimes life - threatening , danger to the well - being of those with alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia .

according to the alzheimer's association , if not found within 24 hours , nearly 50% of those who wander risk serious illness or death .

illness or death may occur from exposure to the elements , lack of food or hydration for an extended period , and general inability of the individual to think , act , or communicate to gain assistance .

while local and state law enforcement agencies are responsible for leading efforts to recover missing adults , in recent years the federal government has increasingly played a role in both helping to prevent certain types of missing adult incidents — particularly among vulnerable populations — and assisting in identifying and recovering those who go missing .

the federal missing alzheimer's disease patient alert grant assists in identifying missing individuals with alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia by funding what is known as safe return , a program administered by the alzheimer's association .

safe return provides a medicalert bracelet or other form of identification to enrolled individuals .

the identification indicates that the individual is memory impaired and includes a toll - free , 24-hour emergency response number to call if the person is found wandering or lost .

as part of the program , the alzheimer's association provides support and referrals to caregivers of those enrolled in the program , and provides some training to law enforcement agencies about individuals with alzheimer's disease .

authorization for the program has lapsed , but congress has continued to appropriate funds .

for each of fy2002 through fy2009 congress appropriated between $800,000 and $2 million in funding .

the missing alzheimer's disease patient alert program reauthorization of 2009 ( h.r .

908 ) , which was approved by the house on february 10 , 2009 , would amend the violent crime control and law enforcement act of 1994 to reauthorize the program through fy2016 , and would revise program requirements to: ( 1 ) provide for competitive grants to nonprofit organizations to assist in locating missing patients with alzheimer's disease and related dementia ; ( 2 ) expand the program to include locating other missing elderly individuals ; and ( 3 ) establish a preference in awarding grants to national nonprofit organizations that have a direct link to patients with alzheimer's disease and related dementias and their families .

currently , grants may be awarded to only such organizations .

separately , congress provided funding from fy2002 through fy2006 for the kristen's act grant program which provided funding for a national clearinghouse and resource center for missing adults generally .

federal funding for kristen's act grants ranged from a high of $1.7 million in fy2002 , decreasing in each subsequent year to a low of $150,000 in fy2006 .

the national center for missing adults ( ncma ) was the sole recipient of the grant .

ncma continues to operate , with non - federal funds , and takes reports of persons who go missing under a variety of circumstances , including due to a diagnosed medical condition , mental illness or diminished mental capacity , alzheimer's disease or dementia , or alcohol or substance abuse .

ncma adds profiles and pictures of missing persons to its website ( http: / / www.missingadults.org ) , sends missing person flyers to the family and law enforcement , assists with press releases , helps generate or manage media attention , and maintains routine contact with the families of missing individuals .

authorization for kristen's act expired in fy2006 .

h.r .

632 , which passed the house on february 10 , 2009 , would reauthorize the grant at $4 million for each of fy2010 through fy2020 .

companion legislation , s. 557 , was introduced in the senate on march 10 , 2008 .

in addition to funding the kristen's act grant , h.r .

632 would direct the attorney general to establish a national "silver alert communications network" to assist regional and local search efforts for missing seniors , in coordination with states , local governments , and law enforcement agencies .

the bill defines "missing senior" as any individual who is reported to , or identified by , a law enforcement agency as a missing person ; and meets the requirements to be designated as a missing senior , as determined by the state in which the individual is reported or identified as a missing person .

the bill further directs the department of justice ( doj ) to appoint a national coordinator of the network to: ( 1 ) establish voluntary guidelines for states to use in developing alert programs to recover missing seniors ; ( 2 ) develop protocols for recovering missing seniors and for notifying law enforcement agencies that a senior is missing ; and ( 3 ) implement an advisory group to assist states , local governments , law enforcement agencies , and other entities involved in the network , among other activities .

the bill authorizes such sums as necessary for these purposes .

no time period is specified .

in addition , h.r .

632 would authorize appropriations of $5 million annually for fy2009 through fy2013 for grants to states to develop and enhance silver alert plans .

the grants would be distributed by doj on an equitable basis throughout the united states .

the federal share of the grant would not exceed 50% .

the focus of this report is on those state alert systems for missing adults .

crs sought to obtain detailed information from states about their alert systems to better inform congress about their activities as well as analyze the similarities and differences among various state alert systems .

in general , these alert systems are intended to rapidly disperse information about a missing person to law enforcement entities , and often the public .

this type of alert system is different from the federally funded safe return program in that safe return maintains a database of individuals who have been pre - identified as being at risk of wandering due to alzheimer's disease and related dementia and choose to enroll in the program .

in the event that an individual enrolled in the safe return program does go missing , safe return can provide information and a physical description of the missing individual , which can assist family members in filing a missing persons report and help law enforcement agencies , regardless of whether the state has an alert system , in search and recovery efforts .

provided that the missing individual is wearing identification , safe return can also facilitate reuniting missing persons with their caregivers .

based on requests from some members of congress for information regarding the administration of alert systems for missing adults , crs sought to identify states that were believed to have missing adult alert systems and contact those states to obtain further information .

using information from a variety of sources , including recent news articles , policy publications , and discussions with various stakeholders from organizations such as the alzheimer's association and project lifesaver international , inc. , crs identified 11 states with alert systems for missing adults — colorado , delaware , florida , georgia , kentucky , north carolina , ohio , oklahoma , rhode island , texas , and virginia .

crs did not conduct a search of state statutes or survey all 50 states to determine whether each state had implemented an alert system for missing adults .

thus , the 11 identified states may not be an exhaustive list of all states with alert systems for vulnerable missing adults .

for the 11 selected states , crs reviewed authorizing legislation , executive orders , and regulations to obtain program data on these state alert systems .

crs also contacted officials in each of the states to obtain additional information .

based on key areas of interest in state alert systems for missing adults that have been expressed by some members of congress , crs prepared a detailed list of questions for state officials covering the following attributes ( see appendix a for a copy of the questions submitted to state officials ) : 1 .

legal authority — whether authority for implementation and administration of the alert system was established by the state through statute , executive order , and / or regulations .

2 .

target population — information on the characteristics of those who may go missing and the population eligible to be the subject of an alert .

3 .

administrative responsibility — the entity or entities responsible for implementation of and administering the alert system and any administrative coordination with the state's amber alert program .

4 .

training — any training provided to law enforcement agencies and other stakeholders on the use of the alert system .

5 .

process for activating alerts — includes information on: eligible entities authorized to file an actionable missing persons report ; criteria for activating an alert ; communication mechanisms for disseminating the alert ; target audiences ; and duration of the alert .

6 .

interstate coordination — any state protocols for alert systems to coordinate with other states when an eligible missing person is believed to have crossed state lines .

7 .

system costs — costs associated with implementing the alert system as well as any costs for ongoing administration of the system .

8 .

use of the system — the history of utilization of the alert system including any available data on the number of alerts that have been activated .

9 .

outcomes — any available data on: the characteristics of those missing individuals who are the subject of an alert ; circumstances related to their disappearance ; and outcomes related to any search and recovery efforts .

between september 2008 and march 2009 , questions were electronically submitted to the state official identified by crs as responsible for or most knowledgeable about the missing adult alert system in that state .

all 11 states responded and , when necessary , crs followed up with state officials for clarification .

officials provided varying levels of detail about their systems .

for some states , crs was unable to obtain information about the number of alerts activated and / or the costs associated with the alert system .

alert systems for vulnerable missing adults appear to be a recent but growing initiative .

among the 11 states crs identified with active alert systems , colorado and georgia were the first to implement an alert system for missing vulnerable adults in 2006 .

since then , nine other states have adopted the systems .

eight of the 11 states are in the south ( delaware , florida , georgia , kentucky , north carolina , oklahoma , texas , and virginia ) , one state is in the west ( colorado ) , one state is in the midwest ( ohio ) , and one state is in the northeast ( rhode island ) .

see figure 1 for a u.s. map with the 11 states identified by crs as having missing adult alert systems .

table 1 provides a general overview of the alert systems implemented in the 11 states identified by crs as having active programs .

state alert systems were authorized either by law or executive order , with most states passing a law to create the alert system for missing adults .

the administration of state alert systems for missing vulnerable adults appears to be a cooperative effort among state and local law enforcement agencies .

these alert systems are intended to rapidly disseminate information to other law enforcement agencies and the public through various media outlets ( eg , television , radio , print media , lottery terminals , electronic highway signs , trucker alert systems ) about a missing person by providing descriptive information about the missing person or vehicle , in the event a missing person is believed to be driving .

for some states , the impetus for legislation to establish the alert system came as a result of public attention surrounding missing person investigations that involved adults with mental or cognitive impairment .

multiple states reported that they modeled their missing adult alert systems after their state amber alert systems for abducted children .

states indicated that while their alert systems for missing adults are similar to their amber alert systems , amber alerts were more widely disseminated .

generally , the same state - level agencies administer or are involved in administering both alert systems , and in some cases , the two systems share one budget .

most states reported that training on the use of the alert system for missing adults is provided to state and / or local law enforcement agencies with some states providing education to the public and other stakeholders .

states have defined their target population for their alert systems differently .

some states include age as a factor for activating an alert , such as the population age 65 and older .

other factors include whether the individual has a cognitive , physical , or developmental disability , or a severe mental health impairment .

in general , the process for activating an alert begins with the local law enforcement agency taking a missing persons report ( see figure 2 ) .

in order for an alert to then be activated , entities at the local and state level , depending on the state's protocol , must ensure that the criteria for activating an alert have been met .

states may require that certain individuals file a missing persons report in order to activate the alert system .

in most states , verification that the individual has a mental or cognitive impairment can be through a family member , caregiver , or guardian .

one difference among states with alert systems is the designated entity responsible for activating the alert .

in six states , a lead state agency is responsible for activating alerts at the request of a local law enforcement agency .

the remaining five states have localized models for the dissemination of alerts where the local law enforcement agency activates the alerts locally and / or regionally and may seek assistance from the state law enforcement agency to disseminate the alert statewide .

in general , the entity responsible for activating an alert will disseminate the missing person's information to other law enforcement agencies and various media outlets to alert the public .

when the public is alerted about the missing information , generally information is publicized on how to contact law enforcement with tips or information .

most states have some mechanisms in place for coordinating alerts with other states to recover individuals who were believed to have crossed state lines during their disappearance .

several states indicated there was no additional cost to implement the alert system or that implementation costs were absorbed by the existing budget for the amber alert program or another program .

some states provided data on the actual costs of operating the alert system .

data from these states estimated that the annual cost of operating an alert system was between $40,000 and $182,000 .

however , these estimates exclude costs to local law enforcement agencies or other stakeholders that may be involved in helping to administer the alert system .

ten out of 11 states reported having used the alert system , the exception being delaware .

although some states reported no information about the number of alerts that have been activated , states that did report this information reported activating anywhere between one ( rhode island ) and 82 alerts ( north carolina ) since implementation of their alert system .

however , the number of alerts a state has activated is likely affected by how long the system has been active , the process and criteria for activating the alerts , the state's identified target population for the alert , and whether the system is generally accepted by law enforcement agencies and other stakeholders as a viable tool to assist in the recovery of missing vulnerable adults .

most states were able to provide information about the outcomes of recovery efforts for these missing persons with the majority of states reporting that individuals were found recovered , though almost every state reported at least one individual who was found deceased .

states provided varying levels of detail about their alert systems .

this section summarizes information provided by state officials , including ( 1 ) legal authority ; ( 2 ) target population ; ( 3 ) administrative responsibility ; ( 4 ) training ; ( 5 ) process for activating alerts ; ( 6 ) interstate coordination ; ( 7 ) system costs ; ( 8 ) use of the system ; and ( 9 ) outcomes .

these attributes are described in tables for each state in appendix b .

this report describes the detailed findings of 11 states with active alert systems for missing adults .

findings from this study suggest that there is an existing patchwork of state alert systems with wide variation in target populations and administrative procedures for activating alerts .

these systems are similar to alert systems for abducted children ( amber alerts ) , but target adults who are vulnerable to going missing due to cognitive or mental impairment , developmental or physical disabilities , and certain mental health conditions .

although the systems in each state vary , in all states either local or state law enforcement agencies are responsible for activating the alerts .

often these law enforcement agencies involve multiple stakeholders in the process of recovering those who go missing , including other local law enforcement agencies , the state highway patrol , the public through various media outlets , and the state's missing persons clearinghouse .

as the nation prepares for an aging population and likely increase in the number of individuals living in the community with cognitive impairment or other forms of disability , congress may want to consider whether there is a role for the federal government in further developing state alert systems .

for example , the federal government could provide funding to facilitate the expansion of alert systems to additional states .

similar to the federal role for state amber alert programs , the federal government could assist in developing minimum guidelines for a missing adult alert system as well as provide states with technical support and training .

establishing a uniform network of state alert systems in every state could assist states and localities , in the event that a person is believed to be missing , with any necessary coordination across state lines .

further , the federal government could also play a role in assisting states with developing their systems so that data are more uniformly collected about the use and efficacy of state alert systems .

finally , the federal government could disseminate information about best practices for states looking to implement alert systems .

the following sections discuss various issues for congress in considering the role of the federal government , if any , in state alert systems for vulnerable missing adults .

these issues are: autonomy and individual rights ; creating a uniform identity ; training ; coordination across states ; efficacy of alerts ; use of alerts ; and support to family caregivers .

state alert systems for missing vulnerable adults appear to be an emerging trend , with alert systems developed in at least 11 states .

as a result , congress is considering legislation that would provide the federal government with a role in assisting states to develop these systems nationwide .

most states with existing alert systems have modeled their program after the amber alert program .

all state systems target persons with cognitive or mental impairments ; however , there is wide variation in the specific target population and procedures for activating alerts .

while states will continue to be faced with the challenge of balancing individual rights with efforts that can assist the most vulnerable of residents , states may benefit from federal efforts that could facilitate interstate coordination for missing persons believed to have crossed state lines .

in addition , federal efforts could model the federal role in developing state amber alerts systems by providing states with minimum guidelines , technical assistance , and training .

state alert systems may also benefit from coordinating with existing federal , state , and local initiatives that can assist in locating vulnerable adults that go missing .

in the event that the alert system assists in recovering a missing vulnerable adult , family caregivers may benefit from referral to the safe return program , funded in part by federal appropriations under the missing alzheimer's disease patient alert grant , or project lifesaver international , inc .

these alert systems could also educate and assess family caregivers about the needs of vulnerable adults and provide linkages to available community resources in an effort to prevent future wandering behavior .

appendix a .

questions for state officials appendix b .

detailed tables of state program .

