the existence of the dual banking system and the relative insulation of federally chartered national banks from state law form the backdrop of cuomo v. the cle aring house association , l.l.c .

 ( clearing house association ) , in which the supreme court , in a five - to - four decision announced on june 29 , 2009 , ruled that the national bank act ( nba ) does not preempt states from bringing judicial actions against national banks to enforce non - preempted state anti - discrimination laws , and by implication state consumer protection laws , as long as the state authorities do not encroach on the visitorial powers of the national bank regulator , the office of the comptroller of the currency ( occ ) .

the court ruled that administrative subpoenas or other forms of administrative oversight or examination are included in visitorial powers and , thus , are not available as state enforcement tools .

the court's ruling reverses an appellate court ruling that sheltered national banks and their subsidiaries from the reach of state enforcement of fair lending laws .

national banks are chartered and regulated under the terms of the nba by occ .

they are also subject to other federal laws , including federal tax , consumer protection , securities , fair housing , anti - money laundering , and laws of general applicability .

moreover , much of their daily activity is subject to state law .

the case began when new york's attorney general ( ag ) , examining publicly available home mortgage disclosure act ( hmda ) data , found disparities between the interest rates charged african american and hispanic borrowers and those charged white borrowers by certain banks operating in new york state and their subsidiaries .

when asked by the ag to provide non - public information on their lending policies and practices , national banks belonging to the clearing house association ( cha ) , including wells fargo , hs - bc , j.p. morgan chase , and citigroup , refused to supply the data .

they saw the ag's requests as involving "visitation," a concept which the supreme court defined in guthrie v. harkness , 199 u.s. 148 , 158 ( 1905 ) as "'the act of a superior or superintending officer , who visits a corporation to examine into its manner of conducting business , and enforce an observance of its laws and regulations.' .

they charged that the ag's request was incompatible with occ's exclusive visitorial powers under the nba .

in their behalf , therefore , the cha , joined by occ , challenged the authority of the ag to investigate the operations of national banks and succeeded in securing rulings at the trial and appellate level enjoining the ag from investigating national banks for violations of state anti - discrimination laws .

in office of the comptroller of the currency v .

spitzer , the district court granted occ's request for an injunction against the state ag's enforcement of fair lending laws .

occ's objection to the ag's investigation of national bank mortgage practices was grounded in the visitorial powers clause of the nba and the occ regulations interpreting that clause .

the new york ag challenged occ's regulatory interpretation of the visitorial powers clause of the nba , which states: ( a ) no national bank shall be subject to any visitorial powers except as authorized by federal law , vested in the courts of justice or such as shall be , or have been exercised or directed by congress or by either house thereof or by any committee of congress or of either house duly authorized .

 ( b ) notwithstanding subjection ( a ) of this section , lawfully authorized state auditors and examiners may , at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice to a bank , review its records solely to ensure compliance with applicable state unclaimed property or escheat laws upon reasonable cause to believe that the bank has failed to comply with such laws .

the second clause of that statute is referred to as the courts - of - justice exception .

the implementing regulation is 12 c.f.r .

ยง 7.4000 .

it provides , in pertinent part , "state officials may not exercise visitorial powers with respect to national banks , such as conducting examinations , inspecting or requiring the production of books or records of national banks , or prosecuting enforcement actions , except in limited circumstances authorized by federal law. .

included among the list of "visitorial powers" specified in the regulation as exclusive to occ is "[e]nforcing compliance with any applicable federal or state laws" that concern "activities authorized or permitted pursuant to federal banking law. .

in the clearing house association , l.l.c .

v. cuomo , the u.s .

circuit court of appeals for the second circuit , with one dissenting opinion , upheld the district court determining that the occ regulation warranted deference under the standard announced in chevron u.s.a. , inc. v. natural resources defense council .

under chevron , courts must defer to agency interpretations of ambiguities in federal statutes under certain conditions .

deference is to be accorded to an interpretation in a regulation issued by an agency charged by congress with enforcing a statute if two conditions are satisfied: ( 1 ) the statute is ambiguous rather than clear on the issue ; and ( 2 ) the interpretation of the agency is reasonable in light of the statutory scheme .

citing supreme court precedent , it rejected the ag's argument that there was a presumption against preemption because occ's visitorial powers regulation divested states of enforcing state laws , an aspect of state sovereignty .

it cited barnett bank of marion county , n.a .

v. nelson as authority for the contrary standard: explicit statutory grants of authority to national banks generally preempt contrary state law .

it also rejected the ag's argument that the language of the visitorial powers clause should be construed as merely limiting states from interfering with occ's statutory grants of authority .

after reviewing the statutory language and judicial constructions of the visitorial powers clause , the appellate court found that although "the precise scope of 'visitorial' powers is not entirely clear," the statute does not preclude occ's interpretation and that , to some extent , the ag's inquiry involves visitation .

the court also found that the ag's investigation did not fall within the courts - of - justice exception by comparing it with the facts of guthrie v. harkness , 199 u.s. 148 , 158 ( 1905 ) , in which the supreme court ruled that a court could permit a private party , a shareholder , to inspect the books of a national bank without violating the exclusive visitorial power of occ .

in a dissenting opinion , circuit judge cardamone saw the result of the majority rule as an alteration of "the compact between the state and national governments" from a "co - equal relationship between two independent co - existing sovereigns" to "one more akin to parent - child or employer - employee. .

the dodd - frank wall street reform and consumer protection act ( dodd - frank ) , p.l .

111-203 , in subtitle d of title x , the consumer financial protection act of 2010 , contains a provision designed to codify the ruling of the supreme court in cuomo by making it clear in statute that the national bank act's visitorial powers clause does not preclude state enforcement actions against national banks for violation of non - preempted state law .

a parallel provision applies to federal savings associations and their subsidiaries .

there is also a provision authorizing state attorneys general and state regulators to bring actions against individual defendants , state institutions , and national banks and federal savings associations for violations of title x and regulations promulgated under title x .

the legislation also defines a standard and procedural requirements for occ to follow in preempting the applicability of state consumer protection laws to national banks or federal savings associations .

the provisions in dodd - frank follow other efforts in the 111 th congress to deal with occ preemption of state efforts to enforce consumer protection laws against national banks , including the following .

the consumer financial protection agency act of 2009 , released on june 30 , 2009 , by the u.s. treasury department , contained provisions applying state consumer protection laws to national banks and a section specifying that no federal law is to be interpreted as precluding state enforcement of state consumer protection laws by bringing a judicial action against national banks involving potential violations of state or federal consumer protection laws .

this proposal essentially proclaimed that state consumer protection laws , subject to certain standards , are applicable to national banks and federally chartered savings associations and their subsidiaries , and that state attorneys general may enforce those laws against those institutions .

h.r .

4173 , the wall street reform and consumer protection act of 2009 , which was passed by the house of representatives on december 11 , 2009 , included , as its title iv , the consumer financial protection agency act , which had been separately reported by the house financial services committee .

this legislation would have transferred responsibility for administering various federal consumer protection laws addressing financial matters to a newly established consumer financial protection agency .

it would have specified that a state consumer financial law is preempted only if its effect on national banks is discriminatory in comparison with its effect upon state - chartered banks ; moreover , under this bill , no occ regulation or order could have been subject to interpretation or application to preempt a provision of a state consumer protection law without a specific finding based on substantial evidence on the record that the provision "prevents , significantly interferes with , or materially impairs the ability of a national bank to engage in the business of banking. .

under this bill , preemption authority would not have covered subsidiaries .

the bill also provided a rule of construction applicable to the visitorial powers clause of the nba to preclude interpreting that clause to prevent a state attorney general from bringing a judicial action to enforce against a national bank any applicable federal or non - preempted state law as authorized by such law .

senator christopher dodd , chairman of the senate committee on banking , housing , and urban affairs , presented a draft proposal , the restoring american financial stability act of 2009 .

it paralleled h.r .

4173 with respect to transferring consumer protection functions from the banking agencies to a single regulatory agency , also named the consumer financial protection agency .

it contained a provision applying state consumer laws of general applicability to national banks unless such laws discriminate against national banks or unless the cfpa determines that they are inconsistent with federal law .

the draft legislation also includes a provision precluding the interpretation of the visitorial powers clause as limiting the authority of a state's attorney general from bringing a judicial action "to require a national bank to produce records relevant to the investigation of violations of state consumer law , or federal consumer laws ; ... to enforce any applicable provision of federal or state law , as authorized by such law. .

h.r .

3310 , the consumer protection and regulatory enhancement act , introduced on july 23 , 2009 , by representative spencer bachus , would have continued the current practice of having the federal banking regulators monitor consumer protection compliance with respect to banking institutions , although it would consolidate bank regulation .

it would have established a financial institutions regulator ( fir ) to assume the functions of the various current federal banking regulators .

within the fir there would be an office of consumer protection to be responsible for administering and enforcing consumer protection laws .

it contained no provision altering current law with respect to the visitorial authority over national banks or the preemption of state consumer protection laws for the benefit of national banks .

as occ and the states begin to operate under the new rules covering preemption of state consumer protection laws and state enforcement authority over national banks , some of the matters which may draw attention from congress include ( 1 ) how well occ and the consumer financial protection bureau are coordinating efforts with those of the states ; and ( 2 ) the extent to which the regime established in dodd - frank improves consumer protection without unduly burdening the financial services industry .

