the health reform debate in the 111 th congress continued and expanded upon the work begun in the 110 th congress .

on november 12 , 2008 , the chairman of the senate finance committee , senator baucus , released a white paper detailing his principles for health reform .

this provided a framework for work within the committee for the 111 th congress .

several bills were introduced when the 111 th congress first convened , and these bills focused on a broad spectrum of approaches to health reform .

on november 7 , 2009 , the house passed h.r .

3962 , the affordable health care for america act .

h.r .

3962 is based on h.r .

3200 , america's affordable health choices act of 2009 , which was originally introduced on july 14 , 2009 , and was reported separately on october 14 , 2009 , by three house committees — education and labor , energy and commerce , and ways and means .

the u.s. senate passed its version of health insurance reform on december 24 , 2009 , the patient protection and affordable care act , in h.r .

3590 , as amended by the senate ( hereafter referred to simply as h.r .

3590 ) .

h.r .

3590 consolidated and amended bills passed by the two committees with principal jurisdiction , the committee on health , education , labor , and pensions , which ordered reported s. 1679 , the affordable health choices act on july 15 , and the senate finance committee , which ordered reported s. 1796 , america's healthy future act of 2009 , on october 19 , 2009 .

the house and senate must agree to the same measure with the same legislative language before a bill can be presented to the president .

congress did not chose to appoint a formal conference committee to negotiate a compromise that would then reported to each chamber for consideration , opting for negotiations between the chambers .

in an effort to move the process forward , the president released a health reform proposal on february 22 , 2010 , which combines and modifies provisions in the senate and house passed bills .

on february 25 , 2010 , the president held a bipartisan meeting on health reform , attended by both democrats and republican members of congress .

this report presents basic background information on health insurance that may be useful to legislators considering health insurance reforms .

it describes health insurance reform approaches and provides brief descriptions of health insurance reform bills introduced in the 111 th congress .

the discussions in this report will not summarize all currently introduced legislation , but may be helpful in understanding the range of options that are currently being considered by congress .

the potential impact of various reform approaches and bills is not analyzed in this report .

as a result , it does not provide evaluations of how well different bills , once enacted , would meet their objectives .

however , all of these bills have a common focus: to address some or all of the current issues surrounding health insurance and health services .

the costs of health insurance and health care services are consuming a growing portion of workers' compensation , and the percentage of individuals with job - based health insurance coverage is declining .

some states are seeking reforms in their state systems , providing useful trials and errors to potentially inform the debate at the federal level .

just as the federal debate in the 1990s was spurred by rising health care and health insurance costs , declining numbers of individuals with private coverage , and state experimentation and innovation , those same issues are at the center of the debate today .

many of the issues addressed through health reform legislation are exacerbated by the existing recession .

while the 111 th congress is still relatively new , several health insurance reform bills have already been introduced .

these bills , as well as other proposals currently under consideration , can be classified as expanding coverage using one of the following approaches: largely replace existing coverage with a national government - provided health insurance program ( or a national health service ) .

expand existing public programs for certain individuals .

expand privately sponsored coverage .

encourage state - based reforms .

simultaneously expand private and public coverage options .

brief summaries of the major provisions of most of the health insurance reform bills introduced in the 111 th congress are provided below .

the bills are loosely classified into the following reform approaches , similar to the discussion above: largely replace existing coverage with a national government - provided health insurance program ( or a national health service ) .

expand privately sponsored coverage .

encourage state - based reforms .

simultaneously expand private and public coverage options .

as discussed previously , there are some bills that have been introduced in the 111 th congress to expand public health insurance programs for certain targeted groups of individuals — for example , to waive the two - year waiting period for disability coverage under medicare .

none of these narrow scope bills are summarized in the list that follows .

similarly , bills affecting private health insurance that only targeted certain individuals or narrow issues — for example , to prohibit pre - existing condition exclusions for children or to restrict private plans' ability to use lifetime limits — are also excluded from the list that follows .

on february 22 , 2010 , the president released a health reform proposal that "includes a targeted set of changes to the patient protection and affordable care act , the senate - passed health insurance reform bill .

the president's proposal reflects policies from the house - passed bill and the president's priorities. .

as there is no legislative language for the proposal , the following description is based on the proposal .

the president's proposal includes market reforms , such as prohibition against ( 1 ) rescissions , ( 2 ) annual and lifetimes limits , and ( 3 ) pre - existing condition exclusions , among others .

the president's proposal would require individuals to have health insurance or to pay a penalty .

there is no specific employer mandate ; however , certain employers would be required to pay for their workers who were receiving a premium or cost - sharing assistance .

small businesses would be eligible for tax credits .

there would be an excise tax on the most expensive health plans , beginning in 2018 , and the threshold would be higher than the threshold included in the senate bill .

the president's proposal would eliminate the nebraska federal matching assistance percentage ( fmap ) , close the donut hole for medicare part d prescription drug coverage , and create a new health insurance rate authority helping states to review unreasonable premium rate increases and other unfair health insurance practices .

absent from the proposal is a public option .

