president barack obama signed h.r .

1 , the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) of 2009 , into law on february 17 , 2009 , as p.l .

111-5 ( 123 stat .

115-521 ) .

this report provides a summary and legislative history of arra and identifies other resources that provide additional information regarding its content and implementation .

for well over a year , the economy of the united states has been in significant distress .

the business cycle dating committee of the national bureau of economic research , whose determinations regarding the timing of recessions are widely accepted , announced on december 1 , 2008 , that the economy had entered recession in december 2007 .

the recession deepened substantially during 2008 and there is considerable uncertainty regarding how long it will last .

the federal government has responded ( and continues to respond ) to the economic situation by employing many different tools , encompassing both monetary policy , conducted by the federal reserve , and budgetary policy , under existing law and new legislation .

with respect to new legislative activity , congress and the president initially responded with the economic stimulus act of 2008 , which president george w. bush signed into law on february 13 , 2008 ( p.l .

110-185 ) .

the act , which consisted mainly of "recovery rebates" for individuals and investment incentives for businesses , reduced revenues by $152 billion in fy2008 and $16 billion in fy2009 .

as the economic crisis worsened , congress and the president enacted additional legislative responses , including extensions of unemployment compensation and the emergency economic stabilization act ( eesa ) of 2008 ( division a of p.l .

110-343 ) , which president bush signed into law on october 3 , 2008 .

the eesa created the troubled assets relief program ( tarp ) , which authorized the treasury department to buy up to $700 billion in troubled assets from financial institutions .

toward the end of the 110 th congress , congressional attention turned to action on a supplemental appropriations act as another legislative response to the economic situation .

the house passed such a measure , the job creation and unemployment relief act of 2008 ( h.r .

7110 ) , on september 26 , 2008 .

president bush threatened to veto the bill , and the senate did not consider comparable legislation before the session ended .

in 2009 , at the beginning of the 111 th congress , president barack obama and congressional leaders made action on an economic recovery bill a top priority .

the legislative vehicle , it was determined , would be a supplemental appropriations act with substantial mandatory spending and revenue components .

the supplemental appropriations act addressing economic recovery is one of three major appropriations acts for fy2009 considered by congress thus far ( at least one additional appropriations act , providing supplemental appropriations for overseas military operations and other purposes , is expected to be considered during the session ) .

on september 30 , 2008 , the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) was signed into law by president george w. bush .

three of the 12 regular appropriations acts for fy2009 were funded by the act for the full fiscal year , and continuing appropriations were provided through march 6 , 2009 , for activities covered by the nine remaining appropriations acts .

consideration of an omnibus appropriations measure addressing the status of the nine remaining appropriations acts for the remainder of fy2009 was postponed until action on the supplemental appropriations measure pertaining to economic recovery ( arra ) was completed .

following the enactment of arra on february 17 , 2009 , the house and senate then finished consideration of the fy2009 regular appropriations acts in the form of a single , omnibus measure ; president obama signed h.r .

1105 , the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 , into law on march 11 , 2009 , as p.l .

111-8 .

house and senate action on arra occurred relatively quickly in the opening weeks of the 111 th congress , from the introduction of legislation in late january 2009 to its enactment into law several weeks later .

the house passed the bill on january 28 , the senate passed it on february 10 , and both chambers agreed to the conference report on february 13 .

arra is a relatively lengthy and complex act , amounting to just over 400 pages ( in slip law form ) and melding together hundreds of billions of dollars in discretionary spending , mandatory spending , and revenue provisions encompassing the jurisdiction of several house and senate committees .

discretionary spending is provided in , and controlled by , annual appropriations acts under the jurisdiction of the house and senate appropriations committees .

spending in this category typically funds the routine operations of federal agencies and many grant programs .

mandatory spending ( sometimes referred to as direct spending ) generally is provided in , and controlled by , substantive legislation under the jurisdiction of the various authorizing committees in the house and senate .

mandatory spending , for the most part , funds entitlement programs such as social security , medicare , and unemployment compensation .

revenue laws are under the jurisdiction of the house ways and means committee and the senate finance committee .

arra provides almost $800 billion through extensive discretionary spending , mandatory spending , and revenue provisions that the administration estimates will save or create some 3.5 million jobs .

funding is provided for existing and some new programs in the 15 cabinet - level departments and 11 independent agencies .

some of the funds are distributed to states , localities , other entities , and individuals through a combination of formula and competitive grants and direct assistance .

in addition to new spending and tax provisions , new policies are created regarding unemployment compensation , health insurance , health information technology , broadband communications , and energy , among others .

with regard to its specific impact on the budget , the act is expected to increase the deficit by $787.2 billion over the 11-year period covering fy2009-fy2019 ; the cost estimate prepared by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) is presented in table 1 .

the estimated deficit impact reflects spending increases of $575.3 billion ( in outlays ) and revenue reductions of $211.8 billion .

the total spending increases consist of $311.2 billion in discretionary new budget authority ( yielding $308.3 billion in outlays ) and $269.5 billion in mandatory new budget authority ( yielding $267.0 billion in outlays ) .

table 2 provides information on the rate at which spending under the act is expected to occur .

as table 2 shows , 20.9% of total outlays ( $120.1 billion ) are estimated to occur by the end of fy2009 .

by the end of fy2010 , 59.0% of total outlays ( $339.4 billion ) are expected to occur , and by the end of fy2011 , 80.9% of total outlays ( $465.6 billion ) are expected to occur .

the cumulative rate of mandatory spending compared to discretionary spending over the first several fiscal years differs , with mandatory spending occurring more quickly .

by the end of fy2011 , for example , 91.3% of mandatory outlays ( $243.8 billion ) are expected to occur , compared to 71.9% of discretionary outlays ( $221.8 billion ) .

revenue reductions ( as shown in table 1 ) occur more quickly , with reductions of $64.8 billion in fy2009 and $180.1 billion in fy2010 .

the combined revenue reduction for these two years ( $244.9 billion ) exceeds the net revenue reduction of $211.8 billion over the 11-year period ending in fy2019 ; a modest revenue reduction occurs in fy2011 , followed by modest revenue increases in all subsequent years .

cbo also prepared a year - by - year assessment of the macroeconomic effects of arra .

with regard to its structure , the act consists of several opening sections ( eg , short title ) and two major divisions .

division a ( appropriations provisions ) includes supplemental appropriations for fy2009 ( and later fiscal years ) covering all 12 of the parallel regular appropriations acts .

the supplemental appropriations corresponding to each regular appropriations act are presented separately in titles i - xii of the division .

four additional titles , dealing with health information technology , a state fiscal stabilization fund , accountability and transparency , and general provisions complete the division .

division b ( tax , unemployment , health , state fiscal relief , and other provisions ) consists of seven separate titles .

division a includes the discretionary spending provisions , but some significant substantive provisions as well .

division b includes the mandatory spending and revenue provisions , with some exceptions .

in addition , division b includes two titles that are not budgetary in nature: title vi ( broadband technology opportunities program ) and title vii ( limits on executive compensation ) .

in the summary sections that follow , related provisions are discussed together , regardless of the division in which they were placed .

table 3 provides a contents listing of arra , by opening section and division and title , with page references to the text of the public law .

in addition , the table provides page references to the legislative text and explanatory statements in the conference report — as printed as a separate document ( h.rept .

111-16 ) and as inserted into the congressional record of february 12 , 2009 .

division a of arra provides $311.20 billion in appropriations for a broad array of agencies , programs , and activities .

the funds are provided in twelve titles corresponding with the twelve annual appropriations bills , and also an additional title for the state fiscal stabilization fund .

not every agency typically funded through the annual appropriations bills received funding in arra .

moreover , the agencies that were funded received widely varying dollar amounts .

in turn , these amounts constitute widely varying percentages of each agency's most recent annual appropriations ( fy2009 ) .

for each of the funding titles of division a , the entries below identify the total funding provided in the title and describe the primary purposes of the funding .

the entries also include percentages that indicate the extent to which the funding in arra is a supplement to other fy2009 funding .

there are 12 entries each corresponding to one title of division a .

however , the entry for title viii , departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies , also discusses the state fiscal stabilization fund ( title xiv ) which received appropriations for education programs .

table 4 indicates the total discretionary budget authority for fy2009-fy2019 provided by title in division a .

table 5 and table 6 , at the end of this section , provide additional information on appropriations in division a , including funding by department and agency .

of the $311.20 billion in total funding , $288.73 billion is identified as for fy2009 .

the remainder is identified for future fiscal years , specifically $7.08 billion for fy2010 and $15.39 billion for fy2011 through fy2019 .

the arra states that the appropriations are in addition to amounts otherwise appropriated for the fiscal year involved , and that all funding is designated as emergency funding .

the monies in the law are available for obligation until september 30 , 2010 ( the end of fy2010 ) unless otherwise specified .

most of the accounts funded in division a of the law do not contain different periods of obligation , although there are a number of exceptions .

for instance , funding for the inspectors general of the agencies typically is provided for a longer period of obligation .

by comparison , the 12 regular , annual appropriations laws typically contain varied periods of obligation for funds therein .

some funds are made available until expended , while others are provided for one or multiple fiscal years .

the arra contains a variety of provisions requiring agencies receiving the funds to notify congress on how the money is to be spent .

for example , it requires that each agency receiving funding in the interior , environment , and related agencies title notify the house and senate appropriations committees as to how the monies are to be spent .

specifically , it provides that each such agency is to submit to the house and senate committees on appropriations , within 30 days of enactment , a general plan for the expenditure of the funds .

each agency also is to submit to the committees , within 90 days of enactment , a report "containing detailed project level information associated with the general plan. .

as another example , several of the appropriations included in the departments of labor , health and human services , and education , and related agencies title require the pertinent agency head to submit an operating plan to the appropriations committees prior to making any obligations of the funds provided .

the timelines and requirements for the plans vary , but they generally focus on detailing activities to be supported and describing the planned allocation of resources , to be followed by subsequent reports on actual obligations and expenditures .

among the general provisions of arra , agencies are to begin spending the funds "as quickly as possible consistent with prudent management. .

with regard to funds for infrastructure , recipients are to give preference to activities "that can be started and completed expeditiously," with a goal of using at least 50% of the monies for activities that can be started within 120 days of enactment .

the arra also requires the establishment of a website with information on how the funds in division a are allocated .

the administration has established a website to monitor implementation of the aara — ( http: / / www.recovery.gov / ) .

for further information on implementation and oversight provisions of arra , see the "summary of general oversight provisions" and "additional resources" sections of this report .

most mandatory spending in arra is contained in division b of the act ; however , some $29 billion of estimated outlays contained in division a are also the result of changes in mandatory programs ( for example , the supplemental nutrition assistance program , formerly known as food stamps ) .

of total amounts shown in table 1 for mandatory spending under division b , nearly $69 billion is from refundable tax credits .

for purposes of this crs report , these tax provisions are generally discussed in the "summary of tax and public finance provisions," although a few that are directly related to the mandatory provisions discussed below also are mentioned here .

non - tax mandatory spending in division b totals $198 billion over the 10-year period fy2009-fy2019 , according to cbo estimates .

the vast majority of this spending will occur in the first two years ( $160 billion ) .

almost all funds will be spent during the five - year period fy2009-fy2013 ( $194 billion ) .

the key exception to this pattern , however , is the medicaid / medicare health information technology provisions ( title iv of division b ) , which do not take effect until fy2011 .

the largest single component of spending results from provisions intended to provide fiscal relief to states under the medicaid program ( title v of division b ) .

cbo estimates that title v provisions will result in $90 billion in outlays over 10 years , with $78 billion in spending during the first two years ( fy2009 and fy2010 ) and nearly the full $90 billion spent during fy2009-fy2013 .

the next largest category of mandatory non - tax spending results from changes in unemployment compensation ( uc ) , which cbo estimates will cost $39 billion over 10 years , with more than $37 billion of that total occurring during the first two years .

uc provisions are combined in title ii of division b with provisions that amend the temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) and child support enforcement ( cse ) programs and that provide one - time "economic recovery" payments to certain individuals ( eg , recipients of social security and other benefit programs ) .

cbo estimates that the combination of tanf , cse , and economic recovery payments will cost $18 billion over 10 years , with $17 billion of that spending in the first two years .

most of this spending is for the economic recovery payments .

subsidies for cobra health insurance premiums will cost an estimated $25 billion over 10 years , and medicare / medicaid health information technology ( hit ) provisions will cost an estimated $21 billion .

most of the hit spending will occur in fy2011-fy2015 , with estimated savings starting in fy2016 .

table 7 , toward the end of this report , provides summary information on the levels of mandatory spending ( and revenue changes ) provided in arra .

division b , title i of arra includes tax provisions targeted to individuals , families , and businesses .

other components of title i include public finance measures designed to encourage economic development investment , energy conservation and efficiency , and a provision to increase the debt limit , which applies to federal debt held by the public and by the government .

table 7 , toward the end of this report , provides summary information on the level of revenue changes ( and mandatory spending ) provided in arra .

divisions a and b of arra contain numerous oversight , accountability , and transparency provisions .

many provisions are specific to individual programs , agencies , and appropriations accounts .

other provisions are more general in nature , applying to multiple programs , agencies , or appropriations .

this section concerns the latter type .

most of the general oversight provisions appear to cover activities and provisions associated with division a rather than the entire law .

the general oversight provisions might be further categorized into two groups: appropriations to oversight entities including offices of inspector general ( ig ) , the government accountability office ( gao ) , and a newly established recovery accountability and transparency board ( ratb ) ; and a number of substantive provisions , including establishment of ratb and enumeration of numerous reporting requirements .

appropriations to igs , gao , and ratb are included predominately in division a .

the provisions are distributed among 12 titles in division a and one title in division b .

in total , 23 igs receive $254.75 million in 25 separate appropriations .

igs in all 15 executive departments receive appropriations , ranging from the department of veterans affairs on the low side ( $1 million in a single appropriation ) to the department of health and human services on the high side ( $48.25 million in two appropriations ) .

arra provides funding to be available to igs with widely varying periods of availability .

for the ig at the department of state , for example , funds are available until the end of fy2010 .

other igs variously have funds available until the end of fy2011 , fy2012 , fy2013 , or "until expended" ( i.e. , "no - year" funds ) .

gao receives $25 million , available through the end of fy2010 , and ratb receives $84 million , available through the end of fy2011 .

some appropriations specify that funds are to be used specifically for oversight of arra - related activities , but others essentially are supplemental appropriations that do not restrict use of funds to arra - related purposes .

it should be noted that ratb has authority to transfer up to 100% of its funds to any office of inspector general , the office of management and budget , the general services administration , and an advisory panel for ratb that arra establishes ( division a , title xv , section 1524 ( f ) ) .

in total , the appropriations provided to these oversight - oriented entities sum to $363.75 million .

the second group of general oversight provisions is included only in division a — chiefly in titles xv and xvi — albeit in considerable variety .

among other things , these substantive provisions establish new oversight - oriented entities like ratb , enumerate diverse reporting requirements for federal agencies and nonfederal recipients of funds , and task ratb , igs , and gao with several duties .

under arra's requirements , for example , ratb's purpose is "to coordinate and conduct oversight of covered funds to prevent fraud , waste , and abuse. .

ratb's membership is to be comprised of at least 10 igs , in addition to or including a chairperson , who may be designated or appointed by the president according to certain criteria .

ratb has several enumerated functions , including to review whether reporting for contracts and grants "meets applicable standards" and "specifies the purpose of the contract or grant and measures of performance. .

in addition , ratb is required to establish a website .

the obama administration established a rudimentary recovery.gov website in anticipation of enactment of stimulus legislation .

as agencies implement arra , the website is to contain , among many other things , considerable information about how funds are allocated and used .

igs and gao also are required to conduct certain reviews .

state and local governments that receive funds also will have certain certification and reporting requirements , which may be funded , at least in part , by flexibility granted to federal agencies to adjust applicable limits on administrative expenditures for federal awards .

further requirements and guidance concerning arra implementation was forthcoming from the office of management and budget ( omb ) , some of which went beyond arra's statutory requirements .

on february 18 , 2009 , omb issued "initial implementing guidance" regarding arra , including numerous reporting requirements , to agencies in a 62-page document .

some of the required information will be posted on recovery.gov and agency - specific arra - related websites .

on march 20 , 2009 , president obama issued a five - page presidential memorandum entitled "ensuring responsible spending of recovery act funds. .

the memorandum directed agencies in how to use "available discretion" when allocating and spending certain arra - related funding .

on april 3 , 2009 , omb issued "updated implementing guidance" to agencies in a 175-page document .

further guidance is expected .

many additional resources pertaining to the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 are available online .

an overview of online resources , particularly with respect to federal , state , and local entities , is provided in crs report r40244 , authoritative resources on the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

key congressional research service reports on various funding and policy areas affected by arra are grouped together under the current legislative issues term "economy , recession , and financial sector" on the crs homepage: http: / / apps.crs.gov / cli / cli.aspx ? prds_cli_item_id=3405&from=3&fromid=4 .

in addition , reports on the individual annual appropriations bills are listed under the current legislative issues term "appropriations and budget" at http: / / apps.crs.gov / cli / level_2.aspx ? prds_cli_item_id=73 .

"recovery.gov" is the centerpiece of the administration's online effort to monitor implementation of the act: http: / / www.recovery.gov / .

the administration's website is intended to be a repository for information related to implementation and oversight of the stimulus , with information about available funding , distribution of funds , and major recipients .

under the umbrella of "recovery.gov," separate websites established by federal agencies and states may be accessed: federal agency recovery sites: http: / / www.recovery.gov / ? q=content / agencies ; and state recovery sites: http: / / www.recovery.gov / ? q=content / state - recovery - page .

finally , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has established a "recovery act guidance" page on its website , including omb memoranda and other documentation providing guidance to federal agencies: http: / / www.whitehouse.gov / omb / recovery_default / .

