congress has historically recognized the importance of teacher quality in improving the academic performance of elementary and secondary school students .

the latest amendments to the higher education act ( hea ) align with past efforts to improve quality through support and accountability for teacher preparation programs .

the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) has long sought to improve quality by supporting better professional development , effective recruitment and retention , and smaller class sizes .

in perhaps its most direct effort to improve teacher quality , the 107 th congress established new federal highly qualified teacher requirements through the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) .

in recent years , researchers and policy - makers have begun to consider and implement ways to use compensation reform to improve teacher quality ; however , federal policy up to this point has not been heavily focused on the issue of teacher pay .

there is growing concern that the single salary schedule currently in place in nearly all of the nation's schools may be a barrier to improving quality .

many believe that teachers' pay should be used to leverage changes in behavior , knowledge , and skills , and make teaching more financially attractive to successful teachers and to highly able individuals outside of teaching .

the recent policy focus on student academic achievement has led some reformers to advocate for various systems of pay - for - performance based on achievement gains , including the use of value - added methods .

others argue that pay differentiation should reward a broader set of factors .

these reforms include incentives based on such things as teacher evaluations , advanced credentials , career ladders , and service in hard - to - staff schools or high - need subject areas .

apart from the recently enacted teacher incentive fund ( tif ) , federal education policy has not significantly addressed the nature of teacher compensation .

nevertheless , significant amounts of funding from several federal programs support the salaries of certain kinds of teachers , including teachers and paraprofessionals serving educationally disadvantaged students under the compensatory education program ( esea , title i - a ) , newly hired teachers under the continuation of activities provided by the class size reduction program ( antecedent to esea , title ii - a ) and special education teachers ( under the individuals with disabilities education act ) .

as congress moves to reauthorize the esea , proposals to leverage federal education spending to reform teacher compensation systems may receive serious consideration .

congress could scale up the current federal role in compensation reform through continued expansion of the tif program ; which is basically providing funding for promising programs that already exist ( mainly ) at the local level .

however , congress may also consider alternative approaches that would alter or expand the federal role .

an example of such a proposal would be to strengthen current language supporting pay reform under esea title ii ( sections 2113 and 2123 ) .

this report is intended to discuss a variety of issues that relate to compensation reform and the proposals congress may consider during esea reauthorization .

the report first provides background on the teacher pay system , including the history behind the development of the dominant feature of this system — the single salary schedule .

second , the report discusses the basic elements of compensation reform , namely performance - based pay , competency - based pay , and service - based pay .

the third section of the report describes several reform efforts that are currently underway around the country at the national , state , and local levels .

finally , the report concludes with a discussion of recent legislative action and issues for esea reauthorization .

the origins of the current system of teacher compensation can be traced to the turn of the 20 th century and the labor movement's drive to improve pay equity in public education and the civil service at large .

prior to that time , "room and board" and "grade - based" compensation models allowed large discrepancies to develop , particularly along racial and gender lines .

by the 1920s , new systems of uniform pay steps were taking hold to ensure teachers with the same years of experience and education level would receive the same salary .

these systems came to be known as the single salary schedule and have been nearly universal in public schools since the mid - 20 th century ; adopted in 97% of all schools by 1950 and operational in 96% of schools in 2000 .

teacher salary schedules are primarily determined at the level of the individual school district .

they are often the subject of negotiation between local school boards and teacher unions where applicable .

this salary schedule bases a teacher's pay primarily on two factors — the number of years of teaching experience the individual has and the number of educational credits and degrees the individual has earned .

increases in both teaching experience and credits / degrees lead to increases in salary , up to absolute limits imposed by the applicable pay schedule .

critics view the single salary schedule as largely rewarding longevity and the accumulation of college credits , not classroom effectiveness .

some researchers have found that the schedule's main factors — experience and level of education — have relatively little beneficial impact on classroom effectiveness as measured by the achievement of a teacher's students .

hanushek and rivkin have concluded: "the results [of a review of the available research] are startlingly consistent in finding no strong evidence that teacher - student ratios , teacher education , or teacher experience have an expected positive effect on student achievement. .

other research challenges these conclusions .

for example , based on their analysis of the literature , rob greenwald et al .

concluded: "[r]esource variables that attempt to describe the quality of teachers ( teacher ability , teacher education , and teacher experience ) show very strong relations with student achievement. .

regardless of the strength of the relationship between teacher quality and student achievement , the single salary schedule ( and perhaps low overall pay , see box below ) is argued by some to fail to draw the highest caliber of potential teachers into the field ; to fail to reward teachers who are exceptionally productive ; or to fail to allocate the supply of teachers to fields where they are most needed ( like math and science ) .

criticism of the single salary schedule has undergirded efforts to implement performance - based pay plans in elementary and secondary education .

teacher compensation reform efforts have a long history and have fallen into and out of favor in public schools repeatedly throughout the 20 th century .

throughout this history there has been a consistent tension in the balance between rewarding inputs versus outputs .

put simply , should teachers be given additional pay for improving the skills and abilities they bring into the classroom or should they get additional pay for improving the skills and abilities their students carry away from school ? .

reflecting this debate , a recent review of the history of compensation reforms described the two classic approaches as ( 1 ) knowledge - based pay and ( 2 ) merit - based pay .

many writing in this area conflate these two reforms ( among other reforms ) under terms like "performance - based pay" and "pay - for - performance. .

to avoid confusion , in this report , the term performance - based pay is used to refer strictly to output - based compensation reforms that reward teachers for improving student performance .

input - based incentives ( such as rewards for improving a teacher's knowledge ) are referred to as competency - based pay .

in addition to these two types of reform , there exists a third category that will be called service - based pay .

these reforms include financial rewards for those teaching in hard - to - staff schools and hard - to - staff subject areas , but can also include rewards for those who move up the career ladder to serve in more advanced roles ( eg , team leadership ) and take on additional responsibilities ( eg , mentoring ) .

the teacher compensation reforms discussed above have not been implemented on a widespread basis .

two surveys conducted by the national education association ( nea ) found that fewer than one in ten teachers receive some form of "performance - based or incentive pay ( eg , merit pay , stipends for teaching in critical shortage areas , incentives for national board certification , etc. ) . .

more specifically , the nea found that 5% of teachers surveyed during the 1995-1996 school year and 8% of those surveyed during the 2000-2001 school year were receiving this type of pay .

data from a more recent survey conducted by the department of education suggest that compensation reforms may be spreading .

the 2003-2004 schools and staffing survey ( sass ) found that 14% of teachers reported receiving a "merit pay bonus [or a] state supplement" to their regular salary .

as congress considers education legislation , including bills to reauthorize the esea , proposals to leverage federal education spending to reform teacher compensation systems may receive serious attention .

the debate over expansion of the federal involvement in this area will likely raise questions about what role the federal government should play in reforming teacher compensation given that most funding for teacher compensation is provided at the local and state levels .

recent legislative action has mostly involved proposals that simply would expand the tif approach of funding a limited number of promising reform efforts already underway , mainly at the local level .

although bills to expand tif funding were not passed in the 109 th congress and the 110 th congress kept program funding level , the 111 th congress tripled tif appropriations for fy2009 .

meanwhile , the program authority continues to provide only minimal guidance as to how these funds should be used .

in recent sessions , congress has considered alternative approaches that would have begun to alter or expand federal support for teacher incentives and compensation reform .

during the last two congresses , debate over this issue occurred both within efforts to amend the tif and also around broader legislative activities .

this section will discuss these recent congressional actions including two bills that were introduced to reauthorize the hea and would also have amended the tif program authority ; two bills that would have established a new program , for so - called innovation districts , in which performance incentives for teachers were to play a major role ; and several hearings in which a broader debate over the federal role in teacher compensation reform occurred .

following a review of recent congressional action is a discussion of some of the issues that may be raised as the process for reauthorizing the esea continues to unfold .

during the 109 th congress , three bills were introduced to amend or increase funding for the tif .

two of the bills simply would have increased funding , while the third bill ( h.r .

609 ) would have moved tif authority from title v - d of the esea to title ii - d of the hea .

the latter bill also further specified eligible entities and program activities , and would have required new non - federal matching funds as well as a program evaluation .

during the 110 th congress , this hea reauthorization bill was reintroduced as h.r .

3746 and retained the tif provisions ; however , action on the bill stopped with committee referral .

the hea was eventually reauthorized by the higher education opportunity act ( heoa , p.l .

110-315 ) ; neither the heoa nor the house and senate - passed bills ( h.r .

4137 and s. 1642 ) contained the tif provisions of the earlier reauthorization proposals .

three other tif - related bills were introduced during the 110 th congress .

the teacher incentive fund act ( h.r .

1761 ) would have clarified and expanded the program's provisions , similar to the h.r .

3746 , and would have codified tif authority in esea , title ii , part c ; the same provisions were included in a bill introduced in the senate ( s. 1775 ) .

action on both of these bills stopped with committee referral .

finally , the 110 th congress reauthorized tif through the fy2008 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

110-161 ) using the same authorizing language that was initially passed in the fy2006 appropriations act .

the fy2006 authorizing language was again used to appropriate funds for tif under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) , the omnibus appropriations act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , and the consolidated appropriations act of 2010 , ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

apart from the tif bills just discussed , few bills related to teacher performance pay have been introduced in congress .

one notable exception was the innovation districts for school improvement act ( introduced in the 109 th congress as s. 2441 and reintroduced in the 110 th as s. 114 ) that would have required participating districts to establish metrics to evaluate teacher effectiveness and , "develop a differentiated pay scale to provide incentives for effective teaching , teaching specific subject areas , and teaching in specific schools , including hard - to - staff schools. .

the bills' provisions regarding these incentives were more specific than either the existing tif language or the bills to amend the tif , particularly with regard to district cooperation with teachers , union representatives , and the community .

another bill , the teacher excellence for all children ( teach ) act ( introduced in the 109 th congress as h.r .

2835 and s. 1218 and reintroduced in the 110 th as h.r .

2204 and s. 1339 ) would have required participating districts to award "premium pay" to those teaching "shortage" subjects in high - need schools and deemed exemplary "based on strong learning gains for students. .

neither the innovation districts bill nor teach act legislation moved beyond committee referral ; although some non - performance pay provisions in the teach act were enacted through the hea reauthorization bill ( p.l .

110-315 ) .

early in the 110 th congress , both the house and senate held hearings on the quality of k - 12 teaching in which issues related to teacher incentives and performance pay figured prominently .

intended as early steps in the esea reauthorization process , testimony at these hearings often raised issues regarding compensation reform and several members asked specific questions about performance pay and other incentives .

on march 6 , 2007 , the health , education , labor , and pensions committee held a hearing entitled , "nclb reauthorization: strategies for attracting , supporting and retaining high quality educators" ( s. hrg .

110-154 ) .

on may 11 , 2007 , the education and labor committee held a hearing entitled , "esea reauthorization: boosting quality in the teaching profession" ( serial no .

110-34 ) .

the overarching sentiment among the education experts tapped for these panels was in favor of providing incentives to promote teacher quality .

several spoke in support of the pay incentive components of tif and tap ; some comments were in response to committee members questions about the issue and several mentioned the need to use a variety of evaluation methods in addition to measures of student performance .

one witness on the senate panel submitted additional material following the hearing in which she argued against the use of value - added modeling for measuring the performance of individual teachers .

in september 2007 , the majority and minority leadership of the education and labor committee released a discussion draft of proposed legislation to reauthorize the esea .

title ii of the draft proposed the establishment of a discretionary grant program ( similar to the teach act proposal ) which would have awarded "premium pay" to "exemplary teachers" serving in high - need schools .

the draft required that leas , in collaboration with local teacher organizations , develop a system to identify "exemplary teachers" that must be ( 1 ) based on strong learning gains for students ; ( 2 ) based on classroom observation and feedback at least four times annually ; ( 3 ) conducted by multiple sources , including master teachers and principals ; and ( 4 ) evaluated against research - validated rubrics that use planning , instructional , and learning environment standards to measure teaching performance .

the committee held an all - day , six - panel hearing on september 10 , 2007 , for comments on the discussion draft .

the "teaching and school leadership" panel included representatives from the nation's two largest teacher unions – the national education association ( nea ) and the american federation of teachers ( aft ) .

both representatives spoke out strongly against the premium pay provisions .

in his prepared statement , reg weaver , president of the nea , stated his organization's position plainly , "the nea opposes federal requirements for a pay system that mandates teacher pay based on student performance or student test scores. .

the aft opposition was less blunt ; vice - president , antonia cortese , expressed concern about the proposal's "top - down" approach which "jeopardizes buy - in" from teachers .

other members of the panel spoke favorably of the proposal's potential to remedy inequities in the distribution of quality teachers .

specifically , both kati haycock , president of the education trust , and kristan van hook , of the national institute for excellence in teaching , praised the use of premium pay to encourage teachers to work in hard - to - staff schools and career ladders to reward professional advancement .

ms. van hook discussed her support for performance pay at great length ; emphasizing the importance of implementing such incentives as part of a "comprehensive approach , such as that that is taken in the bill before you today. .

should the 112 th congress consider compensation reform and teacher incentive pay proposals , it will inevitably be thinking about whether to stay the course with tif .

as it stands , the program is very broadly defined and has been implemented at the local level in varying ways .

should the federal role in this area continue to be a supporter of local pay reform experimentation and provider of seed money to encourage financial commitments from local , state , and other sources for these reforms ? .

in light of recent appropriations and accompanying non - federal matching requirement , it appears this view may hold sway in future deliberations .

if tif remains an experimental approach to finding out what works , congress may consider how long and in how many settings to continue to support this type of effort .

alternatively , congress may consider whether the federal role should be expanded beyond tif .

should this role be greater than funding a limited set of reform efforts designed to meet a few broadly defined objectives ? .

if the federal role is to expand , congress may need to consider ( or set up a process to consider ) what elements of teacher compensation reform can or should be written into federal law .

recently considered legislation and testimony before the authorizing committees ( mentioned in the previous section ) provide some potential avenues for development and also point to potential areas of difficulty .

competency - based and service - based incentives appear to have much support , but some may feel they don't do enough to reward performance .

on the other hand , performance - based incentives may be too controversial and may be difficult to enact on a large scale and in a manner that would achieve intended goals .

another element of the debate over pay reforms may occur around what level of the educational system these reforms are best applied .

that is , either under tif or through a different program , congress may consider whether it wants federal involvement in this area to focus on state reforms or local reforms .

programs reviewed in the previous section of this report show reforms occurring at both levels in numerous locations throughout the country .

should future federal policy development encourage states to be more involved in compensation reform or instead provide direct support to local efforts ? .

scaling up federal support for tif may be easier to implement at the local level , while an expanded federal role that includes more specified program activities may be better suited to the state level .

the debate over local versus state reform may also involve proposals to amend the esea title ii - a state formula grant program .

currently , most of these funds go through state education agencies to local school districts and are mainly used for class size reduction and professional development ; however , "merit pay" is also included in the program's authorized activities .

congress could consider placing greater priority on addressing compensation reform through esea title ii - a by strengthening current language ( sections 2113 and 2123 ) .

performance measurement may be the most hotly contested issue in the compensation reform debate .

current federal law governing tif requires that teacher performance be based on student achievement and teacher evaluation , but does not provide any detail as to how this should occur .

traditional teacher evaluation has been common for decades , while , performance evaluation tied to student achievement is a more recent development .

significant improvements have been made in the effort to connect student achievement to teacher performance , particularly in certain subjects like math .

still , the research in this area provides reason for congress to give serious thought to issues such as the use of value - added methods for high - stakes decision - making for individual teachers .

one reason these methods are hard to apply to individual teachers is that , to produce reliable results , the statistical modeling employed requires large amounts of data .

for example , an elementary school teacher with an average class size of 15 students assessed twice a year would produce too few data points on which to reliably estimate teacher effects apart from non - teacher effects .

the problems associated with measuring individual teacher performance explain much of why school - wide incentives are the dominant mode for delivering performance rewards .

simply put , measuring a school's performance is easier than measuring an individual teacher's performance .

critics of school - wide awards point out that they fail to incentivize individual effort and defeat the purpose of compensation reform .

the counter - argument holds that school - wide awards encourage cooperation and collegiality which are critical to the success of broad - based , systemic reform .

congress may wish to consider the extent to which school and individual performance goals can or should be collectively targeted by pay incentive programs .

data systems for both student achievement and teacher performance have greatly improved in recent years ; however , these systems have by no means reached universal or consistent application .

in addition to the many technical obstacles that remain when it comes to compiling the data many feel are needed to measure and reward teacher performance , there are also political barriers to linking teacher and student records ; some states have moved to prohibit this practice .

congress should be award of the data limitations and obstacles and may want to consider basing performance incentives on data elements and linkages that can be expected to be consistently available .

crs has constructed inventories of state and local programs , which are presented below .

it is important to emphasize that these inventories are not comprehensive .

ideally , compiling complete inventories of all pay incentive programs would involve a proactive , investigative approach such as surveying all school districts or conducting a nationwide sample of school personnel .

given the limitations on our resources , however , crs has collected information through somewhat less systematic methods based on secondary sources .

these methods include ( 1 ) an extensive review of the academic literature and educational press , ( 2 ) a thorough search of the internet for project websites , ( 3 ) a review of documentation made available by state education departments , policy centers , associations , and commissions , and ( 4 ) numerous discussions with experts and practitioners in the field .

these inventories are provided to offer a sense of the landscape of programs in operation in states and localities .

crs believes this is useful in conveying basic information about the structure of programs and the range of characteristics programs feature .

the inventories are not all - inclusive , and crs can not be certain about the extent to which they reflect the actual universe of programs .

on the following pages , table a - 1 contains the inventory of state - level incentive pay reforms and table a - 2 contains the inventory of local - level reforms .

