renewable energy currently accounts for about 10% of u.s. total energy production according to the u.s. department of energy .

biomass is the largest source of renewable energy in the united states .

approximately 53% of all domestic renewable energy comes from biomass sources represented by biofuels , landfill gas , biogenic municipal solid waste , wood and wood - derived fuels , and other biomass such as switchgrass .

much of the impetus for the contribution of biomass sources and technologies to the national energy picture originated in a federal law originally viewed as a natural gas conservation measure , the public utility regulatory policies act of 1978 ( purpa ) .

a market was created for firms outside of the electric utility industry with a preference or opportunity for producing energy from alternative fuels , especially for qualifying small power facilities that could use biomass , waste , or other renewable resources ( including wind , solar energy , and water ) .

investments and advances in combustion turbine technology preceded the growth of cogeneration .

nowadays , combined heat and power turbine - generator sets are a mainstay of several industries and industrial applications .

the pulp and paper industry dominates the cogeneration sector today fueled largely by biomass from wood wastes .

state governments have generally led the way in deploying other renewable energy technologies .

picking up where federal research and development dollars left off , states are using the concept of a renewable portfolio standard ( rps ) to create a market for renewable energy via mandatory goals .

rps requirements oblige electric utilities to provide electricity from renewable energy sources in increasing amounts over a specified period of years .

through february 2009 , rps requirements or goals have been established in 29 states plus the district of columbia .

a major argument that has been advanced for a national renewable energy ( or electricity ) standard is that it would encourage increased use of renewable energy .

thus far , two bills have been introduced in the 111 th congress that would amend purpa .

the american renewable energy act , h.r .

890 , would establish a renewable electricity standard ( res ) .

in the senate , a renewable electricity standard was introduced in s. 433 .

senator bingaman had previously released a draft bill to discuss a federal renewable portfolio standard on february 11 , 2009 .

with biomass representing the most widely used ( and ostensibly the least expensive ) renewable energy resource in the united states , its potential use in meeting res requirements is key to the success of any res that may be enacted .

much of the debate over an res revolves around whether there is a need for a federal requirement for renewable energy use by electric providers and whether the momentum in the states is truly moving the use of renewable energy forward .

the production tax credit and the investment tax credit have been used by the federal government to support renewable energy .

recent consideration has also been given to implementing a federal "feed - in tariff" ( fit ) law .

feed - in tariffs are incentive structures for generating renewable electricity usually at above - market rates for a set number of years , reducing the payback period and adding certainty to the return on the investment .

the successful deployment of renewable energy in europe is often credited to fit provisions .

arguments in favor of an res usually involve impacts on the environment , and reducing dependence on fossil fuels .

historically , most electric power has come from base - load generation in large , central station plants using fossil fuels ( principally coal ) as the source of energy .

when burned , fossil fuels emit pollutants such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides which are subject to environmental controls to limit their release to the air .

combustion of fossil fuels also produces the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide .

generating electricity from renewable resources emits far less of such pollutants .

many consider carbon dioxide emissions from biomass sources as practically neutral , because biomass sources take in carbon dioxide during their growing cycle and release it when burned .

renewable energy is seen as a way to reduce fossil fuel use , and with growing awareness of the potential impacts of climate change , the role of renewable energy in reducing carbon emissions has garnered increasing public support .

but renewable energy technologies ( with the exception of basic biomass combustion ) are relatively newly developed and costlier than fossil fuels to produce electricity .

federal support for research and development is believed by many policymakers to be crucial in making renewable energy technologies more cost - competitive .

a federal res mandate and consistent , long - term financial incentives are also seen by supporters as necessary to increase renewable electricity generation to attain the goals of cleaner energy and greater energy security .

arguments against the need for a national res have been made in the past that this is a matter for state or regional self - determination .

some states have moved forward with their own res programs envisioning either an economic benefit or environmental imperative , or both .

states may argue that a federal mandate could override existing state programs which may have involved years of negotiations among local interests to set goals and timetables .

grants , guaranteed loans and tax incentives from the federal government may be viewed by such parties as the best ways for the federal government to encourage renewable energy growth .

in regions where the quality or availability of renewable resources may be in question , as for example , in the southeast , some states are concerned that the current res proposals would subject them to federal penalties .

a "renewable electricity deployment fund," proposed in h.r .

890 , would return amounts collected from penalties for noncompliance or alternative compliance payments to retail electricity suppliers that have submitted renewable energy credits ( rec ) for compliance .

unless some balancing mechanism is in place , such as the bingaman discussion draft proposal to return federal penalties to those states with less renewable energy resources to specifically develop such resources , southeastern states and electric utilities fear that they will become net purchasers of recs , which will result in a "transfer of wealth" to the sunny and wind - rich states of the southwest and midwest , respectively .

given the identified concerns over biomass supplies in the southeastern states and the pivotal role the region will likely have in a federal res debate , issues in this region will be used as the focus of this report .

investments in energy production in the southeastern united states have long favored base load technologies due to increasing economies of scale from large generation units .

the electricity industry in the region is still largely subject to traditional rate regulation , and power generation projects historically have been approved by state regulatory commissions which have endeavored to maintain a favorable , low cost business climate .

relatively low electricity prices have thus resulted in the region .

new , renewable energy technologies have not been adopted to the extent seen in other regions of the united states thus far , largely because of cost and operational variability .

when considered from a regional perspective , the southeastern united states does not have the high quality wind and solar resources which exist in other regions of the country .

although offshore wind in the region may have promise for southeastern coastal states , there are no commercially operating offshore wind farms anywhere in the united states .

however , renewable energy from biomass is the exception .

the region is home to 44% of the nation's total energy from woody biomass and a significant portion of other biomass types .

not all biomass is recognized as "eligible" to meet federal res requirements due to differences in federal legislation and tax provisions defining biomass .

these definitions have varied over time with changes in the law and regulations , reflecting policy goals and technological change .

the definition of biomass would be critical to determining which technologies and processes would be available to meet possible res requirements .

the next section discusses current and future possible sources of biomass and technologies for renewable energy .

 figure 1 shows various types of biomass resources in the united states by annual tonnage per square kilometer available in individual counties .

the agricultural resources of the midwest and the forest - based resources of the southeast feature prominently .

a potential national renewable electricity standard would rely on biomass as one of the nation's most widely available resources that could be used to meet requirements .

with many states already moving forward on advancing renewable energy goals , the acceptability of an res may come down to regional views on the availability and suitability of renewable energy resources for meeting res requirements .

nowhere is the debate on biomass resources more pronounced than in the southeastern united states where biomass has been described as the region's best hope to meet res requirements .

the key determinants of success related to fuel for a biomass power plant include the availability of biomass resources , prices of the feedstock , and the cost of collection and delivery of these resources .

these factors will help determine whether further biomass development can help the region economically meet projected requirements of an res .

doe / eia has stated that biomass has the potential to be a large part of the national solution toward meeting a prospective res .

this is especially true for the southeastern region , at least in the initial years of compliance .

the definition for biomass could be chosen to expand the resource beyond the supply of woody materials to include livestock wastes , municipal solid wastes , and / or other non - traditional resources .

plans for increased use of waste wood from forests may require new forms of cooperation and coordination between forest products companies and biomass power generators to ensure access to the resource .

biomass power plants are tied to a "geo - economic zone" in which it is cost - effective to collect and deliver the biomass feedstock to the boiler .

this generally means that there could be only one large "industrial" user of biomass ( whether forest product manufacturer or biomass power production ) in a given geo - economic zone , and growth of renewable electricity from biomass to meet res requirements will be bound by such zones .

having a financially viable forest products sector producing wood wastes is important to the biomass power industry .

new resources ( such as dedicated biocrops ) or other biomass sources ( such as municipal solid waste ) may need to be used if biomass from forest residues and forest product industry wastes do not prove sufficient to meet res goals .

targets for biofuels production from a renewable fuels standard may mean that increased amounts of biomass would be dedicated to meet the needs of that program , if the trend away from corn - based ethanol persists and gasoline demand increases .

the effects of these new federal requirements added to existing uses on the price of woody biomass is uncertain , but increased demand without a commensurate increase in supply ( or development of alternative supplies ) usually leads to higher prices for a finite resource .

sustainable management of forest resources is a basic consideration .

despite being "green" resources , renewable energy installations are not without aesthetic or environmental challenges of their own .

wind turbines have been called ugly and noisy , and the cooling needs of solar thermal facilities in desert locations may require the use of scarce water resources .

although biomass - fueled power plants are not immune to such challenges , they are capable of offering base - load capacity , and a viable clean energy alternative for utilities in the southeast should climate change considerations officially become part of the rationale for a renewable electricity standard .

climate change mitigation goals may have additional impacts on the value of renewable energy credits , and eventual impacts on biomass demand nationwide .

research and development initiatives may well increase the efficiency of biomass power generation , making it possible to increase power output from less biomass feedstock .

sustainable management of southeastern woody biomass supplies could help to meet any res target .

diversity in biomass supplies will also be key if the resource is to meet competing demands .

planning for biomass resources that fails to consider competing uses , may have unintended economic , ecological and environmental consequences .

