this report discusses electric power transmission and related policy issues .

transmission is a prominent federal issue because of a perceived need to improve reliability and reduce costs , transmission's role in meeting national energy goals ( such as increased use of renewable electricity ) , and the potential efficiency advantages of "smart grid" modernization .

proposals before the 111 th congress for changing federal transmission law and regulations to meet these and other objectives include s. 539 , the clean renewable energy and economic development act , introduced on march 5 , 2009 ; and the march 9 , 2009 , majority staff transmission siting draft of the senate energy and natural resources committee ( the "senate energy majority draft" ) .

transmission development and regulation are complex and sometimes contentious policy areas .

in addition to an overview of the electric power system , this report reviews six major transmission policy topics: transmission planning .

transmission permitting .

financing and cost allocation .

system modernization and the smart grid .

transmission system reliability .

a concluding section summarizes the policy issues identified in the report .

this section discusses the physical and technical characteristics of the nation's power system , and then regulation of electric power transmission .

this section of the report will discuss the reliability of the transmission system from three perspectives: problems in evaluating the current reliability condition of the grid ; modernization and reliability ; reliability and changes in the energy market .

this concluding section summarizes policy issues of potential interest to congress .

s. 539 and other proposals call for a much larger federal role in transmission planning , and suggest that planning should be conducted on a larger geographic scope than in the past .

policy issues include: what should be the objectives of the planning process ? .

for example , planning could be focused on renewable power development or on broader objectives , such as congestion relief and reliability enhancement .

what should be the scope of a uthority of the planning entities .

federal transmission planning could be run by interconnection - wide centralized authorities ( the top - down approach ) or be conducted primarily at a regional level ( the bottom - up approach ) , or as a hybrid .

what is the appropriate scope of the planning process ? .

should the planning process extend beyond transmission planning narrowly defined to a include a broader array of solutions to power system issues , such as demand response , distributed power , or conventional power plant construction .

could preferential treatment tied to the planning process distort transmission investment ? .

the planning proposals typically make available certain benefits , such as a federal permitting option , to projects included in the plan .

these benefits could lead developers to add unnecessary features and costs to qualify proposals to meet plan criteria .

avoiding these distortions will require careful oversight or , arguably , limiting the benefits associated with the plan ( for example , putting all new power lines or none , whether or not they are in the plan , under federal government permitting authority ) .

is the scheme for managing and financing t he planning process realistic ? .

an effective planning process will need realistic schedules and sufficient resources to timely develop and update transmission plans .

transmission line permitting is primarily under the control of the states .

current proposals would extend federal authority , perhaps by completing displacing the state role .

issues include: should the grid be viewed from a national perspective ? .

the grid evolved as local systems serving limited utility service areas .

now that the system has evolved into three separate synchronized interconnections , each spanning ( other than ercot ) many states .

the question is whether a state - by - state or national view of the grid is most appropriate .

the issue does not necessarily have a single answer ; for example , a state perspective may be appropriate for "routine" projects , while a national perspective could be applied to "national interest" projects .

can transmission s ystem reliability be separated from authority over new transmission construction ? .

in epact05 congress put the reliability of the grid under federal jurisdiction .

by extension , should the federal government have control over the permitting of transmission lines aimed at enhancing system reliability ( which could mean almost any new line in an interconnected power systems ) ? .

how important is it to accelerate the construction of new transmission lines ? .

one criticism of the current regulatory regime is that it takes many years to move a transmission project through the permitting steps .

expanding federal authority over permitting is viewed as a means of accelerating the process .

the question is how important is it to quickly build transmission lines to meet reliability , environmental , and other objectives .

management of the permitting process .

if ferc or some other agency is assigned a federal permitting role , it will need the resources to expeditiously process applications .

otherwise the whole point of giving more permitting power to the federal government would largely be obviated .

building new transmission lines could cost billions of dollars .

even more contentious than how to fund these projects is the question of how the costs of interstate transmission lines should be allocated to utility customers .

issues include: should the federal government help pay for new transmission lines ? .

some proposals call for the federal government , possibly acting through the federal utilities , to help pay for new transmission lines , pay for expanding projects to meet future needs , or actually build new transmission .

how far should the federal government go into financing the expansion of the transmission grid ? .

should the congress establish a national cost allocation rule for new transmission projects ? .

an approach included in several proposals would require all ratepayers in an interconnection to pay for new projects anywhere in the interconnection .

the notion is that in a interconnected grid all customers benefit to some degree from enhancements to the system , but a preferential cost allocation mechanism for transmission may bias investment away from other alternatives .

the smart grid is a concept for modernizing the grid with information technology and intelligent features .

congress has already established and funded programs for encouraging development of the smart grid .

policy issues include: program oversight .

the american recovery and reinvestment act provided funding for previously authorized smart grid programs , including one key effort – development of interoperability standards by the national institute for standards and technology – that has been lagging .

congress may want to monitor how these programs progress .

smart grid cost / benefit oversight .

the balance of costs and benefits that the smart grid will produce for customers has been hotly debated .

many smart grid investment decisions will be made by state utility commissions .

however , other investments and rate decisions will be under ferc jurisdiction , so there is ample room for congressional oversight of the actual costs , benefits , and performance of smart grid investments .

in response to the 2003 northeastern blackout , congress gave ferc authority over the reliability of the bulk power system in the 48 contiguous states .

continuing policy issues include: transmission system information gap .

there is no good source of data that measures the reliability of the transmission grid or allows trend analysis .

nerc is developing a new process for collecting and analyzing transmission reliability data .

the progress of this effort may be of interest to congress , because without good data it will be difficult to judge whether ferc's new reliability standards and other actions are actually improving the reliability of the transmission system .

modernization and reliability .

the implementation of modernized technology and management may be an alternative , or necessary supplement , to building new transmission lines to improve the reliability of the grid .

in considering new spending and planning approaches for the transmission system , congress may wish to ensure that the right balance is struck between modernization and new construction .

reliability and the changing power market .

the power system is changing from a model based on central station power plants to a more diverse range of resources , including variable renewable power , demand response , and distributed generation .

congress may wish to exercise oversight to ensure that ferc and nerc are developing reliability standards for a changing grid .

also , certain kinds of distributed generation are not covered by federal reliability authority , a situation congress may want to revisit in the future .

