nearly all state and local governments sell bonds to finance public projects and certain qualified private activities .

the federal government subsidizes state and local bond issuances through a number of policies .

the mostly widely utilized policy instrument is the tax - exempt bond , which excludes bond interest payments received from the investor's federal taxable income .

in contrast , interest payments from other types of bonds , such as corporate bonds , are included in federal taxable income .

because of the difference in taxability , state and local government tax - exempt bonds — often referred to as municipal bonds — offer a lower pre - tax interest rate than corporate bonds , which reduces the interest costs owed by state and municipal governments .

tax credit bonds ( tcbs ) offer an alternative to municipal bonds , providing a tax credit or direct payment proportional to the bond's face value in lieu of the tax exemption .

most tcbs are designated for a specific purpose .

tcbs have been used by issuers to finance public school construction and renovation ; clean renewable energy projects ; refinancing of outstanding government debt in regions affected by natural disasters ; conservation of forest land ; investment in energy conservation ; and for economic development purposes .

the relative appeal of tcbs and municipal bonds is dependent on issuer and investor characteristics and on economic conditions .

many recent tcbs are not eligible for new issuances under current law , due either to the expiration of issuing authority or to full subscription of the tcb issuing limit .

bonds that are no longer being issued may still be held by the public .

in the 114 th congress , multiple bills have been introduced to extend or modify certain tcb programs .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) extended the issuing authority of qzabs for the 2015 and 2016 tax years , and provided for $400 million of issuing capacity for each year .

other legislation , including h.r .

2676 and s. 1515 would extend the bab program indefinitely .

additionally , the president's fy2017 budget included a number of proposals related to tcbs , including the creation of a new tcb for certain infrastructure programs .

there are several types of tcbs , most of which are provided for a specific purpose , location , or type of project .

issuers of qualified zone academy bonds ( qzabs ) are required to use the proceeds to finance public school partnership programs in economically distressed areas .

clean renewable energy bonds ( crebs ) are designated for clean renewable energy projects .

midwestern disaster bond ( mwdb ) proceeds were for the refinancing of outstanding government debt in regions affected by the midwestern storms and floods in the spring and summer of 2008 .

qualified forestry conservation bonds ( qfcbs ) are intended to help non - profits or government entities purchase and conserve forest land .

qualified energy conservation bonds ( qecbs ) are for investment in capital projects that improve energy conservation .

qualified school construction bonds ( qscbs ) are for school construction , build america bonds ( babs ) are for any governmental purpose , and recovery zone economic development bonds ( rzedbs ) are for economic development purposes .

table 1 summarizes the acronyms for the bonds examined in this report .

the treasury - determined credit rate for investor credit tcbs is set higher than the municipal bond rate to compensate for the credit's taxability noted earlier .

generally , to attract investors , the credit rate should yield a return greater than the prevailing municipal bond rate and at least equal to the after - tax rate for corporate bonds of similar maturity and risk .

and for issuers , the interest cost should be less than , or at least equal to , the next best financing alternative .

in almost all cases , tax - exempt bonds would be the next best alternative for governmental issuers .

the following section offers a brief analysis of the tradeoff between tax credit bonds and other bonds from the prospective of investors and issuers .

the authority to issue tcbs is usually capped with a national limit or with a state - by - state cap .

babs were the exception .

in addition , some of the tcbs include set asides for sub - state governments or other entities .

what follows is a brief overview of how and to whom each bond program allocates the authority to issue the bonds .

table 2 lists the existing tcbs and their authorization levels .

a more detailed description of each type of bond is provided later in the report .

note that p.l .

110-246 , enacted in june of 2008 , created section 54a of the tax code .

this section contains many parameters common to all tcbs .

this revision of the tax code was intended to "standardize" some of the tcb parameters .

as table 2 shows , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 , arra ) included several bond provisions that use a tax credit mechanism .

specifically , arra created qscbs .

it also allowed issuers the option of receiving a direct payment from the u.s. treasury instead of tax - exempt interest payments or tax credits for investors .

these new bonds , babs and rzedbs , are also unlike other tax credit bonds in that the interest rate on the bonds is a rate agreed to by the issuer and bond investor .

in short , with babs and rzedbs , the two parties in the transaction established the tax credit rate , not the treasury secretary .

the resulting investor tax credit amount or issuer direct payment is equal to 35% of the interest payment for babs and 45% for rzedbs .

legislation has been introduced in the 114 th congress that would modify the status of certain tcbs .

this activity includes h.r .

2676 and s. 1515 , which would reauthorize and extend the issuance of babs .

moreover , qzabs were extended for the 2015 and 2016 tax year with $400 million of capacity each year by the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) .

other recent tcb legislative action was taken in the hiring incentives to restore employment act of 2010 ( hire act ; p.l .

111-147 ) , which expanded the direct payment option beyond babs to include issuers of new crebs , qecbs , qzabs , and qscbs .

the aggregate limit for qzab debt was $400 million annually from 1998 through 2008 , $1.4 billion for each of 2009 and 2010 , and $400 million annually from 2011 through 2016 .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) authorized an additional $400 million dollars in qzabs for both 2015 and 2016 .

further limits are applied to each state , the district of columbia , and territory based upon their portion of the u.s. population below the poverty line .

states are responsible for the allocation of the available credit to the local governments or qualified zone academies .

unused credit capacity can be carried forward for up to two years .

individual public schools use qzabs , through their participating state and local governments , for school renovation ( not including new construction ) , equipment , teacher training , and course materials .

to qualify for the program , the school must also be a "qualified zone academy. .

a "qualified zone academy" is any public school ( or program within a public school ) that provides and develops educational programs below the postsecondary level if "such public school or program ( as the case may be ) is designed in cooperation with business to enhance the academic curriculum , increase graduation and employment rates , and prepare students for the rigors of college and the increasingly complex workforce. .

in addition , the academy must also be located in an empowerment zone or enterprise community .

alternatively , the academy also qualifies if it is reasonably expected that at least 35% of the students qualify for the free or reduced price school lunch program .

at least 95% of the bond proceeds must be used for rehabilitating or repairing public school facilities , providing equipment , developing course materials , or training teachers and other school personnel .

these bonds had a national limit of $11 billion in each of 2009 and 2010 .

an additional $200 million in each of 2009 and 2010 was allocated to indian schools .

the bonds generally are allocated to states based on the state's share of title 1 basic grants ( section 1124 of the elementary and secondary education act of 1965 ; 20 u.s.c .

6333 , bg ) .

the district of columbia and the possessions of the u.s. are considered states for qscbs .

the possessions other than puerto rico ( american samoa , commonwealth of the northern mariana islands , guam , and u.s. virgin islands ) , however , were allocated an amount on the basis of the possession's population with income below the poverty line as a portion of the entire u.s. population with income below the poverty line .

as noted above , 40% of the bond volume ( $4.4 billion ) is dedicated to large leas .

a "large" lea is defined as one of the 100 largest based on the number of "children aged 5 through 17 from families living below the poverty level. .

also , one of not more than an additional 25 leas can be chosen by the secretary if the lea is "in particular need of assistance , based on a low level of resources for school construction , high level of enrollment growth , or such other factors as the secretary deems appropriate. .

each large lea , as defined above , would receive an allocation based on the lea's share of the total title i basic grants directed to large leas .

the state allocation is reduced by the amount dedicated to any large leas in the state .

states are currently authorized to issue $5.2 billion of qzabs and were authorized to issue $22 billion of qscbs .

qzab allocations will be made through 2016 and may be carried forward up to two years .

qscb allocations were made through 2010 but can be carried forward indefinitely .

on september 8 , 2016 , the credit rate on qzabs and qscbs was 3.92% and the term 45 years .

as noted earlier , issuers of qzabs and qscbs could have chosen the direct payment option before 2011 .

two bills were introduced in the 113 th congress to extend qscbs , h.r .

1629 and s. 1523 .

as of this writing , no bills have been introduced in the 114 th congress to extend this provision .

as authorized by p.l .

109-58 , the original crebs , which could have been issued through 2009 , had a national limit of $1.2 billion of which a maximum of $750 million can be granted to governmental bodies .

in addition to governmental bodies , cooperative electric companies and a "clean renewable energy bond lender" can issue the bonds .

a clean renewable energy bond lender is defined in the tax code as "a lender which is a cooperative which is owned by , or has outstanding loans to , 100 or more electric companies and is in existence on february 1 , 2002 , and shall include any affiliated entity which is controlled by such lender. .

the creb lender would lend to co - ops or governmental bodies .

the secretary of the treasury reviews applications and selects projects "as the secretary deems appropriate. .

thus , crebs are not allocated by formula and there are no state minimums .

the internal revenue service , through irs notice 2005-98 , described the allocation strategy of the secretary .

the smallest dollar amount projects are considered first and the allocations continue for ever larger dollar amount projects until the entire allocation is consumed .

the term and credit rate for crebs were determined in the same manner as the other tcbs .

these original crebs offered a 100% credit .

crebs are available to finance qualified energy production projects which include ( 1 ) wind facilities , ( 2 ) closed - loop bio - mass facilities , ( 3 ) open - loop bio - mass facilities , ( 4 ) geothermal or solar energy facilities , ( 5 ) small irrigation power facilities , ( 6 ) landfill gas facilities , ( 7 ) trash combustion facilities , ( 8 ) refined coal production facilities , and ( 9 ) certain hydropower facilities .

as originally authorized in p.l .

110-343 , the new crebs had a national limit of $2.4 billion to be issued before december 31 , 2009 .

in contrast to the original crebs , as noted in table 2 , the credit rate on new crebs is 70% of the credit rate offered on the original crebs .

not more than one - third of new crebs were allocated to any of the following: ( 1 ) public power providers , ( 2 ) governmental bodies , or ( 3 ) projects of cooperative electric companies .

for public power providers , the secretary determines the qualified projects which "are appropriate for receiving an allocation. .

each will receive a share of the allocation based on the ratio of the projected cost of the project relative to all other qualified projects receiving an allocation .

governmental bodies and co - ops receive an allocation in an amount the "secretary determines appropriate. .

as with original crebs , there is not a state - by - state minimum or formula allocation mechanism .

as noted earlier , issuers of new crebs can choose the direct payment option .

qecbs were first created under p.l .

110-343 with a national limit of $800 million .

the program was expanded with an additional $2.4 billion under p.l .

111-5 for a total available authority of $3.2 billion .

similar to the new crebs , these tax credit bonds offer a credit rate that is 70% of the credit rate offered on old crebs and other tcbs .

though the authority to allocate qecbs does not expire , the qecb program is now fully subscribed .

qecbs were allocated to states based on the state's share of total u.s. population .

the district of columbia and the possessions of the u.s. are considered states for qecbs .

large local governments , defined as any municipality or county with population of greater than 100,000 , are eligible for a direct allocation .

counties that contain a large city can be eligible if its population less the large city population is still greater than 100,000 .

these bonds are to be used for capital expenditures for the purposes of ( 1 ) reducing energy consumption in publicly owned buildings by at least 20% ; ( 2 ) implementing green community programs ; ( 3 ) rural development involving the production of electricity from renewable energy resources ; or ( 4 ) programs listed above for crebs .

also included are expenditures on research facilities and research grants , to support research in ( 1 ) development of cellulosic ethanol or other nonfossil fuels ; ( 2 ) technologies for the capture and sequestration of carbon dioxide produced through the use of fossil fuels ; ( 3 ) increasing the efficiency of existing technologies for producing nonfossil fuels ; ( 4 ) automobile battery technologies and other technologies to reduce fossil fuel consumption in transportation ; and ( 5 ) technologies to reduce energy use in buildings .

energy saving mass commuting facilities and demonstration projects are also included in the list of qualified purposes .

as noted earlier , issuers of qecbs could have chosen the direct payment option on debt issued through 2011 .

qfcbs were limited to $500 million to be allocated before may 22 , 2010 ( 24 months after enactment of p.l .

110-246 ) , in a manner "as the secretary determines appropriate. .

once the bonds are issued , the proceeds must be spent within three years .

a unique feature of qfcbs is the allowance for an allocation amount to be used to offset any taxes due the federal government .

any allocation amount used to settle outstanding federal tax debts cannot be used for bond issuance .

a qualified issuer is a "state or any political subdivision or instrumentality thereof or a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization. .

for purposes of the qfcb program , a qualified forestry conservation purpose must meet the following criteria: ( 1 ) some portion of the land acquired must be adjacent to united states forest service land .

 ( 2 ) at least half of the land acquired must be transferred to the united states forest service at no net cost to the united states and not more than half of the land acquired may either remain with or be conveyed to a state .

 ( 3 ) all of the land must be subject to a native fish habitat conservation plan approved by the united states fish and wildlife service .

 ( 4 ) the amount of acreage acquired must be at least 40,000 acres .

gtcbs were bonds distributed to areas affected by hurricane katrina , which made landfall in late august 2005 .

a total of $350 million was available to be issued through gtcbs , with up to $200 million available to be issued by the state of louisiana , up to $100 million available to be issued by the state of mississippi , and up to $50 million available to be issued by the state of alabama .

the maturity length of gtcbs was much shorter than that of many other tcbs , with a maximum allowable term of two years .

gtcb credits were eligible to be claimed against regular income tax liability and alternative minimum tax liability .

gtcbs were designed to assist state and local governments that were burdened with additional fiscal stress .

the bonds were largely designed to help with fiscal responsibilities that pre - dated the arrival of hurricane katrina , as 95% of gtcb proceeds were required to be used to make bond payments ( other than private activity bonds ) that were outstanding as of august 28 , 2005 .

gtcbs could be used to pay principal , interest , or premia on state or local outstanding bonds .

eligibility to authorize gtcbs expired at the end of 2006 .

mwdbs were designated for areas impacted by the severe storms and flooding in the midwest that occurred between may 1 , 2008 , and august 1 , 2008 .

each affected area could have issued an amount based on the population of the affected area .

states with over 2 million affected residents were authorized to issue up to $100 million and those with less than 2 million and more than 1 million could have issued $50 million .

states with an affected population under 1 million were not eligible to issue mwdbs .

based on irs guidance , illinois , missouri , and nebraska could have issued up to $50 million each .

indiana , iowa , and wisconsin could have issued up to $100 million .

these bonds were issued in calendar year 2009 only and as with gtcbs , had a maximum term of two years .

the credit rate on the bonds reflected the relatively short term of the bonds .

the bonds were intended for states to use to help those sub - state jurisdictions which were under fiscal stress .

specifically , the proceeds from mwdbs were to be used to pay the principal and interest on any outstanding state bonds or the bonds of any affected political subdivision within the state .

the proceeds could also have been loaned to a jurisdiction for the same purpose .

the provision required the issuer to issue an equal amount of general obligations for the same purpose , akin to a matching requirement .

unlike other tcbs , babs were not targeted in their designation .

the volume of babs was not limited and the purpose was constrained only by the requirement that "the interest on such obligation would ( but for this section ) be excludible from gross income under section 103. .

thus , babs could have been issued for any purpose that would have been eligible for traditional tax - exempt bond financing other than private activity bonds .

the bonds must have been issued before january 1 , 2011 .

babs are a direct payment tcb , and offer a credit amount equal to 35% of the interest rate established by the buyer and issuer of the bond .

in the 114 th congress , similar legislation has been introduced in the house and senate to reinstate and permanently extend babs .

h.r .

2676 and s. 1515 would permanently extend issuance authority for babs , and implement a decreasing schedule for the applicable credit rate .

the credit rate would decrease from 35% for bonds issued in 2009 or 2010 to 28% for bonds issued in 2019 or later .

a u.s. department of the treasury report on babs estimated that through december of 2010 , the bonds had saved municipal issuers roughly $20 billion in interest costs .

rzedbs are a special type of bab .

instead of the 35% credit , rzedbs offered a 45% credit and are targeted to economically distressed areas .

specifically , these bonds are for any area designated by the issuer ( 1 ) as having significant poverty , unemployment , rate of home foreclosures , or general distress ; ( 2 ) economically distressed by reason of the closure or realignment of a military installation pursuant to the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 ; or is ( 3 ) an empowerment zone or renewal community .

the purpose of the bonds is , as the name implies , economic development .

specifically , the bonds are to be used for " ( 1 ) capital expenditures paid or incurred with respect to property located in such zone [recovery zone] , ( 2 ) expenditures for public infrastructure and construction of public facilities , and ( 3 ) expenditures for job training and educational programs. .

the volume limit for rzedbs is $10 billion and was allocated to states ( including dc and the possessions ) based on their employment declines in 2008 .

all states that experienced an employment decline in 2008 receive an allocation that bares the same ratio as the state's share of the total employment decline in those states .

however , all states and u.s. territories , regardless of employment changes , are guaranteed a minimum of 0.90% of the $10 billion .

large municipalities and counties are also guaranteed a share of the state allocations based on the jurisdiction's share of the aggregate employment decline in the state .

a large jurisdiction is defined as one with a population of greater than 100,000 .

for counties with large municipalities receiving an allocation , the county population is reduced by the municipal population for purposes of the 100,000 threshold .

authority to issue rzedbs expired january 1 , 2011 .

