food safety in the united states is regulated mainly by the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) and the food and drug administration ( fda ) within the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

although the fda is the federal agency primarily responsible for ensuring the safety of a vast majority of foods under the current system , the usda is responsible for regulating meat , poultry , and some egg products , as well as being responsible for animal and plant health .

usda's role in the food safety system is founded on its authority to regulate meat and poultry inspection and importation .

the food safety and inspection service ( fsis ) within usda is responsible for inspecting domestic and imported meat and poultry products under the federal meat inspection act and the poultry products inspection act .

this role in inspection of meat and poultry generally begins beyond the farm at slaughter and processing facilities .

this authority does not include direct regulation of on - farm practices related to animal health .

however , as the next step in the food chain after the farm , the standards set for inspection may be seen to indirectly regulate the health of animals on the farm .

the egg products inspection act may be interpreted similarly .

in other words , these acts restrict acceptance of animals that do not meet health standards at slaughtering and processing facilities , which effectively require farms to maintain healthy livestock in order to sell their livestock for food processing .

food safety regulation is not limited to processing plants .

usda has authority to exercise food safety oversight and enforcement on farms as well .

four statutes that provide the most significant authority related to on - farm activity and food safety are the animal health protection act , the plant protection act , the agricultural marketing agreement act of 1937 , and the agricultural marketing act of 1946 .

usda's role in the current food safety system appears to focus on inspections during production , but usda appears to have authority under numerous statutes to regulate at least some on - farm activities .

although this authority does not explicitly provide for oversight of farm operations , the statutory language does not explicitly prohibit usda from carrying out its authority on farms .

thus , it appears that usda may apply its statutory authority to on - farm activities , if the on - farm activity is one that is generally covered by the relevant statute .

the statutory authorities discussed in this report generally require that exercise of the authority provided be linked to products in interstate commerce .

in the debate over food safety regulation on the farm , some have raised arguments that on - farm activities may not be sufficiently linked to commerce to justify congressional regulation .

as a result , usda's authority to implement programs related to food safety on farms before the agricultural products in question actually enter commerce has become an issue .

although it might seem obvious that agricultural products sold in stores are a part of commerce , one may question whether usda would be authorized to take actions under these statutes on farms that do not sell their products , but rather are self - sufficient .

it is likely that any farm would be subject to usda's regulatory authority in the context of these statutes because of congress's broad authority to act under the commerce clause of the u.s. constitution .

the constitution empowers congress "to regulate commerce with foreign nations , and among the several states , and with the indian tribes," and "to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers. .

the u.s. supreme court has found that the commerce clause allows for three categories of congressional regulation: the channels of interstate commerce ; the instrumentalities of interstate commerce ; and "those activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce .. .

i.e. , those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce. .

one of the court's most expansive commerce clause rulings , wickard v. filburn , concerned congress's ability to regulate the production and consumption of homegrown wheat .

the court held that economic activities , regardless of their nature , could be regulated by congress if the activity "asserts a substantial impact on interstate commerce. .

in wickard , a farmer challenged a monetary penalty he received for growing wheat in excess of a quota established by the usda to regulate wheat prices , arguing that the wheat never went to market but was grown and consumed on his own farm and thus outside the scope of interstate commerce .

although the court recognized that one family's production alone would likely have a negligible impact on the overall price of wheat , if combined with other personal producers , the effect would be substantial enough to make the activity subject to congressional regulation .

although the court has arguably narrowed its interpretation of congress's authority under the commerce clause in recent decades , the court has indicated as recently as 2005 that wickard v. filburn is still good law , holding that congress can regulate purely intrastate activity that is not "commercial" if it concludes that failure to regulate the activity would undercut the interstate market .

the relevant on - farm statutes , particularly the ahpa and the ppa , include provisions that generally apply to agricultural products in interstate commerce , which wickard indicates would include items still on the farm .

they also include some provisions that authorize usda to inspect agricultural products at any time , including when on a farm , to control pests and diseases that might affect agricultural commerce generally .

thus , it seems that usda's authority to regulate animals , plants , and other agricultural products on the farm itself is a proper exercise of authority and a valid interpretation of the authority delegated by congress .

