organized crime threatens the economy , national security , and other interests of the united states .

particularly in the past several decades , organized crime has been evolving and taking on an increasingly transnational nature .

with more open borders and the expansion of the internet , organized criminals threaten the united states not only from within the borders , but beyond .

organized crime stretches far beyond the italian mafia , encompassing russian , asian , balkan , middle eastern , and african syndicates .

even though organized crime has not received as much recent media or congressional attention as have other national concerns , such as the threat of terrorism , these criminals have not ceased their illicit activities .

illustrating that the threats from organized crime remain , former attorney general michael mukasey reconvened the organized crime council ( occ ) in april 2008 to address the evolving threats from organized crime .

beyond the individual illegal activities committed by organized crime groups ( eg , gambling , prostitution , labor racketeering , smuggling / trafficking , extortion , theft , murder , and money laundering ) , the occ has indicated that these organizations may penetrate the energy and other strategic sectors of the economy ; provide logistical and other support to terrorists , foreign intelligence services , and governments ; smuggle / traffic people and contraband goods into the united states ; exploit the united states and international financial systems to move illicit funds ; use cyberspace to target u.s. victims and infrastructure ; manipulate securities exchanges and perpetrate sophisticated frauds ; corrupt or seek to corrupt public officials in the united states and abroad ; and use violence or the threat of violence as a basis for power .

the domestic impact from the activities of organized crime groups thus extends beyond what many may consider to be traditional organized crime activities .

congress may wish to consider the impact of organized crime on domestic issues of immediate concern , such as the economy and national security .

do these evolving threats from organized crime require new tools to combat it ? .

another issue that congress may wish to consider is the adequacy of the resources the federal government allocates to organized crime .

following the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , national priorities and federal resources shifted away from more traditional crime fighting — including that of organized crime — toward counterterrorism and counterintelligence .

subsequently , there has been a decrease in the federal law enforcement resources dedicated to organized crime matters and a decrease in the number of federal organized crime cases opened .

consequently , the policy question facing congress is whether the resources that the federal government allocates to organized crime matters are sufficient to counter the threats that organized crime poses .

this report provides a background on organized crime in the united states as well as the tools that congress has afforded for the federal government to combat it .

it outlines the trends in federal efforts to investigate and prosecute organized crime .

the report then discusses the evolving nature of organized crime , including the domestic impact of organized crime , prominent organized crime groups , and their illegal activities affecting the united states .

it concludes with a discussion of issues that congress may wish to consider , including the attention the federal government allocates to organized crime matters , the multilateral efforts to combat organized crime , and issues surrounding a potential nexus between organized crime and terrorism .

a clear definition of organized crime is important for both legal and policy purposes .

some experts suggest that although organized crime is difficult to define , the various attributes of criminal organizations are central to the definition .

this report uses the attributes of a criminal organization , in combination with the definitions of organized crime , enterprise , and racketeering as outlined in the current law , as a framework for discussing the trends in organized crime and policy issues for congress to consider .

specifically , attributes of organized crime may involve structure , restricted membership , continuity , violence or the threat of violence , illegal enterprises , legitimate business penetration , corruption , and lack of ideology .

the structure of modern organized crime groups often does not exhibit the rigid hierarchy of more traditional organized crime groups such as the italian mafia .

moreover , organized crime groups restrict membership based on a number of factors , including race , ethnicity , kinship , and criminal background .

these criminal organizations continue , even if leadership or membership changes over time .

further , violence and / or the threat of violence are integral aspects of organized crime .

organized crime groups profit from illegal enterprises as well as from infiltrating legitimate businesses .

they may attempt to corrupt public officials in order to escape investigation , prosecution , or punishment .

notably , the primary goal of organized crime groups is to make money ; these groups are profit - driven rather than ideology - driven ( a key distinction between organized crime and terrorist groups ) .

organized crime in the united states has a long - standing history .

although this history has its origins prior to the 20 th century , organized crime flourished around the time of prohibition and grabbed the attention of policymakers .

through most of the 20 th century , u.s. law enforcement combated what many consider "traditional" organized crime networks operating inside the united states , including the italian mafia , russian mafia , japanese yakuza , and chinese tongs .

these criminal organizations were involved in a variety of illegal activities , and in the 1950s and 1960s , the most profitable of these activities was gambling , followed by loan sharking , narcotics trafficking , extortion , prostitution , bootlegging , and fraud .

other prominent activities of organized crime groups were racketeering , theft , murder , and money laundering .

the national focus on organized crime led to several efforts aimed at investigating and controlling it .

these initial efforts included the senate special committee to investigate organized crime in interstate commerce in 1950 and 1951 led by senator kefauver , senate hearings on organized crime in 1958 and 1963 led by senator mcclellan , a series of conferences on organized crime at oyster bay in 1965 and 1966 , and the creation of the 1967 task force on organized crime .

this 1967 task force reported that law enforcement measures to curb organized crime had not been successful and , further , that organized crime in america was on the rise .

statistics showed that from 1961 to 1966 , the number of individuals indicted by the organized crime and racketeering section ( ocrs ) of the department of justice ( doj ) rose from 121 to 1,198 .

further , the number of those indicted individuals actually convicted rose from 73 to 477 .

although the raw number of indictments and convictions rose between 1961 and 1966 , crs analysis revealed that the proportion of individuals from organized crime groups who were convicted during this period actually declined , from 60.3% to 39.8% .

combating organized crime had been a responsibility primarily of state and local law enforcement .

as the scope of organized crime was continuing to increase , congress recognized the need for better crime fighting tools and the need to further the federal government's role in fighting and prosecuting organized crime .

in general , domestic crime control tends to fall on the shoulders of state and local law enforcement agencies .

as mentioned above , however , the federal government began to play a larger role in combating organized crime following the enactment of the omnibus crime control and safe streets act of 1968 , and even more after rico and the organized crime control act of 1970 .

various federal agencies are currently involved in controlling the activities of organized crime groups .

in addition to domestic efforts to combat organized crime , the federal government is also involved in international efforts .

according to the department of justice and the fbi , the threats posed by organized crime have become more broad and complex than ever before .

federal resources dedicated to organized crime matters , however , do not appear to have expanded along with the threats , and have actually decreased since 2001 .

after the september 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , national priorities , including those of federal law enforcement , shifted further toward counterterrorism - related activities and further away from traditional crime fighting activities .

within the law enforcement domain , this shift can be objectively seen in the field agents assigned to organized crime casework , the cases investigated , and the cases handled by the u.s .

attorneys' offices .

as mentioned , organized crime in the united states has taken on an increasingly transnational nature .

this shift has been facilitated by factors such as economic globalization and improved communications technology .

organized crime activities across the globe do not appear to be waning , and the national intelligence council has estimated that by 2025 , the "relative power" of criminal networks will continue to rise , and some countries could even be taken over and run by these networks .

the section below provides a detailed discussion of the organized crime groups that operate in the united states , the activities of these groups , and the domestic industries that have been and may continue to be threatened by organized crime .

one way of analyzing the organized crime threat is by examining the most prominent organized crime groups operating in the united states .

the fbi , for instance , provides information on the various organized crime groups in order to present a picture of organized crime in the united states .

a second method is by examining those areas of society threatened most by the activities of organized crime ( such as the economy or national security ) , regardless of which group is committing the crime .

the organized crime and racketeering section ( ocrs ) at doj , for example , presents the organized crime threats to the united states in terms of the principal threat areas , rather than the individual groups committing crimes .

subsequent discussion uses both approaches to analyze organized crime .

the u.s. department of justice organized crime council , chaired by the deputy u.s. attorney general , has identified eight strategic threats to the united states posed by international organized crime .

of note , the term "international organized crime" includes not only those organized crime groups operating outside the borders of the united states , but within the u.s. borders as well .

as mentioned earlier , the council noted that international organized criminals have and may penetrate the energy and other strategic sectors of the economy ; provide logistical and other support to terrorists , foreign intelligence services , and governments ; smuggle / traffic people and contraband goods into the united states ; exploit the united states and international financial system to move illicit funds ; use cyberspace to target u.s. victims and infrastructure ; manipulate securities exchanges and perpetrate sophisticated frauds ; corrupt or seek to corrupt public officials in the united states and abroad ; and use violence or the threat of violence as a basis for power .

former u.s. attorney general michael mukasey outlined strategic goals in combating these threats .

these goals continue to include targeting the largest organized crime threats , dismantling criminal organizations and removing their leadership , marshalling information from all available resources , and relying on all possible domestic and international tools and law enforcement partnerships .

one specific goal of the organized crime council that may be of particular interest to congress is to "provide law enforcement with updated legislation and operational procedures needed to combat international organized crime. .

specifically , the organized crime council indicated that laws and regulations should be expanded , updated , or modified to afford the government the abilities to investigate and prosecute organized criminals that affect american society from outside u.s. borders .

this suggests that federal law enforcement currently may not have the extraterritorial jurisdiction or the most effective tools to combat the evolving organized crime threats to the united states .

the section below provides a detailed discussion of some potential impacts of organized crime , followed by possible issues that congress may consider .

the evolving nature of organized crime , as discussed , presents several issues that congress may wish to consider .

one issue is whether the tools that congress has provided the federal government with to investigate and prosecute domestic organized crime — namely rico , money laundering , and asset forfeiture statutes — are still effective tools to combat today's threats from organized crime .

as evidenced by proposed legislation , congress is considering clarifying and expanding these statutes so as to better equip the federal government to fight organized crime .

policies exist that allow federal law enforcement to investigate and prosecute organized crime groups .

what may not fully exist , however , are the monetary and personnel resources to effectively combat organized crime — evidenced by a decrease in fbi agents used to investigate organized crime matters and in fbi organized crime case openings .

as previously discussed , in fy2004 , the fbi utilized about 35% fewer agents on organized crime matters than it did in fy2000 .

agent utilization on organized crime matters also declined by over 15% between fy2005 and fy2009 .

the fbi has recognized that prioritizing counterterrorism and counterintelligence cases affects resources available to criminal investigations and that targeting the most significant threats will allow criminal investigative resources to be used most effectively .

fbi director robert muller testified to the need for restoring resources to the fbi's criminal programs , which include organized crime .

efforts — both administrative and congressional — can be made to this effect in several ways .

one congressional option may be to increase overall funding available to the fbi and other federal law enforcement agencies that may be experiencing a decrease in resources dedicated to more traditional crime fighting matters , including organized crime .

if these resources are then administratively allocated to criminal programs , organized crime agent utilization could potentially be more closely aligned with agent allocation without taking resources away from higher priority areas .

another congressional option may be to provide directed funding for organized crime matters .

this option could ensure that any increase in funding intended to be directed toward criminal programs or organized crime matters would be utilized in those domains .

yet another policy option may be to decide that the existing resources dedicated to organized crime are sufficient , given the limited financial resources available under the federal budget and given the national priority of combating the threats from terrorism .

if , on the other hand , more funding were available or if the link between organized crime and terrorism were more direct , the case for reevaluating the funding directed toward organized crime might be stronger .

however , considering the current budget constraints and priorities , some may consider existing organized crime funding as adequate .

the federal government is already involved in several multilateral efforts — with state and local agencies as well as with international allies — to combat organized crime .

with respect to working with domestic state and local law enforcement agencies , federal law enforcement agencies have formed joint task forces , some that target a variety of organized crime groups and some that target specific criminal organizations .

several of these task forces were outlined in previous sections of this report .

some analysts have suggested that despite the benefits of multilateral crime fighting , potential jurisdictional issues may arise .

as organized crime groups have expanded their activities beyond state and even national lines , so has the responsibility for combating organized crime expanded .

there exists a clear line between state and federal jurisdiction for prosecuting crimes .

however , jurisdiction over agency responsibility for investigating cases may at times be unclear .

this may be due in part to overlapping agency responsibilities and may also arise from the complexity of the cases investigated .

for instance , an organized crime case with a drug component may fall under the jurisdiction of both the fbi and the dea , potentially causing confusion on which agency would take the lead on such cases .

an issue that may become more visible than the issue of domestic law enforcement coordination is that of international law enforcement coordination .

by ratifying the united nations convention against transnational organized crime in 2005 , congress took a step in working with foreign governments and law enforcement agencies to combat organized crime .

specifically , this convention provided the framework for international cooperation by requiring mutual legal assistance between countries in fighting organized crime , as well as by requiring extradition for those organized criminal offenses outlined in the convention .

these provisions enhance the united states' ability to combat international organized crime and work with countries where there was no previous mutual assistance arrangement already in place .

as organized crime becomes increasingly transnational , so may the need for international organized crime working groups , task forces , and law enforcement cooperation .

the benefits of international cooperation and partnerships are twofold .

u.s. law enforcement can extend its expertise and capabilities to assist overseas law enforcement combat organized crime .

partnering with international law enforcement will develop the intelligence needed to support domestic investigations of organized crime .

however , one of the challenges , as expressed by federal law enforcement , is the increased time required to conduct international investigations .

among the various effects that this may have on investigations , organized crime groups may be inadvertently afforded a longer time to conduct their illegal activities , potentially affecting a greater number of victims or increasing the magnitude of damage to the victims .

a second challenge relating to international investigations may arise from the domestic practice that federal prosecutors are involved at all stages of organized crime cases .

when investigations are conducted abroad , the involvement of prosecutors may not be as consistent .

in addition to law enforcement collaboration with foreign nations , congress has given the federal government extraterritorial jurisdiction to investigate and prosecute individuals who criminally violate u.s. interests abroad ( p.l .

99-399 ) .

this legislation was directed at combating terrorist acts against the united states , and thus the extraterritorial jurisdiction does not necessarily cover all crimes committed by organized crime groups .

the increasingly transnational nature of organized crime as well as the potential for a nexus between organized crime and terrorism — as suggested by some analysts — may lead policymakers to question whether and / or how to extend this extraterritorial jurisdiction beyond the crimes currently covered with the practical and diplomatic challenges that such an approach may entail .

some experts have indicated that the lines between organized crime groups and terrorist organizations may become increasingly blurry .

even if organized crime groups and terrorist organizations do not form "long - term strategic alliances," as suggested by the national security council , the links between organized crime and terrorism may still be significant .

the council suggests ( as does the fbi ) , however , that organized criminals and terrorists may ally for business purposes .

both criminal and terrorist organizations depend on money ; organized criminals are profit - driven , and terrorists — though ideology - driven — need money and goods to finance their operations .

it has been suggested that organized crime groups may cooperate with terrorists if the business alliance is profitable .

some experts have cited potential additional areas of overlap between organized crime groups and terrorist organizations .

for example , the language school that provided some visas for the 9 / 11 hijackers is also reported to have provided visas for prostitutes of a human trafficking ring .

there have also been instances of terrorist organizations drawing on the structure and activities of organized crime groups as models for structuring their organizations and financing their operations .

drug trafficking , for instance , has been one of the most profitable activities for both organized crime groups and terrorist organizations .

other illegal activities include human trafficking , weapons trafficking , endangered species trafficking , art and antique theft , counterfeiting , and credit card fraud .

because there may be overlap between organized crime groups and terrorist organizations in terms of their criminal activities and funding sources , some analysts have argued that combating organized crime is central to combating terrorism .

congress therefore may consider the potential nexus between organized crime and terrorism when addressing the nation's security and determining the appropriate allocation and utilization of resources , as well as effective information sharing and interagency cooperation , as discussed above .

