a watershed in u.s. immigration policy toward cuban migrants may be on the horizon as the obama administration and a bipartisan group of congressional leaders weigh prospects for more open economic and diplomatic relations with cuba .

a normalization of the immigration policy cast 50 years ago in response to the communist revolution in cuba , however , is not imminent , nor is it likely to be easily achieved .

this report opens with a historical analysis of the unique immigration policy that evolved with cuba and an explanation of its nexus with other federal policies .

it follows with time series analysis of cuban migration trends .

the report concludes by discussing current challenges and issues .

cubans are among the subset of foreign nationals who are eligible for federal benefits and cash assistance .

over a decade ago , title iv of the personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( prwora ) of 1996 ( p.l .

104-193 ) established comprehensive restrictions on the eligibility of noncitizens for means - tested public assistance and limited the eligibility of refugees and asylees to five years .

aliens who enter the united states without authorization are barred from any federal public benefit except the emergency services and programs expressly listed in prwora .

amendments in p.l .

105-33 and p.l .

105-185 extended the period of food stamp / supplemental security income ( ssi ) / medicaid ( but not temporary assistance for needy families ) eligibility for refugees and asylees from five to seven years and added cuban and haitian entrants to those eligible for these benefits for seven years .

despite a history of travel restrictions imposed by the castro government , cuba was one of the top immigrant - sending countries during the last half of the 20 th century and is one of the top immigrant - sending countries thus far in the 21 st century .

in fy2008 , there were 49,500 cubans who became legal permanent residents ( lprs ) — surpassed only by lprs from mexico , china , india , and the philippines .

yet , very few cubans have arrived in the united states through the legal immigration avenues proscribed by the ina .

an analysis of the trends in cuban migrants — and how their patterns have changed over time — follows .

u.s. immigration policy toward cuban migrants juggles immigration control and humanitarian compassion within a larger policy framework that remains quite contentious .

the change in leadership of both the united states and cuba may provide openings for revisions in u.s. policy on cuban migration .

a normalization of immigration policies , however , is not imminent nor is it likely to be easily achieved .

some of the major challenges and issues that bear on u.s. policy on cuban migrants are discussed below .

some consider the migrant interdiction and repatriation policy to be at odds with the rescue mission of the u.s. coast guard , while others view it as integral to maritime security role of the u.s. coast guard .

a series of events in 1999 illustrate the difficulties balancing these priorities .

a well - publicized incident in june 1999 provoked outrage when the u.s. coast guard used pepper spray and a water cannon to prevent six cubans from reaching surfside beach in florida .

a few weeks later , a woman drowned when a boat capsized during interdiction .

notably in late november 1999 , the u.s. coast guard opted to bring six - year old elian gonzalez and two other survivors of an ill - fated journey to the united states rather than taking them to cuba as the migration agreement provides .

for the first five months elian gonzalez was in the united states , he was in the temporary care of his father's uncle , lazaro gonzalez , who lives in miami .

when elian's father , juan miguel gonzalez , arrived in the united states in april 2000 to assume custody of his son , lazaro gonzalez defied a federal government order to turn over the child .

then - attorney general janet reno ordered federal law enforcement officers to remove elian from the home of lazaro gonzalez in the pre - dawn hours of april 22 , 2000 .

several incidents in 2003 offer further examples of the interdiction and repatriation dilemma .

on april 11 , 2003 , the cuban government executed three men who had hijacked a ferry in havana on april 2 in an attempt to reach the united states .

the men were executed by firing squads after summary trials that were held behind closed doors .

international human rights groups , such as amnesty international and human rights watch , and a number of countries , including mexico , the european union , and the 15-nation caribbean community , condemned the crackdown and the executions .

in july 2003 , a dozen people reportedly stole a cuban - flagged boat from the marina where it was docked in cuba and kidnapped the three watchmen guarding the marina in the process .

when the boat was in international waters allegedly on route to florida , the u.s. coast guard officials tried to intercept it and reportedly faced violent resistance when they interdicted the vessel .

all 15 persons on board were taken to the u.s. coast guard cutter and interviewed by a uscis asylum officer .

the three watchmen indicated a desire to return to cuba .

when the cuban government offered to sentence the 12 persons implicated in crimes ( purportedly boat theft , kidnapping , and assaulting federal officers ) to 10 years in prison , the united states agreed to return them .

the reach of the interdiction policy became clear on january 5 , 2006 , when the u.s. coast guard found 15 cubans , including 4 women and 2 children , on an old key west bridge that was no longer connected to land .

the decision to repatriate the cubans was made by the coast guard's legal office in conjunction with dhs immigration and customs enforcement .

the coast guard stated that the cubans "were determined to be feet - wet and processed in accordance with standard procedure. .

by 2006 , migrant interdiction and repatriation had become the keystone in the designing of operation vigiliant sentry ( ovs ) , the dhs coordinated plan for response to a caribbean mass migration .

ovs was reportedly exercised throughout 2006 to prepare for a potential migration in the event of instability in cuba .

supporters of these repatriation decisions argue that it is critical to deter illegal and dangerous migration of cubans who flee on unseaworthy or overcrowded vessels .

some further maintain that the prison sentences of the 12 cubans who stole a boat in 2003 , which the cuban government apparently negotiated with the united states , were essential to prevent a repeat of summary executions that occurred to the hijackers in april of that year .

critics of these decisions assert that both countries ( united states and cuba ) are denying these people their rights to due process and a hearing .

some called for a full investigation of these incidents , and some sought an end to the current interdiction and repatriation policy .

some maintain the 1966 cuban adjustment act is obsolete and locked into the mind set of the cold war era , as well as unnecessary since cubans may seek asylum under the refugee laws enacted since 1966 .

the caa , as discussed above , permits cubans who have been physically present in the united states for at least one year to become lprs .

over the decades since its enactment , it has enabled most cubans to enter the united states regardless of whether they have proper immigration documents .

some opponents of the caa assert that it is discriminatory because it gives cubans an immigration advantage that foreign nationals from no other country have .

immigration control proponents have argued that it serves as a magnet attracting cubans who would not otherwise qualify for admission .

just as there are efforts in congress to liberalize economic policies ( especially travel and agricultural ) with cuba since raul castro assumed power , some argue that it is time to regularize immigration policy with cuba .

opponents of repealing or revising the caa say that it would send the wrong message to cubans during this critical period .

it is not necessary and may be unwise , some maintain , to alter the law now that fidel castro has transferred power to his brother raul castro .

supporters of the caa point out that the success of the migration agreement — particularly its commitment to admit at least 20,000 cubans annually — depends on the ability to adjust the parolees under the caa .

if the caa were repealed , supporters point out , only cubans who met the refugee definition or who qualified for visas as family - sponsored immigrants or as employment - based immigrants would be able to immigrate to the united states , and the backlogs for immigrant visas would grow .

confusion over the extent of federal cash assistance available to cuban migrants prompted allegations that cubans were receiving cash payments in excess of amounts normally available to other program beneficiaries .

some allege further that cuban migrants use these federal cash payments to pay smugglers to shepherd them into the united states .

media reports have indicated that smugglers can charge cuban migrants up to $15,000 each .

the rca payments available to cuban entrants , however , are not issued in a lump sum , and the payment levels provide only basic monthly assistance to refugees without income or assets with which to support themselves for a maximum period of eight months .

in the state of florida , for example , a single cuban entrant — as other eligible refugees and asylees — who meets the federal and state eligibility requirements for rca in florida would be eligible to receive between $95 to $180 a month .

more broadly , some questions why all cubans — rather than those who enter as refugees — are afforded the same set of federal benefits as refugees .

most lprs who enter the united states are barred from federal benefits for at least five years according to comprehensive restrictions on the eligibility of noncitizens for means - tested public assistance .

others maintain that cubans are refugees , regardless of whether they adjust through the caa or the refugee provisions in the ina .

whether the united states should resume migration talks with cuba is central to the policy debate .

semi - annual migration talks between cuba and the united states had been held regularly on the implementation of the 1994 and 1995 migration accords for a decade .

the u.s. state department , however , had cancelled the 20 th round of talks scheduled for january 2004 , and no migration talks were held since .

according to the state department , cuba had refused to discuss issues integral to the migration agreement .

in response to the cancellation of the talks , cuban officials maintained that the decision of the united states was irresponsible and that cuba was prepared to discuss all of the issues raised by the united states .

fidel castro's departure as head of government in july 2006 has prompted some observers to call for a reexamination of u.s. policy toward cuba overall , and a potential opportunity to restart the migration talks .

after serving temporarily , raúl castro , brother of the former dictator , officially assumed the cuban presidency in february 2008 .

this transfer of power between the castro brothers led some to question whether there would be much of an opening for renewed migration talks between the united states and cuba .

during the 2008 presidential campaign , however , president barack obama stated he would seek to change u.s. policy by allowing unlimited family travel and remittances to cuba , signaling to some the possibility of resuming the migration talks .

in his opening speech at the summit of the americas on april 17 , 2009 , president obama expressed the hope of "a new beginning with cuba," specifically mentioning migration as an issue .

supporters of resuming the migration talks maintain that the talks are a key element .

in february , the ranking member of the committee on foreign relations , senator richard lugar , released a staff report that specifically called for a resumption of the migrations talks .

regarding migration , staff recommends the revival of us. - cuban biannual migrations talks , which have been suspended since 2004 .

these talks provide an important venue for discussing the shared problem of illegal migration .

the usg should remain committed to fully implementing its agreements under the 1994 joint communique and the 1995 joint statement ( collectively known as the u.s. - cuba migration accords ) as effective tools for promoting safe , legal , and orderly migration .

in addition , staff suggests an executive branch review of the "wet - foot , dry - foot policy. .

under this policy , cubans who are intercepted at sea are sent back to cuba or to a third country while those who make it to u.s. soil are allowed to remain in the united states .

the review should assess whether this policy has led to the inefficient use of u.s. coast guard resources and assets as well as the potential to redirect these resources to drug interdiction efforts .

some of those challenging the resumption of the migration talks argue that cuba should address the five areas of concern ( listed above ) before the united states moves forward .

the state department spokesman during the george w. bush administration , richard boucher , made this point in 2004: "the point is not just to have a meeting," boucher said , "the point is to deal with the serious issues involved. .

whether to even negotiate with the current government of cuba is an issue raised by others .

roger noreiga , of the american enterprise institute and formerly the assistant secretary of state for western hemisphere affairs , offered this argument in 2008: some of those counseling "stability" may be concerned about a mass migration of cubans fleeing chaos .

it is time to rethink that argument , which is usually wielded by those policymakers counseling a "go slow" approach .

the best hope for avoiding a dangerous mass migration of cubans to our shores in a post - fidel world is to help them press for real change at home .

if we stand by as their dreams of a new future are dashed by raúl , we are inviting a burst of migration by a new generation of desperate cubans.… in this post - fidel period , any clumsy word or deed suggesting that the united states accepts the transfer of power from one dictator to another would snuff out the nascent hopes for freedom and consign 11million cubans to additional years of hopeless dictatorship .

on may 31 , 2009 , an official at the u.s. department of state reported that the cuban government had indicated that it wants to resume talks on the legal immigration of cubans to the united states .

migration talks with cuba , however meaningful , would likely be incremental in scope .

the objectives of such talks would be striving toward safe , legal , and orderly immigration .

