a discussion draft of broad legislation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions was released march 31 , 2009 , by representative waxman , chairman of the house committee on energy and commerce , and representative markey , chairman of the energy and environment subcommittee .

the draft legislation , titled the american clean energy and security act of 2009 , proposes a "cap and trade" system to control carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases that have been associated with global climate change .

the proposed cap - and - trade system would cover electric utilities and other entities that together are responsible for 85% of u.s. greenhouse gas emissions .

covered entities would need permits ( called allowances ) to emit carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases , and unused allowances could be banked for future use or sold .

the number of allowances issued each year would be gradually reduced until greenhouse gas emissions from covered entities were cut 83% below 2005 levels in 2050 .

to address concerns that greenhouse gas controls could place u.s. manufacturers at a competitive disadvantage , the draft bill authorizes compensation to certain industrial sectors .

if the president determined that competitive imbalances persisted despite those payments , foreign manufacturers and importers would have to purchase special allowances to cover the carbon emissions related to their imported products .

the draft bill would require retail electricity suppliers to meet a certain percentage of their power load with electricity generated from renewable resources , starting at 6% in 2012 and gradually rising to 25% in 2025 .

several major issues are not addressed by the draft bill and are still under discussion , such as how to allocate emission allowances and how to assist workers and consumers affected by the cap - and - trade system .

substantial controversy is also continuing over the draft bill's renewable energy mandate on electricity suppliers .

the remainder of this report provides a brief summary of the provisions of the march 31 waxman - markey discussion draft .

the summary focuses on general descriptions of the discussion draft's provisions , excluding most details and analysis .

it is not designed to track the development and evolution of greenhouse gas legislation .

this summary was prepared by crs analysts in the following subject areas: carbon capture and storage , [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] electricity grid , stan kaplan , x[phone number scrubbed] energy efficiency , [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] global warming adaptation , jane leggett , x[phone number scrubbed] pollution reduction programs , [author name scrubbed] , x[phone number scrubbed] , and jonathan ramseur , x[phone number scrubbed] renewable energy , richard campbell , x[phone number scrubbed] transportation , brent yacobucci , x[phone number scrubbed .

lists five environmental and economic purposes for the provisions of part 1 .

part 1 generally uses the same definitions as those used in title vii of the clean air act above .

creates a rebate program directed at energy / greenhouse gas - intensive , trade - exposed industries harmed by the direct emissions reduction costs and indirect increased energy input costs from implementing title vii of the clean air act .

based on the best data available , epa is to provide the rebate to eligible companies based on a two - part formula: ( 1 ) 85% of the industry's average emissions per unit of output times the company's output ; ( 2 ) average emissions per kilowatt - hour of electricity purchased by the company times 85% of the industry average electricity used per unit of output .

entities not covered by title vii are eligible for the indirect emissions rebate .

requires epa to transmit to congress a report on carbon leakage and the effectiveness of sec .

403 one year after the first year of the rebate program .

program is to be phased out over a 10-year period , starting in 2021 ( subject to annual review ) .

eligible entities who are no longer engaged in eligible sectors or subsectors are to no longer receive rebates from the epa .

defines a covered good under part 2 , including iron , steel , steel mill products , aluminum , cement , glass , pulp , paper , chemicals , and industrial ceramics .

defines the purpose of part 2 in terms of environmental goals and encouraging effective international actions .

states the policy of the united states is to achieve effective international agreements on climate change that require all major greenhouse gas - emitting nations to contribute equitably to reducing emissions .

requires the president by june 30 , 2017 , to submit a report to congress that analyzes the impact of title vii of the clean air act compliance costs on industries that manufacture covered goods , related jobs , carbon leakage , and the degree to which the rebates provided in part 1 mitigates these factors .

if the president finds that title vii compliance is still having adverse economic and environmental effects after initiation of part 1 , then the president shall initiate part 2 .

under part 2 , no person may import a covered good without submitting the required number of international reserve allowances in accordance with rules promulgated by epa .

within 24 months of president's determination , epa is to promulgate rules establishing an appropriate price and distribution system for international reserve allowances .

these allowances will be required for importation into the united states of any covered good as determined by the president .

exemptions are provided for least developed countries or countries who emit less than 0.5% of global greenhouse gas emissions .

the purpose of the program is to address the competitive imbalance of production costs resulting from the direct and indirect costs of implementing title vii of the clean air act .

the secretary of education may competitively award grants to eligible partnerships for developing programs focused on emerging careers and jobs in renewable energy , energy efficiency , and climate change mitigation .

partnerships shall include at least one local agency eligible for funding under sec .

131 of the perkins career and technical education act of 2006 ( pctea ) , or an area career and technical education school or education service agency ; at least one post - secondary institution eligible for pctea funding ; representatives of the community ( including business , labor or industry ) with experience in clean energy .

application criteria and priorities are prescribed .

a peer review panel ( comprised of educators and clean energy professionals ) is to review applications and recommend awards .

directs the secretary of labor to carry out a program for workforce training and education in industries and practices in clean energy , energy efficiency , or sustainable practices .

half of the funds awarded in each fiscal year shall go to institutes of higher education with pre - existing programs leading to particular certificates or degrees in specified areas .

a peer review panel ( composed of educators and clean energy professionals ) will review applications and recommend awards .

recipients of support from funding in this subtitle shall provide reasonable assurance that all those employed in the authorized programs , or by contractors ( or subcontractors ) will be paid at wage rates not less than those prevailing on similar work in the locality .

provides developing countries with assistance from the united states to encourage widespread deployment of technologies that reduce ghg emissions , and encourage developing countries to adopt policies and measures that will reduce ghg emissions .

appropriate congressional committees — house: energy and commerce , foreign affairs .

senate: environment and public works , energy and natural resources , foreign relations .

developing country — country eligible to receive assistance from the world bank .

eligible country — a developing country determined by the president under sec .

454 as eligible to receive assistance from the international clean technology fund ( ictf ) .

interagency group — group established by the president under sec .

453 to administer the ictf .

establishes an international clean technology fund in the u.s. treasury .

an interagency group is to consist of the secretaries of state , energy , and treasury ; the epa administrator ; and any other federal agency head or executive branch appointee the president designates .

the secretary of state is to chair the group .

directs the president to publish a list of countries eligible for assistance no later than january 1 , 2012 , and revise this list annually .

criteria for eligibility shall include developing countries that have signed and ratified an agreement or treaty to undertake ghg mitigation activities ; a determination by the president that such activities will achieve substantial , measurable and verifiable ghg reductions ( relative to business as usual ) ; and such other criteria as the president determines .

authorizes the secretary of state , in consultation with the interagency group , to provide assistance from the ictf for projects in eligible countries .

assistance may be in the form of grants , loans or other assistance .

distribution of assistance from the ictf may be direct , via the world bank or other international development bank or institution , through an international fund created by the unfccc , or through some combination of these mechanisms .

the interagency group will establish criteria for project selection .

the secretary of state shall monitor project performance and shall have authority to terminate assistance in whole or part for noncompliance with the approved proposal .

requires the president to submit annual reports on assistance from the program , beginning no later than march 1 , 2012 .

parts 1 and 2 support domestic and international assessments of vulnerabilities to climate change , development of adaptation strategies and plans , and authorization of funding to assist adaptation to climate change .

part 1 establishes three overlapping domestic programs with distinct interagency coordination bodies , program offices , requirements for assessments , adaption plans and strategies , funding mechanisms , and reporting requirements .

part 2 addresses an international adaptation assistance program .

establishes the national climate change adaptation council for interagency coordination among 16 or more federal agencies .

the council is chaired by the representative of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) and supported by a new national climate change adaptation program within noaa .

the council is to serve as a forum for interagency consultation and coordination on federal policies relating to the assessment of , and adaptation to , the effects of climate change on the united states and its territories .

establishes a national climate change program within noaa to increase the effectiveness of federal climate change adaptation efforts .

under this program , among other duties , the administrator of noaa must produce a quadrennial national assessment evaluating the nation's vulnerability to the effects of climate change .

the assessment is to be comprised of regional assessments and a national synthesis .

several factors for inclusion in regional assessments are listed .

in each assessment cycle , the administrator of noaa must convene workshops in each identified region and one nationally .

establishes a national climate service within noaa to be an information clearinghouse for data and services on the effects of climate change and adaptation , and to provide technical assistance to other agencies , as well as state , local and tribal government decision - makers .

further , the administrator of noaa is authorized to deploy observation and monitoring systems for adaptation .

each department or agency serving on the council must prepare a detailed adaptation plan to address the effects of climate change on matters within its jurisdiction .

these adaptation plans are due to the president for approval within one year of publication of each national assessment , and must be submitted to congress , after presidential approval , within 18 months of publication of each national assessment .

establishes a national climate change adaptation fund in the department of the treasury by 2013 to provide financial assistance to regions , states , localities , and tribes for implementing projects that reduce their vulnerability to the effects of climate change , as well as other project categories .

states that the federal policy of the united states is to "use all practicable means and measures" to assist the efforts of public health professionals and communities to adjust health systems to address impacts of climate change , and to encourage further understanding of health effects due to climate change .

requires the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) to promulgate a national strategy to mitigate public health impacts of climate change in the united states , in consultation with relevant agencies and stakeholders .

states that federal policy is "to use all practicable means and measures to assist natural resources to become more resilient and adapt to and withstand the impacts of climate change and ocean acidification" ( hereiafter "adapt to" ) , and establishes a program to that effect .

directs the chair of the council on environmental quality ( ceq ) to advise the president on development and implementation of a natural resources climate change adaptation strategy and federal natural resource agency adaptation plans .

within one year of each strategy , each agency represented on the panel must produce a federal natural resource agency adaptation plan .

establishes a new natural resources climate change adaptation panel to coordinate related federal agencies' adaptation strategies , plans , programs and activities ( ceq is to chair the panel ) .

the panel must be established within 90 days of enactment of the law , include heads of five additional agencies ( noaa , the department of the interior , epa , the department of agriculture , and the army corps of engineers ) , and is to develop a natural resources climate change adaptation strategy within two years of enactment .

directs the administrator of noaa and the director of the u.s. geological survey ( usgs ) to establish a natural resource climate change adaptation science and information program , to be implemented through the usgs national global warming and wildlife center and counterpart programs in noaa .

this program is to provide technical assistance , research , tools to assist development of adaptation strategies and plans , supplemented by five - year surveys of adversely affected natural resources and decision support needs .

an appointed science advisory board will advise the program .

funding is expected to be available for states to implement adaptation plans .

to be eligible for more than three years for funding from a new natural resource climate change adaptation fund , each state must prepare a state natural resources adaptation plan , to include performance measures and to be reviewed and updated every five years .

directs percentages of the fund to support a variety of agencies , governments , and programs .

the secretary of state , with the administrators of the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) and epa , is to establish an international climate change adaptation program within usaid to assist developing countries most vulnerable to climate change .

foreign aid can be given to any private or public group to assist with the development of adaptation plans and projects , including specific investments and research to improve capacity building and resilience to climate change , and engagement with communities and other stakeholders .

the administrator of usaid must report within 180 days after enactment , and later annually , to the president and congress .

the report would detail priorities , provide assessments of vulnerabilities , describe how funds were spent , and discuss cooperation with other countries and international organizations .

requires the administrator to distribute 40-60% of program funds to relevant international fund ( s ) , providing at least 15 days advance notice to congress .

to receive funding , an international fund must meet specific criteria .

for these funds , the administrator of usaid also must establish performance goals , evaluate the effectiveness of the assistance provided , and report annually to congress .

