the conference report on the national defense authorization act for fy2010 defense authorization bill ( h.r .

2647 ) , as well as a compromise version of the fy2010 defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

3326 ) that was agreed to by house and senate negotiators in lieu of a conference report , largely support proposals by the obama administration to terminate some major weapons programs that were designed for traditional combat — such as the air force's f - 22 fighter .

the rationale for these cuts , according to secretary of defense robert gates , was to allow dod to focus more resources on equipment better suited to the type of operations underway in iraq and afghanistan .

the house approved the authorization conference report on october 8 by a vote of 281-146 .

the senate approved the conference report october 22 by a vote of 68-29 and the president signed the bill into law ( p.l .

111-84 ) on october 28 .

in lieu of a conference report on the fy2010 defense appropriations bill , house and senate negotiators agreed on a compromise amendment to the senate - passed version of the bill , which would appropriate $497.7 billion for the dod base budget ( covering all accounts except military construction ) and $128.2 billion for fy2010 war costs .

the house passed that compromise version of the bill december 16 by a vote of 395-34 .

the senate approved it on december 18 by a vote of 88-10 .

the president signed the bill on december 19 ( p.l .

111-118 ) .

neither the fy2010 defense authorization act nor the companion defense appropriations bill covered funds that will pay for president obama's decision , announced december 1 , to increase by 30,000 the number of u.s. troops deployed in afghanistan .

the bills do cover funds to pay for operations in afghanistan and iraq that already were underway prior to the december 1 announcement that additional forces would be deployed .

 ( see " war costs and issues ," below. ) .

the enacted versions of both the authorization and appropriations bills fund continued development of an alternate engine for the f - 35 joint strike fighter .

the office of management and budget ( omb ) had warned in its official statement of administration policy ( sap ) on each of the defense bills that the president might veto any bill that continued the alternate engine program .

defense secretary robert gates echoed that warning in an october 13 letter to the chairman and ranking minority member of the house defense appropriations subcommittee .

the administration's veto threats concerning the alternate engine program were more ambiguous than the flat , unqualified declaration by president obama earlier in the year that he would veto any bill that funded continued production of the f - 22 .

in the case of the alternate engine program , both omb and secretary gates said that the president's senior advisors would recommend a veto of any bill that would "seriously disrupt" the f - 35 program , which , administration officials contend , the alternate engine program might do .

for details on the alternate engine issue , see " defense authorization conference ," below .

the administration had taken a less adamant stance in its opposition to provisions of the defense appropriations bill which would continue production of the c - 17 , a wide - body cargo jet .

like omb , secretary gates said that he "strongly objects" to the senate bill's addition of $1.5 billion for 10 c - 17s and to the house bill's addition of $674 million for three of the planes .

neither omb's statement of administration policy ( sap ) nor secretary gates's letter contained any explicit warning that president obama might veto the defense bill over that issue .

the compromise final version of h.r .

3326 would add to the budget request $1.5 billion for 10 c - 17s .

on the other hand , both omb and secretary gates warned that the president's senior advisers would recommend that he veto the dod appropriations bill if it included funds to continue procurement of vh - 71 helicopters , which were intended to transport the president and other senior officials .

the administration cancelled the project because of cost overruns , but the house version of the appropriations bill added $400 million to complete work on five of the aircraft that already are under construction .

the compromise final version of the appropriations bill added $100 million to the vh - 71 program .

for details on the c - 17 and vh - 71 issues , see " compromise version of defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

3326 ) ," below .

the president's fy2010 request of $533.7 billion for the dod base budget is $20.4 billion higher than the total of $513.3 billion the obama administration cites as the total appropriated for the dod base budget in the regular fy2009 appropriations process .

in an april 6 press conference , defense secretary robert m. gates said this nominal increase of 4% would amount to an increase in real purchasing power of 2% , taking into account the cost of inflation .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , h.r .

1 , p.l .

111-5 ) , also known as the "economic stimulus" package , provided an additional $7.5 billion in dod appropriations for fy2009 , bringing the fy2009 discretionary appropriations for the pentagon to a total of $520.7 billion .

compared with this amount , the fy2010 request would amount to an increase of $13.0 billion , a nominal increase of 2.5% ( not adjusted for inflation ) .

comparison of the fy2010 dod base budget request with the corresponding appropriation for fy2009 is complicated by the fact that the administration is funding in the fy2010 base budget several activities that were covered by war cost supplemental appropriations bills in fy2009 and prior years .

in an april 7 conference call with internet defense reporters , secretary gates said the total amount of funding shifted into the base budget was about $13 billion , which included ongoing costs of expanding the army and marine corps , increased funding for medical research and quality - of - life improvements for military personnel .

however , in testimony before the senate defense appropriations subcommittee on june 9 , after the administration's detailed budget request had been released , secretary gates said the amount of funding shifted into the base budget was $8 billion , rather than the $13 billion he had cited earlier .

setting aside those funds allocated to costs that were not included in the fy2009 dod base budget ( for the sake of an apples - to - apples comparison ) , president obama's fy2010 request for the dod base budget includes about $520.7 billion , which is roughly $7.4 billion more than was appropriated for dod in the regular appropriations process .

if the $7.4 billion provided to dod in fy2009 by the economic stimulus package is added to the regular fy2009 appropriations , the fy2009 appropriation and the fy2010 request are roughly the same .

comparison of president obama's fy2010 dod base budget request with the fy2010 budget projected by the bush administration is uncertain because the budget outline made public on february 26 listed only an aggregate total for the dod base budget , without specifying whether or not that sum included each of several elements of dod funding that might or might not reasonably be included and which could affect the total by several billions of dollars .

in his april 7 conference call with reporters , secretary gates said that the comparable bush administration projection of the fy2010 dod base was $524 billion .

by that standard , president obama's fy2010 request is nearly $10 billion higher .

however , since the obama request includes about $8 billion for programs that the bush administration did not fund in the dod base budget , the obama request is about $2 billion higher than the bush projection , on an apples - to - apples basis .

in the fall of 2008 , dod reportedly drew up a projected fy2010 base budget request that was $57 billion higher than the request the bush administration had projected in february 2008 .

that larger request , details of which were not published , was not subjected to the regular budget review process within the executive branch .

although the administration's detailed budget request was not transmitted to congress until may 7 , 2009 , congress began acting on the annual defense authorization bill only about a month later than it typically does .

the house armed services committee reported its version of the bill ( h.r .

2647 ) on june 18 , 2009 and it was passed by the house on june 25 .

the senate armed services committee reported its version of the bill ( s. 1390 ) on july 2 and the senate passed the bill july 23 .

the conference report on h.r .

2647 was filed october 7 and the house adopted it on october 8 by a vote of 281-146 .

the house defense appropriations subcommittee reported its version of the fy2010 defense appropriations bill on july 16 .

the house appropriations committee reported the bill h.r .

3326 on july 24 and house passed it on july 30.the senate appropriations committee reported its amended version of the bill on september 10 and the senate passed the bill september 6 by a vote of 93-7 .

in lieu of a conference report on the fy2010 defense appropriations bill , house and senate negotiators agreed on an amendment to the senate - passed version of h.r .

3326 that would appropriate $497.7 billion for the dod base budget and $128.2 billion for war costs .

the house passed that compromise version of the bill december 16 by a vote of 395-34 .

the senate passed it december 19 by a vote of 88-10 and the president signed the bill later on december 19 ( p.l .

111-118 ) .

the obama administration's request for $130 billion for operations in iraq and afghanistan during fy2010 was submitted to congress with the fy2010 base budget request on may 7 , 2009 and has been considered as part of dod's overall request for the year .

that request reflected the administration's review of u.s. strategy for both wars that was completed in march 2009 , but not the new debate about president obama's december 1 , 2009 announcement that he intended to deploy about 30,000 additional troops to afghanistan in the first half of 2010 .

although president obama said in his december 1 speech that the additional deployments are "likely to cost us roughly $30 billion for the military this year," some press reports have suggested the cost could run as high as $35 billion .

dod is in the process of developing its supplemental request to cover additional costs in fy2010 according to testimony by secretary of defense gates .

while there was some speculation that the administration would propose that additional war funding be included in the still - pending fy2010 dod appropriations act , both congressman murtha and senator inouye , chairs of the house and senate appropriations committee , respectively , reportedly objected .

the administration is likely to submit a fy2010 supplemental to congress in early february 2010 along with dod's regular and war requests for fy2011 .

it is not clear whether dod will assume in its war funding request for fy2011 any decrease in the number of troops in afghanistan .

the president said in his december 1 speech that the united states would "begin the transfer of our forces out of afghanistan in july of 2011" as part of handing over responsibility to afghan forces but did not specify any timeline , which may be decided after the administration conducts a full - scale evaluation in december 2010 .

in recent years , some senior military officers , as well as research groups and advocacy organizations , have argued that defense spending needs to be substantially higher in the next few years to avoid drastic cuts in major weapons programs or in the size of the force .

many have called for a baseline defense budget , not including war - related costs , pegged to about 4% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) — an amount that would be anywhere from $62 to $169 billion per year higher over the next few years than the administration plan .

senator james m. inhofe and representative trent franks — members , respectively , of the senate and house armed services committees — summarized the case for such an increase in identical joint resolutions ( s.j.res .

10 and h.j.res .

3 ) introduced on feb. 12 , 2009 which call for a base defense budget equal to at least 4% of gdp .

the fundamental case for meeting the 4% target is that , since the end of the cold war , dod's budget and force structure have declined significantly while the tempo of operations has increased — to include sustained combat operations — and the geographic scope of operations has broadened .

these arguments for a substantial increase in the defense budget , however , come at a time when , by historical standards , military spending seems very robust .

between fy1998 , when the post - cold war decline in defense spending hit bottom , and fy2009 , the baseline department of defense budget , not including war costs , increased by almost 40% above inflation ( see table 5 ) .

adjusting for inflation , the fy2009 baseline dod budget was more than $100 billion , or about 20% , greater than the average during the cold war ( measured from the end of the korean war in fy1954 through fy1990 ) .

funding for weapons acquisition ( procurement plus r&d ) in fy2009 was more than $45 billion — or about one - third — higher than the annual cold war average .

the apparent disconnect between the size of the budget and the appeals for more money appears even more striking when amounts that have been appropriated for war costs are added to the equation .

on top of a baseline dod budget that grew from $255 billion in fy1998 , in fy2009 prices not adjusted for inflation , to $528 billion in fy2009 , supplemental appropriations for war - related costs climbed from $19.4 billion in fy2001 , as an initial response to the 9 / 11 attacks , to $63 billion in fy2003 , the year of the iraq invasion , to an estimated $189 billion in fy2008 .

while large portions of the supplementals have been consumed by war - related operating costs , substantial amounts have also been devoted to buying new equipment , particularly for the army and the marine corps .

although the bulk of this acquisition has been for force protection , communications , and transportation , the effect has been to modernize much of the basic equipment stock of both services , in effect augmenting their baseline budgets .

the fact that so large a level of spending appears to the military services to be so inadequate has several explanations — and the policy implications are , accordingly , matters of varying interpretation .

following are some of the contributing factors .

future baseline budgets are widely expected to decline: the administration plan to cut the deficit in half by the end of president obama's first term includes limits on defense as well as non - defense spending .

white house budget projections accommodate an increase of about 5% above inflation in the fy2009 dod budget , but project a cumulative decline of about 3% between fy2009 and fy2012 .

many unofficial projections of the deficit situation are less sanguine than the administration's , so many analysts expect , at best , a flat baseline defense budget for the foreseeable future .

increased costs in part of the budget , therefore , will necessarily come at the expense of resources available in other areas .

supplemental appropriations are expected to decline: although plans to withdraw from iraq are uncertain , the military services expect that supplemental appropriations will come down within a few years .

costs for training and equipment maintenance that have been covered in supplementals would , then , migrate back into the baseline budget at the expense of other programs , and money to further upgrade ground forces would have to be found elsewhere .

costs of military personnel have grown dramatically in recent years: since the end of the 1990s , congress has approved substantial increases in military pay and benefits , including pay increases of ½ percent above civilian pay indices in seven of the past eight years , three rounds of "pay table reform" that gave larger raises to personnel in the middle grades , increased housing allowances to eliminate on base and off - base disparities , dod - provided health insurance for medicare - eligible military retirees ( known as tricare for life ) , concurrent receipt of military retired pay and veterans disability benefits that had earlier been offset , elimination of a reduction in retiree survivor benefits that had occurred at age 62 , and large increases in enlistment and reenlistment bonuses and special pays .

although bonuses and some other payments may decline in the future , most of the past increases in pay and benefits have been built into the basic cost of personnel .

crs calculates that uniformed personnel now cost 40% more , per capita , after adjusting for inflation , than in fy1999 .

operating costs continue to grow above base inflation: historically , military operation and maintenance budgets , which pay for everything from personnel training , to weapons repairs , to facility operations , to health care , have increased relative to the size of the force by about 2.7% per year above inflation .

these increases are not as large as in some areas of the civilian economy , such as health care , but they do not reflect gains in productivity that are common in other sectors of the economy .

continued growth in operating costs , which is now widely seen as a fact of life in defense planning , erodes the availability of resources for weapons modernization and other priorities .

increasing generational cost growth in major weapons programs: it is generally expected that new generations of weapons will be more expensive than the systems they replace as weapons technology advances .

the rate of generational cost growth , however , is becoming a matter of increasing concern within the defense department .

new stealthy aircraft , multi - mission ships , advanced space systems , and networked missiles , guns , and vehicles appear to be getting more expensive than their predecessors at a greater rate than in the past .

unless budgets increase more rapidly than costs , trade - offs between the costs of new weapons and the size of the force may be required .

poor cost estimates: the difficulties engendered by accelerating intergenerational weapons cost growth are exacerbated by poor cost estimation .

the government accountability office has documented frequent , substantial increases in costs of major defense systems compared to original development estimates .

a side - effect of inaccurate cost projections is an increased instability in the overall defense budget , which entails inefficient production rates for major weapons programs and increased costs due to changing production plans .

new requirements based on the lessons of iraq and afghanistan: the wars in iraq and afghanistan have led to very large increases in equipment requirements for ground forces , particularly for force protection , communications , and transportation .

national guard combat units that earlier were equipped with older systems cascaded from active units are now seen as part of the rotation base that require equally modern equipment .

full sets of current equipment are expected to be available not only for next - to - deploy units , but also for units as they begin to reset from overseas rotations .

a key lesson of the war is that what used to be called "minor procurement" for ground forces was substantially undercapitalized .

a broader range of national security challenges: a common presumption before 9 / 11 was that forces trained and equipped for traditional conflicts between national armies would be able to cope with what were seen as less demanding other challenges such as stability operations .

now secretary gates and other prominent defense leaders maintain that forces must be designed not only for traditional conflicts , but for insurgencies and other irregular wars , support of allies , threats of catastrophic attacks by non - state actors with weapons of mass destruction , and entirely new kinds of disruptive attacks on specific u.s. and allied vulnerabilities .

the effect has been to broaden requirements without , necessarily , an attendant offsetting reduction in older force goals .

when these factors are taken as a whole , it is not so surprising that military planners discover some shortfalls .

for congress , it may not be so certain that the principal answer to all these problems is to provide more money for defense .

more money is one alternative .

other alternatives may include backing away from plans to add 92,000 active duty troops to the army and marine corps ; shifting resources among the military services to reflect new challenges rather than allocating them roughly the same proportions every year ; reviewing requirements for expensive new technologies in view of the presence or absence of technologically peer or near peer competitors ; and shifting resources from military responses to global threats toward non - military means of prevention .

secretary gates stated that the budget decisions that he announced on april 6 , 2009 , were intended to "reshape the priorities of america's defense establishment. .

those decisions focused almost exclusively on "means," rather than on desired "ends" based on policy decisions , or "ways" designed to utilize given means to achieve desired ends .

that emphasis on resources , together with the relatively broad scope of the announced programmatic decisions , raises key questions about the relative weight of strategy and budget in driving defense priorities .

on april 6 , 2009 , roughly a month before the details of the fy2010 budget were released , secretary gates announced several key recommendations all of which were incorporated into the administration's fy2010 budget request released may 7 .

gates said this "unorthodox" procedure was warranted by the scope and significance of the decisions and by his desire to publicize them as elements of his effort to change dod's strategic direction .

the conference report on the annual congressional budget resolution ( s.con.res .

13 ) includes a recommended ceiling on fy2010 budget authority and outlays for the "national defense" function of the federal budget that matches president obama's request .

the budget resolution's ceilings on budget authority and outlays for national defense and other broad categories ( or functions ) of federal expenditure are not binding on the appropriations committees , nor do they formally constrain the authorizing committees in any way .

however , the budget resolution's ceilings on the so - called "050 function" — the budget accounts funding the military activities of dod and the defense - related activities of the department of energy and other agencies — have in the past indicated the general level of support in the house and senate for the president's overall defense budget proposal .

the house version of the budget resolution ( h.con.res .

85 ) , adopted april 2 , set the fy2010 budget authority ceiling for the 050 "national defense" function at $562.0 billion and provided a separate allowance of $130.0 billion — the amount requested for war costs — under function 970 ( "overseas deployments and other activities" ) .

those two ceilings add up to $692.0 billion .

the senate version of the budget resolution ( s.con.res .

13 ) , also adopted april 2 , set the budget authority ceiling for the 050 national defense function at $691.7 billion and did not set a separate ceiling for overseas deployments .

in the reports accompanying their respective resolutions , the house and senate budget committees each indicated that the ceilings recommended were intended to accommodate president obama's fy2010 dod budget request .

the conference report on the final version of the budget resolution ( h.rept .

111-89 ) follows the house version's pattern of setting separate ceilings for a national defense base budget and for overseas deployments .

the house adopted the joint resolution april 29 by a vote of 233-193 .

the senate adopted it the same day by a vote of 53-43 .

the conference report on the defense authorization bill ( h.rept .

111-288 ) was filed on october 7 , 2009 and was adopted by the house on october 8 by a vote of 281-146 .

the senate adopted the conference report october 22 by a vote of 68-29 and the president signed it into law ( p.l .

111-84 ) on october 28 .

the conference report authorizes a total of $680.2 billion for military activities of the department of defense ( dod ) and defense - related activities of other federal agencies .

the total authorization , which is $14.9 million higher than the obama administration requested , includes $550.2 billion for the so - called "base budget" — all dod activities other than combat operations in iraq and afghanistan — and $130.0 billion for "overseas contingency operations," including operations in iraq and afghanistan .

the house version of the fy2010 defense authorization bill , h.r .

2647 , was reported by the house armed services committee on june 18 , 2009 ( h.rept .

111-166 ) and passed by the house june 25 with relatively few changes .

it would have authorized $550.5 billion for the dod base and defense - related programs of the energy department , which is $348.0 million more than the president requested .

for war costs , the house bill would have authorized $130 billion , as requested , but would redistribute some funds within that total bringing the total authorized by the house - passed bill to $680.5 billion .

on july 2 , 2009 , the senate armed services committee reported its version of the fy2010 defense authorization bill , s. 1390 ( s.rept .

111-35 ) , which would have authorized $551.1 billion for the dod base budget and related energy department programs , $864.8 million more than the president requested .

the senate bill would have authorized $129.3 billion , for war costs , which is $740 million less than the request , bringing the total authorized by s. 1390 to $680.3 billion .

the senate bill also would require the administration to cut a total of $500 million ( to reflect unspecified "management efficiencies" ) from the total dod authorization , thus reducing the bill's total authorization to $679.8 billion .

the senate passed the bill july 23 .

funding levels authorized by h.r .

2647 as passed by the house , by s. 1390 as passed by the senate , and by the conference report on h.r .

2647 are presented in table 7 .

funding levels authorized for selected programs by each version of the authorization bill are summarized in appendix .

following are highlights of the versions of the fy2010 defense authorization bill passed by the house and senate as well as the conference report .

both the house and senate versions of the authorization bill supported most elements of the obama administration's plan to shift the focus of anti - missile defense efforts by slowing or terminating work on some technologically advanced systems while increasing the planned procurement of aegis and thaad interceptors designed to cope with near - term missile threats .

during house action on h.r .

2647 , the $9.3 billion missile defense program was the component of the dod budget request that was most extensively debated , both in the armed services committee and on the house floor .

several republican - sponsored amendments that would have increased funding for various missile defense programs were rejected in both venues .

the senate bill also supported the administration's principal missile defense decisions .

like both house and senate versions of the bill , the conference report supports secretary gates's proposals to cap the number of ground - based interceptors ( gbi ) deployed in alaska and california at 30 , instead of deploying a total of 44 .

secretary gates , missile defense agency chief lt. gen. patrick j. o'reilly and other military commanders have said that 30 operationally effective gbis are sufficient given the current and prospective threat over the next five years or so from iran and north korea .

secretary gates has said that the cap at 30 would be revised upward if the threat assessment changes .

others , however , believe the threat of long - range ballistic missile attack from iran and north korea is more imminent and question whether 30 deployed gbis are sufficient .

however , the conference report would add to the budget request authorization for $20 million to sustain the vendor base for components that could be used to manufacture additional gbis .

the conferees said a gbi test plan adopted by dod late in the summer of 2009 would require purchase of seven additional gbis .

the conference report also would require the secretary of defense not to allow a break in the gbi production line until dod completes a detailed review of the ground - based missile defense system , including an assessment of the number of gbi's needed to sustain it over 20 years of service ( sections 232-233 ) .

like both house and senate versions of the bill , the conference report supports the administration's proposal to cancel the multiple kill vehicle ( mkv ) and kinetic energy interceptor ( kei ) programs and construction of a second airborne laser ( abl ) prototype aircraft ( although the existing abl plane would be retained for research ) .

the government accountability office ( gao ) has faulted each of these programs for significant technical , cost and operational challenges .

some missile defense supporters contend that cancelling the kei and relegating the abl to a research program will leave the country without an active program to destroy attacking ballistic missiles in their boost - phase or shortly after their launch .

secretary gates has said that the requirement for a boost - phase bmd program is being looked at as part of the current bmd review and the quadrennial defense review ( qdr ) , expected to be completed later this year .

meanwhile , the administration has said it wants to pursue an ascent phase bmd program designed to destroy attacking missiles shortly after their rocket motors burn out in the boost - phase .

because this effort is new , few details are available .

like the house version of the bill , the conference report on h.r .

2647 would require the defense secretary to report to congress the details and strategy behind the ascent phase effort ( section 238 ) .

when the obama administration released its fy2010 defense budget request , it still was reviewing the bush administration's plan to deploy in europe a radar in the czech republic and interceptor missiles in poland that are intended to intercept missiles launched from iran at europe or the united states .

according to secretary gates , unspent funds appropriated in fy2009 for the so - called "third site" ( the other two being the gbi sites in alaska and california ) plus an additional $50.5 million requested in the fy2010 budget would allow the project to go forward if the polish and czech parliaments ratify basing agreements reached with the united states in 2008 .

but the administration also said that the proposed third site is one of several options on the table for dealing with potential missile attacks from iran .

the house and senate bills both would authorize a total of $353.1 million from funds available for fiscal years 2009 and 2010 to develop missile defenses in europe either to continue with research , development , test and evaluation of the proposed radar and interceptor site in poland and the czech republic pending czech and polish ratification of the agreements , or to develop an alternative integrated missile defense system to protect europe from threats posed by all types of ballistic missiles , subject to certain conditions .

on september 17 , 2009 , president obama cancelled the plan to deploy a long - range missile defense system in poland and the czech republic .

instead , dod plans to rely on a network of mobile radars and interceptor missiles , including cruisers and destroyers equipped with the aegis radars and sm - 3 missiles to defend europe against iranian missiles of short and medium range .

the president said u.s. intelligence agencies had concluded that iran's effort to develop long - range ballistic missiles was taking longer than had been assumed while it was moving more quickly than had been forecast to develop missiles that could fly far enough to hit europe , but not far enough to hit u.s. territory .

the conference report authorizes dod to use a total of $309.0 million from funds available in fiscal years 2009 and 2010 for the european defense system proposed by the president in september , except for any required military construction .

the conference report also would require an independent assessment of the cost and effectiveness of the new plan .

as for military construction for the european defense system , the conference report would rescind $151.2 million authorized in fy2009 for construction in poland and czech republic associated with the old plan .

construction projects required by the new european missile defense plan would have to be requested and authorized by congress in the year the work was expected to begin , the conferees said .

the conference report also adds $23.2 million to the $168.7 million requested for procurement of sm - 3 missiles .

it also requires from the navy ( as one part of a broader , long - term plan for shipbuilding ) a report on the number of additional aegis warships required by the new european defense plan based on the sm - 3 missile .

both house and senate versions of the authorization bill supported the administration's budget proposal for major shipbuilding programs .

however , the senate armed services committee was more critical than its house counterpart of the navy's management of its shipbuilding program for surface combatant ships .

the senate version , which was debated as s. 1390 , included a provision that would require the navy to prepare an detailed acquisition strategy for purchasing surface combatants , supported by a battery of analyses .

the conference report expanded the scope of the required report .

the senate bill also would have repealed a provision of the fy2008 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

110-181 ) that would require that future cruisers , destroyers and large amphibious landing ships be nuclear - powered .

the conference report did not include that provision .

both versions of the bill accepted the decision , recommended by senior navy leaders in 2008 and embraced by the obama administration , to buy only three guided missile destroyers of the ddg - 1000-class , instead of the seven ships that had been planned , and to resume procurement of ddg - 51 class destroyers , 62 of which are in service or under construction .

accordingly , the house and senate versions each would have authorized , as requested , $1.08 billion to complete the third ddg - 1000 , $539 million to continue development of that class and $1.91 billion for one ddg - 51 .

the house bill would have added $100 million to the $329.0 million requested for components to be used in ddg - 51s to be funded in future budgets , but this was dropped from the conference report .

both versions of the bill authorized , as requested , $340.0 million to continue development of the cg ( x ) class of cruisers to replace existing aegis cruisers which are slated for retirement beginning in the early 2020s .

however , the conference report retains a senate provision that would allow the navy to spend only half those funds until the service produces the surface combatant acquisition plan ( and supporting analyses ) that the bill requires .

the conference report would add $15 million to the portion of the cg ( x ) - related r&d budget that funds development of the very powerful radar planned for the ship ( instead of adding $50 million as the senate bill did ) .

as requested , both bills temporarily waived a law requiring the navy to keep 11 carriers in service , thus allowing the number of flattops to drop to 10 between 2013 , when the enterprise is slated for retirement after 48 years of service , and 2015 , when the gerald r. ford is scheduled to enter the fleet .

the older ship would have required a very expensive overhaul if it had to be kept in service during those two years .

the house armed services committee questioned secretary gates's recommendation to slow the rate at which future carriers are built to replace those being retired , a policy that would permanently reduce the carrier force from 11 ships to 10 after 2040 .

the house committee added to h.r .

2647 a provision ( section 122 ) requiring the navy to submit a report on the effects of funding a new carrier at the proposed slower rate of one ship every five years instead of the previous plan under which some future carriers would have been funded only four years apart .

the house provision also bars the navy from spending funds authorized by the bill in a way that would make it impossible to fund the next two carriers four years apart , as had been planned .

the conference report requires the report on the effect of slowing the rate of carrier construction , as described in the house bill .

the conference report did not include the associated house provision restricting the use of funds , but conferees included report language saying they "expect" the navy not to take any action that would preclude building the next two carriers at four - year intervals until it completes the required report .

both versions of the bill authorized construction of three additional littoral combat ships , as requested .

h.r .

2647 also included a provision , requested by the administration , that would liberalize the cost - cap of $460 million per lcs set by existing law , by allowing the cap to be adjusted for inflation and by excluding certain costs .

however , the house committee also added to that bill a provision ( section 121 ) authorizing the navy to compile a technical data package that would allow it to put the contracts for these ships up for bid by other contractors if the two shipyards currently building lcs ships would not contract to build the fy2010 ships within the limits of the revised cost cap .

on september 16 , 2009 , the navy announced a restructuring of the lcs program , cancelling its plan to build several ships to each of two competing designs before selecting one of the two for further production .

under the navy's new plan , it would choose between the two designs during fy2010 .

in addition , the navy announced that , instead of buying three lcs ships in fy2010 ( as provided for in the budget request ) , it would contract with the winning contractor to buy two ships in fy2010 as part of a so - called "block buy" of up to 10 ships to be funded through fy2014 .

the conference report authorizes the revised program , including two ships to be funded in fy2010 for which it authorizes the same amount as had been requested for three lcs vessels ( $1.38 billion ) .

it also would raise the cost - cap on the ships ( while giving the secretary of the navy significant discretion to waive the cap ) and it would require the competing shipyards' bids to include delivery to the navy of a technical data package that would allow it to put the contracts for these ships up for bid by other contractors .

the house and senate versions of the bill both concurred in secretary gates's recommendations to terminate development of the csar - x combat rescue helicopter and the vh - 71 presidential helicopter and to end procurement of c - 17 wide - body cargo jets .

each bill rejected several of gates's recommendations concerning combat aircraft .

neither the house nor senate version of the bill authorized funds for procurement in fy2009 of additional f - 22 fighters — funding for which was adamantly opposed by the president .

by a vote of 31-30 , the house armed services committee had added to the administration's request an authorization of $368 million to buy long lead - time components that would allow procurement in fy2011 of 12 additional f - 22 fighters .

h.r .

2647 would have funded the f - 22 add - on without increasing the total amount authorized by cutting $368.8 million from the $5.5 billion requested for environmental cleanup of energy department sites associated with the nuclear weapons program .

the senate armed services committee voted 13-11 to include in s. 1390 authorization of $1.75 billion to purchase seven additional f - 22s in fy2010 .

of that total , $32.3 million was money appropriated for f - 22 procurement in fy2009 but not spent by the obama administration .

in floor action , however , by a vote of 58-40 , the senate adopted an amendment to the bill that would reverse the committee's action , stripping the $1.75 billion from the f - 22 program and reallocating it to the budget accounts the armed services committee had reduced to cover the cost of the f - 22 addition .

the senate acted after president obama said unequivocally that he would veto any bill that would fund additional f - 22s .

the conference report dropped the $368 million for long lead - time procurement the house bill would have authorized .

however , it retained in modified form a house provision that would require the secretary of the air force to ensure the preservation of unique tooling that would be needed to resume f - 22 production in the future .

rejecting a position taken by both the bush and obama administrations , the conference report added to the budget request authorization of funds ( $560 million ) to continue developing an alternate engine for the single - engine f - 35 joint strike fighter .

h.r .

2647 would have added a total of $603 million to continue developing the alternate engine and prepare for its production .

the bill would have offset that increase by cutting from the request two of the 30 f - 35s requested ( a $308 million reduction ) and approving only two - thirds of a proposed management reserve fund for the program ( a further reduction of $156 million ) .

the senate armed services committee included in s. 1390 an increase of $438.9 million to continue development of the alternate engine , offsetting that addition by cutting the proposed management reserve by $156 million , the same amount the house bill cut from that request .

facing an administration threat to veto any defense bill that funded continuation of the alternate engine project , the senate adopted by voice vote an amendment to s. 1390 eliminating authorization to continue work on the alternate engine .

this came after it rejected by a vote of 38-59 an amendment that would have reaffirmed the armed services committee's action .

the house bill would have delayed secretary gates's plan to retire 249 older combat jets , most of which are assigned to air force reserve and air national guard units .

it would have shifted from other parts of the air force budget request a total of $344.6 million to continue operating those planes .

the bill ( section 1047 ) also would have prohibited their retirement until 90 days after the secretary of the air force submits to the senate and house armed services committees a report detailing how the air force will fill the gaps left by the retirement of those planes and what missions it will assign to the bases and personnel associated with the aircraft .

the conference report retains the requirement for a report , but would bar retirement of the planes for 30 days after the report ( rather than 90 ) and does not fund continued operation of the planes in the interim .

the house version of the bill also would have required ( section 133 ) the secretary of defense to report on alternative plans to prevent a prospective shortfall in air force fighters ( as the service retires old planes more quickly than it fields new f - 35s ) by purchasing so - called "4.5 generation" fighters , that is , types currently in service , such as f - 15s , f - 16s and f / a - 18s , that are equipped with improved radars and other upgrades .

the conference report retains that provision with modifications ( section 131 ) .

the house and senate versions of the bill each included provisions designed to put pressure on dod to sign a multi - year contract for additional f / a - 18e / f fighters , in order to reduce a prospective shortfall in carrier - based fighters .

the house bill would have authorized a multi - year contract to buy additional f / a - 18 variants ( including the single - seat "e" model , the dual - seat "f" model and the ef - 18g , which is a version of the plane equipped to jam enemy radars ) .

it also would have increased from $51.4 million to $159.4 million the amount authorized in fy2010 for long lead - time components to be used in planes that could be funded in fy2011 .

the house bill directed the congressional budget office to compare , in terms of cost and effectiveness , the purchase of new f / a - 18e / fs with the refurbishing of older model f / a - 18s .

it also added to the bill a provision ( section 1051 ) expressing the sense of congress that the navy should field at least 10 carrier air wings , each equipped with at least 44 strike fighters .

the senate armed services committee , predicting that ongoing dod studies would make the case for a signing a multi - year contract to buy new f / a - 18e / fs rather than refurbishing older planes , argued that the navy should buy 18 of the "e" and "f" model planes in fy2010 — as it earlier had planned to do — rather than reducing the production run to nine planes , as the administration's budget proposed .

accordingly , s. 1390 would have authorized $1.57 billion for 18 f / a - 18e / fs , an increase of $560 million over the request .

the conference report authorizes a multi - year contract for f / a - 18 type aircraft and authorizes funding in fy2010 for 18 of the planes , rather than the 9 requested , adding $512.3 million to the amount requested .

the house and senate armed services committees both endorsed secretary gates's recommendation to terminate development within the army's future combat systems ( fcs ) program of several new kinds of manned ground combat vehicles , including a self - propelled howitzer .

however , both panels proposed reductions in the amounts authorized for the payments required to cancel existing contracts on those projects .

the house version of the bill authorized $100 million of the $426.8 million requested to terminate those parts of the program , arguing that unspent fcs funds appropriated for fy2009 would cover the balance of the termination costs .

the senate committee cut $381.8 million of the fcs termination request and authorized the remaining $45 million to continue developing "active protection systems" — small weapons mounted on combat vehicles to intercept approaching missiles .

the conference report made smaller reductions in the proposed fcs termination costs than either the house or senate bill , authorizing $215.8 million of the $426.8 million requested to terminate the ground combat vehicles projects .

like the house and senate versions of the bill , the conference report authorizes the $2.12 billion requested to continue developing other components of fcs .

the conference report incorporates a senate provision ( which was very similar to a house provision ) requiring the army to create two new programs — one to develop a new self - propelled cannon and one to develop a family of other ground combat vehicles — and to report on its plans to acquire those new systems .

like the senate bill , the conference report also would require dod to contract with a non - governmental organization to assess the research needed to develop technologies that would be required by a new generation of ground combat vehicles .

in its report on h.r .

2647 , the house armed services committee offered specific recommendations for how the army should modernize its combat vehicle fleet in the absence of fcs , taking into account the large amounts spent to modernize existing vehicles in recent years .

the committee recommended that current fleet of m - 1 tanks , paladin cannons and stryker armored combat vehicles should be given upgrades — including some technologies developed as part of fcs , such as the "active defense system" intended to shoot down approaching anti - tank missiles .

two other types of armored carriers — bradleys and the older m - 113s — should be candidates for replacement by new vehicles , the committee said .

the conference report directed the army to give priority to upgrading the existing paladin howitzer .

as authorized by both the house and senate versions of the bill , the conference report authorizes , as requested , $293.5 million to continue development of the marine corps' expeditionary fighting vehicle ( efv ) , an armored amphibious troop carrier designed to carry marines ashore from transport ships more than 20 miles offshore .

the house armed services committee , which has criticized the efv design as being too vulnerable to so - called improvised explosive devices ( ieds ) , insisted that the marines explore various modifications that would give troops inside an efv at least the same level of protection against ieds as they would have riding in the heaviest mine - resistant , ambush - protected ( mrap ) vehicles .

the committee directed the secretary of the navy to give the congressional defense committees a report on efv survivability options .

like the house and senate bills , the conference report authorizes , as requested , a total end - strength of 1.41 million personnel for active - duty members of the four armed forces , an increase of 40,227 over the fy2009 level .

this total includes limits of 547,400 for the army and 202,100 for the marine corps , which mark the achievement by those two services three years earlier than planned of a decision to increase their combined end - strengths by a total of 92,000 personnel over their fy2007 levels .

the conference report , like the house and senate bills , also authorizes the army to increase its end - strength by an additional 30,000 active - duty personnel through fy2012 .

like the house and senate versions , the conference report also authorizes a 3.4% increase in basic pay for military personnel , which is one - half of a percentage point above the administration's request .

this would be the eleventh consecutive year that legislation has given the military a pay raise that equals or exceeds the labor department's employment cost index ( eci ) , a measure of private sector wage growth .

the house bill would freeze implementation of the national security personnel system ( nsps ) and the parallel defense civilian intelligence personnel system ( dcips ) , both of which are pay - for - performance systems affording managers more flexibility in hiring and determining compensation for employees than the federal government's general schedule .

the senate version of the bill , was silent on the dcips but would have eliminated nsps unless the secretary of defense certified that its termination would not be in the best interest of dod and provided a schedule for making changes "to improve the fairness , credibility and transparency" of nsps .

the conference report terminated nsps and required that all employees currently covered by that system transition by january 1 , 2012 back to their previous personnel system .

the house bill would have terminated all on - going "a - 76" competitions to determine whether jobs currently performed by federal employees should be out - sourced to private contractors .

the senate bill would have terminated a - 76 competitions that had exceeded certain time limits .

the conference report terminates no on - going competitions , but imposes a moratorium on beginning new a - 76 competitions until dod complies with certain existing legal requirements , a contingency which , in effect , would bar new competitions through october 15 , 2010 , according to the conferees .

the house version of the bill would have funded an initial increment of an initiative , proposed by president obama , to expand the number of disabled military retirees entitled to "concurrent receipt" of both their military retired pay and disability - based stipends from the department of veterans affairs .

since 2001 , congress has taken several steps to liberalize a general policy ( the roots of which date from 1891 ) requiring disabled military retirees to forego an amount of their retired pay equal to the amount of any veterans disability stipend .

under congressional budget rules , the cost of the administration proposal would have to be offset by a either a reduction in already - mandated expenditures or an increase in revenue .

a funding offset large enough to cover the cost of the president's concurrent receipt proposal through fy2010 was provided by a bill ( h.r .

2990 ) the house passed june 24 by a vote of 404-0 .

the text of h.r .

2990 was incorporated into the defense authorization bill by h.res .

572 , the rule governing floor action on the defense bill , which the house adopted june 24 by a vote of 222-202 .

neither the senate version of the bill nor the conference report acted on the concurrent receipt issue .

the conference report includes , in modified form , several provisions in the senate version of the bill that amend the military commissions act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-366 ) , which codified rules under which military tribunals could try non - u.s. citizens detained in the course of the war against terrorism ( sections 1801-07 ) .

regarding military commissions , some key provisions of the final version of h.r .

2647 include the following: military commissions would have jurisdiction over "alien unprivileged enemy belligerents," a class of persons defined somewhat differently from "alien unlawful enemy combatants," the class of persons subject to military commissions under current law .

under the provision in the conference report , membership in al qaeda at the time an offense occurred would be sufficient to meet the definition , even if the person did not engage in or support hostilities against the united states .

confessions allegedly elicited through cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment , would be inadmissible even if they were made prior to the enactment of the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 2000dd ) , which bars the use of such confessions only if they were made after its enactment .

the conference report also bars the admission of any other statement of the accused unless the military judge finds it reliable and voluntarily given .

the requirement that the statement be voluntary would be waived if it were taken in a combat circumstances .

in the case of hearsay evidence , the party offering the evidence would have the burden of demonstrating that it is reliable , whereas under current law , the opponent has the burden of proving that it is unreliable .

the conference report includes a requirement that the judge consider wither the declarant's will was overborne .

the prosecutors' obligation to disclose exculpatory information would include mitigating evidence , and the obligation would extend to all information that is known or reasonably should be known to any government officials who participated in the investigation and prosecution of the case .

the conference report provides for additional counsel for those charged with capital crimes , and recommends that the defense be fully resourced , particularly in capital cases .

the conference report retained the court of military commission review , created by the 2006 military commissions act to review any judgment rendered by a military commission .

the senate bill would have assigned that role to the court of appeals for the armed forces .

the conference report contains a detailed provision governing the use of classified information , establishing procedures for military commissions that are similar to the procedures used in federal courts and courts - martial .

the conference report on h.r .

2647 retained , with modifications , a provision of the senate bill that would prohibit the use of contract employees to conduct interrogations of individuals detained during hostilities ( section 1038 ) .

unlike the senate version of the bill , in which the prohibition was absolute , the conference report would allow the secretary of defense to waive the ban , with the proviso that he notify congress within five days of issuing such a waiver .

the conference report would prohibit the president ( thru december 31 , 2010 ) from releasing in the united states , its territories or possessions any non - u.s. citizen detainee held at the guantanamo bay naval station .

it also would prohibit , for the same time period , transfer of any guantanamo detainee to those areas until 45 days after the president has submitted to the congressional defense committees a plan for the disposition of such person , including an assessment of the risks entailed by the proposed action and a plan for mitigating those risks ( with an estimate of the associated costs ) , and the location or locations to which the detainee would be transferred .

the house version of the bill included a prohibition that was similar except that it was open - ended ( i.e. , did not lapse on december 31 , 2010 ) and it would have required 120 days' prior notice to congress .

the conference report also incorporated several provisions of the house - passed version of the bill ( some of them with modifications ) that deal with the treatment of detainees .

these provisions would: prohibit of reading miranda rights to any foreign belligerent , privileged or unprivileged , captured outside the united states , unless a court rules otherwise ; and require a report on how the reading to detainees of their "miranda rights" may affect military operations in afghanistan , including any effects on intelligence collection through interrogations ( section 1040 ) ; require dod to videotape or otherwise electronically record strategic intelligence interrogations of persons in its custody , under its effective control , or under detention at a dod theater - level detention facility , with the proviso that the secretary of defense could waive the requirement and notify congress ( section 1080 ) ; require that the international committee of the red cross ( icrc ) be notified whenever a detainee comes into u.s. custody or under u.s. control at the detention facility at bagram air base in afghanistan .

the icrc would have access to such detainees "as soon as practicable" after submitting a request to visit a detainee .

the house version of the bill had required notification of the icrc within 24 hours of the detainee's coming into u.s. custody ( section 1039 ) .

the conference report included , with modifications , provisions of the senate - passed bill relating to so - called hate crimes .

the senate provisions , in turn , largely mirrored the provisions of h.r .

1913 , passed by the house april 29 , 2009 .

current law defines hate crime as any crime against either person or property in which the offender intentionally selects the victim because of the victim's actual or perceived race , color , religion , national origin , ethnicity , gender , disability , or sexual orientation .

hate crimes are not separate and distinct offenses .

rather , hate crimes are traditional crimes , during which the offender is motivated by one or more biases that are considered to be particularly reprehensible and damaging to society as a whole .

federal jurisdiction over hate crime , however , is limited to certain civil rights offenses , which are considered to be "hate crimes" when it is determined that the offender was motivated by a bias against race , color , religion , national origin , and , in limited instances , disability .

during senate debate on the defense authorization bill , it adopted by voice vote an amendment — similar to h.r .

1913 — that would broaden federal jurisdiction over hate crimes by authorizing the attorney general to provide assistance ( technical , forensic , prosecutorial , or other ) , when requested by a state , local , or tribal official , for crimes that ( 1 ) would constitute a violent crime under federal law or a felony under state or tribal law , and ( 2 ) are motivated by the victim's actual or perceived race , color , religion , national origin , gender , sexual orientation , gender identity , or disability .

the senate also adopted , by a vote of 78-13 , an amendment to the hate crimes amendment that would prohibit the implementation of any provision of the amendment in a manner that would violate or burden the exercise of an individual or group's first amendment rights to free speech and association provided the actions in question were not intended to plan or incite violence against another individual .

although supporters of the amendment argued that greater federal involvement would ensure that hate crimes are systematically addressed , some opponents contended that additional federal penalties for hate crimes would be redundant and largely symbolic , as penalties for those crimes already exist under state law .

the senate rejected by a vote of 29-62 an alternative amendment that would have required a report on state - level hate crimes investigations , prosecutions , and sentencing .

the conference report on h.r .

2647 dropped a senate provision authorizing the death penalty for certain hate crimes , but retained a senate provision prohibiting assault and battery against a person on account of their military service or status as a member of the u.s. armed forces .

the conference report also added to the senate - passed language provisions that would ( 1 ) define the term "state" to include the district of columbia , puerto rico , and any other territory or possession of the united states , ( 2 ) establish a seven - year statute of limitations for hate crimes that did not result in death , and ( 3 ) require the u.s .

sentencing commission to produce a report on mandatory minimum sentencing provisions under federal law .

current statute ( section 2905 of the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 ) requires the secretary of defense to seek fair market value prior to conveying real property ( land or permanent structures ) declared surplus during the current round of military base closures to local authorities .

section 2705 of the conference report eliminated this requirement on condition that the authority to which the property is transferred adhere to certain restrictions in its redevelopment .

the bill also allows the secretary to accept , as consideration for the property's value , a portion of the third - party sale or lease revenues collected by the property's redevelopment authority , payment in kind ( in the form of goods and services ) , other real property or property improvements , or other considerations the secretary considers to be appropriate .

sections 2831 through 2837 contain provisions related to military force realignment on guam , which includes the movement of forces forward from domestic bases and the redeployment of marine units from their garrisons in the japanese prefecture of okinawa to new locations in the territory .

the bill appoints the deputy secretary of defense as leader of the interagency guam executive council .

it also labels any corporation , agency , etc. , able to build military family housing or provide utilities to military installations on guam as "special purpose entities" ( spe ) and requires the secretary of defense to report on how he intends to employ spes in support of the redeployment .

the bill requires the use of dod's "unified facilities criteria" ( ufc ) as the minimum construction standard for all projects funded by contributions made by the government of japan for the relocation .

local wage rates would apply to construction workers employed on relocation projects , and the bill stipulates a number of measures that would emphasize the recruitment of the us construction workers before h2b visa waivers could be issued to foreign laborers .

the bill also creates an interagency coordination group for guam realignment , chaired by the dod inspector general ( ig ) that includes the igs of other federal agencies .

the group would report annually to the congressional defense committees on realignment activities .

following are among the other issues on which the senate took action during debate on the fy2010 defense authorization bill .

none of them were dealt with in the conference report on h.r .

2647 .

the senate rejected an amendment that would allow citizens who have obtained permits from their home states to carry concealed firearms to carry concealed firearms in any other state that issues such permits .

the amendment garnered 58 "aye" votes and 39 "nays" ; however , it was debated under an agreement stipulating that the amendment would be agreed to only if it obtained 60 or more "yeas. .

by voice vote , the senate adopted an amendment expressing the sense of the senate that the follow - on agreement to the expiring strategic arms reduction treaty ( start ) should not include limitations on ballistic missile defense , military capabilities in space or advanced conventional weapons .

the amendment also requires a presidential report on plans to improve the safety and reliability of u.s. nuclear weapons and to modernize the energy department's nuclear weapons complex .

the version of the amendment that was adopted supplanted an earlier version which would have barred the use of funds to implement a start follow - on agreement unless ( 1 ) the treaty placed no limits on missile defenses , space capabilities or advanced conventional weapons and ( 2 ) the administration's fy2011 budget provides sufficient funding for the energy department's nuclear complex to maintain the reliability and safety of remaining u.s. nuclear forces and to modernize the weapons complex .

the senate rejected by a vote of 43-54 an amendment expressing the sense of the senate that north korea should be officially designated as a state sponsor of terrorism .

north korea had been so - designated by the state department , but that designation was rescinded in october 2008 .

subsequently , the senate adopted , by a vote of 66-31 , an amendment requiring a review of north korea's conduct to determine whether it should be re - listed as a state sponsor of terrorism .

in lieu of a conference report on the fy2010 defense appropriations bill ( h.r .

3326 ) , house and senate negotiators agreed on a compromise final version of the bill that was drafted as an amendment to the senate - passed version .

the house passed the compromise version december 16 by a vote of 395 to 34 .

the senate passed it on december 19 by a vote of 88-10 and the president signed the bill later on december 19 ( p.l .

111-118 ) .

as enacted , the bill supports proposals by the obama administration to terminate some major weapons programs designed for traditional combat — such as the air force's f - 22 fighter .

it funds several other programs the administration also wanted to cancel , including development of an alternate engine for the f - 35 joint strike fighter , continued production of the c - 17 cargo plane and continued development of the vh - 71 presidential helicopter .

the enacted version of h.r .

3326 does not reflect any additional funding requirements associated with president obama's decision , announced december 1 , to increase by 30,000 the number of u.s. troops deployed in afghanistan .

the bill does include funds to pay for operations in afghanistan and iraq that already were underway , prior to the december 1 announcement that additional forces would be deployed .

for additional information , see " war costs and issues ," above .

the enacted version of h.r .

2236 included provisions temporarily extending — in most cases through february 28 , 2010 — current policies or expiring provisions of law relating to ten non - dod federal programs or activities .

for additional information , see " temporary extensions of non - defense programs ," above .

the version of the fy2010 defense appropriations bill which the house passed july 30 by a vote of 400-30 included funds to continue development of an alternate engine for the f - 35 joint strike fighter ( $560 million ) , continue production of the c - 17 cargo plane ( $674 million ) , and spend an additional $400 million on the vh - 71 executive helicopter program .

the administration opposed all of these actions , two of which — the alternate engine and the vh - 71 — drew threats that the president might veto a bill that funded them .

the house - passed bill also would have added to the budget request nine f / a - 18e / f fighters ( $495 million ) , one littoral combat ship ( $540 million ) plus $240 million to fully fund the three lcs ships requested , and a third high - speed transport ship ( $180 million ) in addition to the two requested ( one apiece for the army and navy ) .

as reported by the house appropriations committee , h.r .

3326 also would have added to the budget request funds to continue production of the f - 22 fighter , which the obama administration — like the preceding bush administration — had decided to terminate .

president obama also had said , in unusually explicit terms , that he would veto any defense bill that provided funding for continued f - 22 production .

before the house passed the bill , it adopted by a vote of 269-165 an amendment deleting the additional f - 22 procurement funds .

in its report , the house committee noted that the administration had not submitted to congress the annual selected acquisition reports ( sars ) , which provide cost and schedule data on major equipment purchases .

noting that the government accountability office ( gao ) relied on data from these reports to perform its annual assessment of major weapons programs , the committee directed the secretary of defense to provide "sar - like" data — including future budget projections — to gao in time for that agency to present congress with its annual program review in march 2010 .

like the house - passed version of h.r .

3326 , the version of the fy2010 defense appropriations bill passed by the senate on october 6 ( which the senate appropriations committee had reported september 10 ; s.rept .

111-74 ) , concurred with most of the obama administration's proposals to terminate or reduce funding for several high - profile weapons programs including production of the vh - 71 white house helicopter and f - 22 fighter .

however , the senate's version of the bill also concurred in the administration's decision to terminate development of an alternate engine for the f - 35 fighter , whereas the house version of the bill added funding to continue that effort .

like the house - passed bill , the senate version also would have added funds to buy 18 f / a - 18e / f navy fighters , instead of the nine planes requested by the administration .

the senate version would have funded these aircraft ( $512.3 million ) in the section of the bill that funds war costs .

it also would have sustained the production line for the c - 17 cargo plane , which is slated to shut down , by adding to the budget request funds for 10 c - 17s ( $2.50 billion ) .

the house bill would have added funds for three c - 17s .

funding levels appropriated by the house and senate versions of h.r .

3326 and by the compromise version of the bill are summarized in table 8 , below .

funding levels authorized and appropriated for selected programs are summarized in the appendix .

following are highlights of h.r .

3326 .

the house and senate versions of the bill generally supported the administration's decisions to slow or terminate some technologically advanced anti - missile systems while increasing the procurement of the navy's ship - borne aegis and the army's ground - based thaad systems , both of which are designed to cope with near - term missile threats .

the enacted version of the bill adds a total of $77.6 million to the amounts requested for aegis , including: $57.6 million ( in addition to $168.7 million requested ) to purchase sm - 3 interceptor missiles used by the aegis system ; $20 million ( in addition to $257.4 million requested ) for development of improved variants of the sm - 3 ; and the final bill did not include $41 million added by the senate bill for the radar component of the land - based thaad system .

in omb's september 25 statement of administration policy ( sap ) regarding the senate bill , the administration opposed the additional funding for the thaad radar , saying it was premature .

like the house version of h.r .

3326 , the enacted version added to the budget request $80 million to adapt to other missile defense programs technologies that were fostered by the program to develop a kinetic energy interceptor ( kei ) — a very fast missile intended to intercept enemy missiles early in their flight .

defense secretary gates had recommended cancelling the program on cost and technical grounds .

the house had rejected by a vote of 124-307 an amendment that would have dropped the kei funding from its version of the bill .

the statement of administration policy ( sap ) on h.r .

3326 issued by the office of management and budget ( omb ) on july 29 , the administration strongly objected to a provision of the house bill that would have rescinded $114.7 million that had been appropriated in fy2009 for work on a european missile defense site and $40.2 million that had been appropriated for the projected space tracking and surveillance system ( stss ) , which is intended to be a network of missile tracking satellites .

these were among rescissions of prior appropriations included in the house version of the bill with a total value of $1.39 billion , which reduced the budgetary impact of the bill by that amount .

the enacted version of the bill did not include the european site or stss among the programs from which it rescinds a total of $1.24 billion in prior - year appropriations .

on september 17 , 2009 , president obama cancelled the plan to deploy a missile defense system in poland and the czech republic , designed to intercept long - range missiles launched from iran at u.s. territory .

the system would have used a two - stage version of the three - stage "ground - based interceptor" ( gbi ) , 30 of which currently are deployed in alaska and california .

in place of that system , the administration announced plans to acquire a network of mobile radars and interceptor missiles , including the sm - 3 intended to defend europe against iranian missiles of short and medium range .

the president said u.s. intelligence agencies had concluded that iran's effort to develop long - range ballistic missiles was taking longer than had been assumed while it was moving more quickly than had been forecast to develop missiles that could fly far enough to hit europe , but not far enough to hit u.s. territory .

although the administration cancelled the plan to deploy in europe a two - stage version of the gbi , it planned to continue developing that weapon .

the senate appropriations committee added to the appropriations bill $50 million to sustain a production capacity for those weapons .

by voice vote , the senate adopted an amendment by senator joseph i. lieberman that would require dod to spend on development of the two - stage gbi at least $50 million ( and would give dod discretion to spend as much as $151 million ) of the funds appropriated for missile defense in europe by h.r.3326 and by the fy2009 dod appropriations bill .

in the "joint explanatory statement" by house and senate negotiators who drafted the compromise final version of the bill , the missile defense agency is "encouraged" to spend at least $50 million in fy2010 funds to continue the two - stage gbi program .

in addition , the statement directs dod to send the congressional defense committees a plan for continuing development of that weapon and an explanation of how mda will use development of the two - stage interceptor to modernize the ground - based system currently deployed in alaska and california .

in their explanatory statement , house and senate negotiators who drafted the compromise bill also directed the secretary of the navy to report to congress on the benefits of using the hull form of a class of ships already being procured as the basis for several classes of ships currently slated for funding in future budgets .

both the house and senate versions of the bill basically approved the $1.07 billion requested for a third destroyer of the ddg - 1000-class , which is the last ship of this type the navy plans to acquire .

the house bill would have trimmed the request by $11 million while the senate bill would have shifted into the ddg - 1000 funding line $320.6 million the budget request includes in a separate line to cover costs associated with building this class of ships that are not allocated to any one vessel .

the compromise version incorporated the actions of both chambers , appropriating $1.38 billion for the ship .

the senate bill would have added to the request $1.74 billion for a second ddg - 51 destroyer , in addition to providing the $1.91 billion requested for one ship of this class , which the house bill funded .

the compromise bill added to the request $250 million for long lead - time components to be used in two ddg - 51s to be funded in fy2011 .

the house version of the bill would have cut $40 million from the $150.0 million requested for development of a new class of cruisers , designated cg ( x ) , which is intended to replace existing ticonderoga - class cruisers equipped with the aegis anti - aircraft and anti - missile defense system. .

the senate version of the bill would have cut $64 million from the request .

the enacted version of the bill cut $104 million , providing a total of $46 million for the program .

the house and senate appropriations committees agreed that the three littoral combat ships included in the administration's original fy2010 budget request were not fully funded by the accompanying $1.38 billion budget request .

but , whereas the house bill would have added to the request $240 million to fully fund the three ships requested plus an additional $540 million for a fourth lcs , the senate committee cut $300 million from the request in the senate bill and directed the navy to buy only two of the ships .

on september 16 , 2009 , the navy announced a restructuring of the lcs program , cancelling its plan to build several ships to each of two competing designs before selecting one of the two for further production .

under the navy's new plan , it would choose between the two designs during fy2010 and would procure two lcs ships in fy2010 ( instead of the three included in the original fy2010 budget request ) .

the enacted version of h.r .

3326 bill would provide $1.1 billion for procurement of two lcs ships and $424.5 million in r&d funding to continue developing the design .

the r&d funding includes $60 million the bill adds to the budget request to develop , for whichever of the two designs the navy selects , a technical data package that would allow a second contractor to compete for future contracts .

the final bill did not include $180 million the house bill would have added to the budget request to fund a third joint high speed vessel , in addition to the one requested in the navy budget ( $178.0 million ) and another in the army budget ( $183.7 million ) .

these are small ships based on the design of high - speed ferries intended to haul cargo and combat units over distances of up to several hundred miles .

as enacted , the bill incorporates $170 million , added by the senate bill to the budget request , for long lead - time components to be used in a helicopter carrier ( lha ) for which the navy plans to request most of the funding in fy2011 .

unlike the senate bill , the compromise version would provide the $1.1 billion requested for two t - ake class supply ships .

the house bill would have cut one ship ( $400 million ) .

most of the administration's proposals to terminate certain major aircraft programs were incorporated into both the house and senate versions of h.r .

3326 .

however , both versions of the bill also added to the budget , over the administration's objections , funds or production of the c - 17 cargo jets and for development of both a alternate engine for the f - 35 joint strike fighter and the vh - 71 white house helicopter .

as reported by the house appropriations committee , h.r .

3326 had included $368.8 million for long lead - time components that would permit the funding of 12 more f - 22 fighters in fy2011 .

however the house adopted by a vote of 269-165 an amendment by defense appropriations subcommittee chairman john p. murtha to reallocate that money , in light of president obama's insistence that he would veto a bill that included funds to continue f - 22 production .

subsequently , the house reaffirmed that position , rejecting by a vote of 169-261 a procedural motion that was , in effect , an amendment to restore the f - 22 procurement funds .

the house bill also includes a provision barring the use of funds to approve or license the sale of f - 22s to any other country , a provision that has been included in the defense appropriations bill for every year since fy1998 .

the senate version included no funds to continue f - 22 production .

but , while retaining the ban on approving any foreign sale of the plane , it would explicitly allow dod to "conduct or participate in studies , research design and other activities," to develop an "export" version of the plane that was modified to protect classified information ( section 8056 ) .

that provision was retained in the final bill .

the house version of h.r .

3326 bill included $560 million to continue development of an alternate engine for the f - 35 joint strike fighter .

the house appropriations committee largely offset the cost of the alternate engine project by cutting from the budget two of the 30 f - 35s requested ( $300 million ) and $232 million requested for one - time costs associated with the program because , the committee said , the program had not yet expended more than $200 million appropriated in prior years for these costs .

in a statement of administration policy ( sap ) issued before the house passed h.r .

3326 , the office of management and budget said the administration "strongly objects" to any action that would delay the f - 35 program , as administration officials have insisted the alternative engine project would do , and that the president's advisers would recommend that he veto the defense bill , if it includes funding for the alternate engine .

the senate version of the bill included no funds for the alternate engine .

however , the compromise version added to the budget request $465 million to continue the program without making any of the offsetting reductions the house version had made to the funding request for the joint strike fighter .

both the house and senate versions of the bill added funds for nine f / a - 18e / f navy fighters in addition to the $1.0 billion requested for nine planes of this type .

the house version would have added $495 million for the additional planes plus $108 million for long lead - time components that would allow the navy to sign a five - year contact for 150 additional f / a - 18e / fs beginning in fy2011 .

the senate bill would have added $512.3 million for nine additional f / a - 18e / fs to the section of the bill that funds war costs .

the final bill would add $495 million for the additional nine planes to the base budget request and no additional funds for long lead - time components .

the rationale for funding the additional f / a - 18e / fs , as stated by both the house and senate appropriations committees , is that the planes are needed to mitigate a shortfall in the navy's force of carrier - based fighters that otherwise would occur for three reasons: repeated combat deployments are wearing out the f / a - 18s currently in service earlier than had been projected ; plans to extend the life of the planes currently in service are more problematic than had been assumed ; and production of f - 35 joint strike fighters intended to replace the older f / a - 18s has been delayed .

the compromise version , like the house and senate bills , provide the requested $1.61 billion for 22 radar - jammer versions of the f / a - 18e / f , which are designated e / f - 18gs .

in its report on the bill , the senate appropriations committee noted that the navy and air force are exploring the possibility of acquiring so - called "light attack" planes , which could be any of several types of off - the - shelf aircraft — some of them armed versions of training planes — that are less expensive than front - line fighters and which are designed for combat against relatively lightly armed insurgent forces .

the senate committee directed the services to treat this project as a "new start" acquisition program , going through established procedures to fund the effort and to solicit proposals from contractors .

house and senate negotiators did not address this issue in their joint statement on the compromise version of the bill .

the enacted version of h.r .

3326 would add to the budget request $2.5 billion for 10 c - 17 wide - body , intercontinental cargo planes .

the house - passed bill would have added $674.1 million for three c - 17s , whereas the senate bill would have added $2.50 billion for 10 of the planes .

during senate consideration of the bill , it killed , by a vote of 34-64 , an amendment by senator mccain that would have eliminated funding for the 10 c - 17 cargo planes the appropriations committee had added to its version of h.r .

3326 .

the amendment would have reallocated the added funds ( $2.5 billion ) to operations and maintenance ( o&m ) accounts in the bill .

the amendment would have violated the senate's budget rules by increasing budget outlays resulting from the bill during fy2010 , thus exceeding a cap on outlays established pursuant to the congressional budget resolution .

the reason the amendment would have increased fy2010 outlays is that funds appropriated for o&m accounts are spent more quickly than funds appropriated for aircraft procurement accounts .

the vote that killed senator mccain's amendment came on a motion to exempt the c - 17 amendment from those budget rules .

after that motion — which would have required 60 votes for adoption — was rejected , the mccain amendment was ruled out of order .

on october 6 , the senate rejected by a vote of 30-68 a second mccain amendment that would simply have dropped from the bill the $1.5 billion added to the budget to buy c - 17s .

in the statements of administration policy ( saps ) released by the office of management and budget ( omb ) concerning both the house and senate versions of the defense bill , omb said the administration "strongly objected" to funding additional c - 17s , but did not specifically say that the bill might be vetoed if it were not brought into line with the administration's request .

president obama had made such an explicit veto threat to back up his objection to congressional initiatives to fund production of additional f - 22s .

the senate version of the bill would have cut $30 million from the $439.6 million requested to develop a new aerial refueling tanker on grounds that the project had been delayed .

after a competition in 2008-09 , the air force had selected the team of northrop grumman and europe - based eads as the winner of a competition to build the new plane .

however , gao nullified that decision , upholding a protest by boeing — the other competitor — who argued that the service had not adhered to the announced criteria for selecting the winner .

the enacted version of the bill would provide $291.7 million for the tanker program .

the budget requested $294.8 million for five long - range executive transport planes , including: $66.4 million for one c - 37 ( based on the commercial gulfstream v executive jet ) ; and $228.4 million for four c - 40s ( based on the commercial boeing 737 airliner ) .

the house bill would have added to that request $132.8 million for two additional c - 37s and $200.0 million for two additional c - 40s .

the compromise version , like the senate bill , would provide $294.8 million , as requested , for one c - 37 and four c - 40s .

pursuant to the administration's decision to cancel development of a new fleet of presidential helicopters , designated vh - 71s , the budget request included $85.2 million to wind down the program .

the senate bill would have cut $55 million from that request , while the house bill would have added $400 million to the budget request to continue testing and outfitting five vh - 71s already built .

those five aircraft had been planned to be part of a fleet of 27 helicopters , most of which were to have been much more capable than the first five .

the house appropriations committee said that the added funding would allow dod to harvest useful aircraft from the $3.2 billion already spent on the program .

in its sap on the house bill , omb said the administration "strongly objects" to this funding and that , if it were included in the final version of the bill , the president's advisers would recommend a veto .

the compromise version of the bill would cut from the request $55 million , following the senate's lead .

it also would add $100 million to extract from the program technologies that could be used in the resumed effort to develop a new transport helicopter for senior officials .

both house and senate versions of h.r .

3326 accepted the administration's decision to cancel the csar - x program , which was intended to develop a new search and rescue helicopter to replace the hh - 60ms currently used for that mission .

the house bill would have cut $80 million from the $90 million requested for csar - x development costs and added $140 million to buy five hh - 60ms to replace aircraft lost in combat since 2001 plus an additional $100.2 million to upgrade older hh - 60g rescue helicopters .

the senate bill included none of the $90.0 million in the budget request for csar - x .

acting at the request of the air force , the committee said in its report , the bill allocated $90 million , instead , to buy two new hh - 60ms ( $75.0 million ) and to begin development of a replacement for the hh - 60m ( $15.0 million ) .

the enacted version of the bill tracked the senate bill's action on csar - x .

the house and senate versions of the bill basically supported the administration's decision to substantially restructure the army's future combat systems ( fcs ) program , starting over the effort to develop a new family of ground combat vehicles .

the house version of h.r.3326 would have provided $2.67 billion of the $2.88 billion requested for fcs , eliminating $211 million requested for termination costs the committee said could be covered by unspent funds previously appropriated for now - cancelled elements of the program .

the senate bill would have cut $368 million from the amounts requested for fcs programs .

the compromise version would provide $2.55 billion for fcs , a reduction of $332 million .

the house version of the bill would have cut $50 million from the $293 million requested to continue development of the marine corps's expeditionary fighting vehicle ( efv ) , a troop carrier intended to carry a squad of marines from ship to shore at nearly 30 mph and then function as an armored troop carrier on land .

citing delays and cost increases in the program , the house committee said it had "serious reservations" as to whether the efv development program would succeed .

the compromise version of the bill , like the senate bill , would fund the request .

following are selected other provisions that initially were added to the senate version of h.r .

3326 .

by a vote of 91-7 , the senate adopted october 6 an amendment by senators christopher s. bond and patrick j. leahy that would bar dod from carrying out a plan to retire 249 older combat jets , most of which are assigned to air force reserve and air national guard units .

the prohibition would be lifted when dod submits to the senate and house armed services committees a report detailing how the air force will fill the gaps left by the retirement of those planes and what missions it will assign to the bases and personnel associated with the aircraft .

the compromise version of the bill did not include the bond - leahy amendment ; however , in the joint explanatory statement issued by house and senate negotiators who drafted the bill , the secretary of the air force was directed to spend no funds on the proposed changes until several reports associated with the issue are submitted to congress .

the compromise version of h.r .

3326 retain a provision of the senate bill that would prohibit the payment of funds appropriated by the bill to any contractor that requires its employees , as a condition of employment , to accept the result of binding arbitration in case of any claim arising from sexual assault or harassment .

the senate approved the provision , offered as a floor amendment by senator al franken , by a vote of 68-30 .

