in august 2008 , the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 ( cpsia ) was enacted in response to consumer alarm about the safety of toys and children's products and concern about the effectiveness of the consumer product safety commission ( cpsc ) and of the statutory and regulatory framework for consumer product safety .

consumer attention and concern were roused by several well - publicized national recalls of various toys and children's products .

in addition to strengthening the regulatory and enforcement authority of the cpsc , the new law established new safety standards , such as those for lead content and phthalates , and testing and certification requirements , focusing particularly on children's products .

a range of implementation issues have arisen .

new safety standards and testing and certification requirements have caused confusion and concern about possible exemptions to and appropriate compliance with new standards , compliance with testing and certification requirements , and disputes about cpsc interpretation of new standards .

despite the efforts of the cpsc to issue implementing regulations and guidelines in a timely manner , a number of unanswered questions and lack of clarity remain , particularly among small manufacturers , second - hand retailers , and manufacturers / retailers of certain types of consumer products .

increased statutory penalties and potential applicability of certain state laws have added to uncertainty about what constitutes compliance with the new requirements of the cpsia .

this report will describe the new requirements for certification and testing and the effect of the stay of enforcement of these requirements announced by the cpsc , certain new safety standards established by the cpsia and related implementation actions and issues , implementation issues faced by small businesses and second - hand retailers , and legislative proposals to amend the cpsia to provide for exemptions from certain requirements and for special consideration for small businesses and second - hand retailers .

in light of the confusion and misunderstanding regarding the certification and testing requirements of the cpsa as amended by the cpsia , this section will summarize these requirements and the cpsc's limited stay of enforcement .

there are two types of compliance certification requirements: ( 1 ) a general conformity certification for consumer products , not just children's products , based on testing of each product or a reasonable testing program by the manufacturer and ( 2 ) a certification for children's products based on testing by a third - party laboratory .

until a third - party testing requirement takes effect for a safety standard applying to children's products , a general conformity certification applies to that safety standard .

the certification requirement applies to products manufactured on or after november 12 , 2008 .

the third - party testing and certification requirements take effect at different times , on a rolling basis .

both types of certification are required of either the manufacturer ( domestic product ) or importer ( imported product ) , not of a retailer or distributor .

the cpsia added a requirement that the certificates must ''accompany'' each product or shipment of products subject to the certification requirements and be ''furnished'' to each distributor or retailer of the product .

in addition , a copy of the certificate must be ''furnished'' to the cpsc upon request .

under the cpsa as amended by the cpsia , the cpsc has the authority to designate by rule whether the manufacturer or importer ( or private labeler ) must issue the required certificate and to relieve the other parties from the requirement to furnish certificates .

the implementation of new product standards for lead and phthalates in particular have caused controversy .

cpsc has no authority to delay or suspend the safety standards and on these grounds has declined to stay effective dates .

in addition to issues of exemption for specific product categories or the delay of certain requirements of the cpsia , small businesses and second - hand resellers have asserted that they have particularly suffered a severe economic impact from the cpsia .

in letters to the cpsc , congressional committees and members have urged the cpsc to expeditiously issue guidelines and exemption regulations , criticized the cpsc for problems with implementation , and asked the cpsc to explain the implementation issues that have arisen .

the cpsc responded with letters explaining these issues , how they are being handled , and the cpsc's views regarding potential solutions , including any need for additional legislation .

relief from the deadlines imposed for cpsc action and increased agency discretion to grant exemptions are a couple of the proposed solutions that may entail legislation ; component certification is one of the administrative solutions being studied by the cpsc .

additionally , business stakeholders , including manufacturers and second - hand resellers , have been vocal in demanding legislative action to resolve problems businesses perceive in the cpsia and its implementation .

consumer advocates generally appear to be pleased with the cpsia implementation , with the exception of the ogc memorandum permitting the continued sale of inventory that did not comply with the new phthalates standard .

they acknowledge the implementation issues that have arisen and the exemptions permitted under the law and have urged the cpsc to issue appropriate guidance and take appropriate steps in its discretion to address these issues .

they have also urged the president to appoint a new cpsc chair .

some members have urged that hearings be held to consider implementation problems and whether legislation may be appropriate .

the congressional committees with jurisdiction over the cpsc and consumer product safety issues have not yet held hearings with regard to cpsia implementation issues , apparently preferring to wait for the appointment of a new cpsc chair and to allow time for the cpsc to address and resolve such issues administratively to the extent feasible .

the chairmen of the congressional committees have urged president obama to replace acting cpsc chair nord as soon as possible with his own designee .

the cpsc had been hampered by the absence of additional resources and staff needed to implement the cpsia effectively .

the recent enactment of the omnibus appropriations act , fiscal year 2009 , p.l .

111-8 , provided $105,404,000 to the cpsc , which was acknowledged by acting cpsc chair nord as funds urgently needed to implement the cpsia by hiring additional staff and upgrading databases and technology infrastructure .

several bills have been introduced to mitigate the impact of new cpsia requirements on small businesses and second hand resellers ( some of which are non - profit / charitable organizations ) ; delay the effective dates of requirements ; and provide exemptions for atvs , bicycles , motorbikes , and books .

proposed legislation to amend provisions established by the cpsia include: s. 374 , a bill to amend the consumer product safety act to provide regulatory relief to small and family - owned businesses , related to h.r .

968 and h.r .

1465 ( sponsored by senator jim demint and introduced february 4 , 2009 ) ; s. 389 , to establish a conditional stay of the ban on lead in children's products , and for other purposes ( sponsored by senator robert f. bennett and introduced february 5 , 2009 ) ; h.r .

968 , to amend the consumer product safety act to provide regulatory relief to small and family - owned businesses , related to s. 374 ( sponsored by representative john b. shadegg and introduced february10 , 2009 ) ; h.r .

1027 , thrift store protection act ( sponsored by representative bill posey and introduced february 12 , 2009 ) ; h.r .

1046 , children's product safety enhancement and clarification act of 2009 ( sponsored by representative adam h. putnam and introduced february 12 , 2009 ) ; h.r .

1465 , to amend the consumer product safety act to provide regulatory relief to small and family - owned businesses , related to s. 374 ( sponsored by representative brad ellsworth and introduced march 12 , 2009 ) ; h.r .

1510 , to amend the lead prohibition provisions of the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 to provide an exemption for certain all - terrain vehicles , and for other purposes , related to h.r .

1587 ( sponsored by representative denny rehberg and introduced march 16 , 2009 ) ; s. 608 , common sense in consumer product safety act of 2009 ( sponsored by senator jon tester and introduced march 17 , 2009 ) ; h.r .

1587 , to amend the lead prohibition provisions of the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 to provide an exemption for certain off - highway vehicles , and for other purposes ( sponsored by representative denny rehberg and introduced march 18 , 2009 ) ; h.r .

1692 , to amend the consumer product safety improvement act to exempt ordinary books from the lead limit in such act ( sponsored by representative jeff fortenberry and introduced march 24 , 2009 ) ; h.r .

1815 , to clarify the applicability of certain provisions in the consumer product safety improvement act , and for other purposes ( sponsored by representative joe barton and introduced march 31 , 2009 ) ; s.amdt .

964 to s.con.res .

13 , to establish a deficit - neutral reserve fund to protect small and home businesses from the burdensome and impractical requirements of the consumer product safety improvement act of 2008 ( sponsored by senator jim demint and introduced april 2 , 2009 ) .

this amendment not agreed to in the senate by a yea - nay vote of 39 to 58 on april 2 , 2009 ( record vote no .

151 ) .

