figure 1 .

map of costa ricasource: map resources .

adapted by crs graphics .

successive costa rican administrations have sought to address extensive deforestation and environmental degradation that resulted from decades of logging and agricultural expansion .

the country's strong conservation system and innovative policies have done much to restore costa rica's environment and ecotourism has provided a significant source of economic growth .

costa rica's efforts also have led many observers to recognize it as a world leader in environmental protection and have enabled the country to play an outsized role in the formulation of global environmental policies .

despite these accomplishments , some maintain that there are a number of environmental problems that must still be addressed by the country .

relations between the united states and costa rica traditionally have been strong as a result of common commitments to democracy , free trade , and human rights .

u.s. intervention in central america during the 1980s , however , slightly strained the relationship .

president arias responded to the various conflicts in the region by crafting a peace plan during his first administration , which excluded the involvement of extra - regional powers .

as a result of his efforts , arias was awarded the nobel peace prize in 1987 .

u.s. policy in iraq also strained relations between costa rica and the united states .

although then president pacheco ( 2002-2006 ) supported the u.s. invasion , costa rica's constitutional court ruled that listing the country as a member of the "coalition of the willing" violated the country's constitutionally mandated neutrality .

president arias has questioned the priorities of the united states for spending substantial funds in iraq while allocating comparatively little to assist allies in central america .

current relations between the united states and costa rica could be characterized as friendly .

costa rica finally implemented cafta - dr in january 2009 .

the agreement will likely strengthen costa - rica's already significant trade relationship with the united states .

vice president biden visited costa rica during his first trip to central america , leading the arias administration to describe the meeting as "a clear recognition of the trajectory of costa rica as the united states' strategic partner in the region. .

additionally , president arias criticized the anti - americanism of some of his fellow latin american leaders at the fifth summit of the americas , and the united states strongly supported president arias' role as mediator in the political crisis in honduras .

for more than a decade , costa rica has not been a large recipient of u.s. assistance as a result of its relatively high level of development ; however , this is likely to change somewhat as a result of the "mérida initiative" and its successor program , the central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) .

the peace corps has been operating in costa rica since 1963 and generally has been the largest source of u.s. assistance to the country since the u.s. agency for international development mission closed in 1996 .

in recent years , costa rica has also received u.s. assistance through the "international narcotics control and law enforcement" ( incle ) , "international military education and training" ( imet ) , and "foreign military financing" ( fmf ) accounts .

costa rica received $364,000 in regular u.s. assistance in fy2009 and is scheduled to receive an estimated $705,000 in fy2010 .

the obama administration has requested $750,000 for costa rica for fy2011 .

in 2007 , costa rica signed one of the largest ever debt - for - nature swaps with the u.s. government .

authorized by the tropical forest conservation act of 1998 ( p.l .

105-214 ) , the agreement reduced costa rica's debt payments by $26 million over 16 years .

in exchange , the costa rican central bank agreed to use the funds to support grants to non - governmental organizations and other groups committed to protecting and restoring the country's tropical forests .

in order to fund the agreement , the u.s. government contributed $12.6 million and conservation international and the nature conservancy contributed a combined donation of more than $2.5 million .

costa rica historically has not experienced significant problems as a result of the regional drug trade , however , crime and violence have surged in recent years as colombian and mexican cartels have increased their operations throughout central america .

costa rica's murder rate nearly doubled between 2004 and 2008 , from 6 per 100,000 to 11 per 100,000 residents .

although costa rica's murder rate remains significantly lower than those of the "northern triangle" countries of guatemala , el salvador , and honduras , the surge in organized crime has presented the costa rican government with a considerable security challenge .

in october 2007 , the united states and mexico announced the mérida initiative , a multi - year proposal to provide u.s. assistance to mexico and central america aimed at combating drug trafficking and organized crime .

congress appropriated some $165 million for central america under the mérida initiative — a portion of which was to go to costa rica — through the fy2008 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

110-252 ) and the f2009 omnibus appropriations act ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

111-117 ) split central america from the mérida initiative , and appropriated $83 million under a new central america regional security initiative ( carsi ) .

the obama administration has requested $100 million for carsi in fy2011 .

costa rica received an initial $1.1 million in mérida / carsi funds in june 2009 , after costa rica and the united states signed a letter of agreement implementing the initiative .

the initial funds were to be used to finance the central american fingerprint exchange , improved policing and equipment , improved prison management , maritime interdiction support , border assistance and inspection equipment , and a number of regional training programs .

president arias has praised the security initiative as a "step in the right direction," but maintains that the u.s. funding of the program in central america — and costa rica in particular — is "insufficient. .

although costa rica has no military , it receives imet assistance to train its public security forces .

these funds have been used to improve the counterdrug , rule of law , and military operations capabilities of the costa rican coast guard and law enforcement services .

costa rica was prohibited from receiving imet assistance in fy2004 , fy2005 , and fy2006 as a result of its refusal to sign an article 98 agreement exempting u.s. personnel from the jurisdiction of the international criminal court .

in october 2006 , president bush waived fy2006 imet restrictions for a number of countries — including costa rica — and signed the john warner national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2007 into law ( p.l .

109-364 ) , a provision of which ended article 98 sanctions on imet funds .

costa rica began receiving imet funds again in fy2007 .

in january 2009 , security minister janina del vecchio revealed that costa rica would once again send police officers to the western hemisphere institute for security cooperation ( whinsec , formerly known as the school of the americas ) in fort benning , ga .

the decision to resume training came just a year and a half after president arias , following a meeting with opponents of whinsec , announced that costa rica would withdraw its students from the school .

whinsec , which has trained tens of thousands of military and police personnel from throughout latin america — including 2,600 costa ricans , has been criticized for the human rights abuses committed by some of its graduates .

supporters of the school maintain that whinsec emphasizes democratic values and respect for human rights , develops camaraderie between u.s. military officers and military and police personnel from other countries in the hemisphere , and is crucial to developing military partners capable of effective combined operations .

a provision of the omnibus appropriations act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) directs the department of state to provide a report of the names , ranks , countries of origin , and years of attendance of all students and instructors at whinsec for fiscal years 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 .

the latin american military training review act ( h.r .

2567 , mcgovern ) , which was introduced in the house in may 2009 , would suspend all operations at whinsec , establish a joint congressional task force to assess the types of training that are appropriate to provide latin american militaries , and establish a commission to investigate activities at whinsec and its predecessor .

in august 2004 , the united states trade representative ( ustr ) and the trade ministers from the dominican republic , costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , and nicaragua signed the dominican republic - central america - united states free trade agreement ( cafta - dr ) .

cafta - dr liberalizes trade in goods , services , government procurement , intellectual property , and investment , immediately providing duty - free status to a number of commercial and farm goods while phasing out tariffs on other trade over five to twenty years .

prior to the agreement , the countries of central america all had tariff - free access to the u.s. market on approximately three - quarters of their products through the caribbean basin trade partnership act ( p.l .

106-200 , title ii ) .

the cafta - dr agreement makes the arrangement permanent and reciprocal .

although cafta - dr is a regional agreement under which all parties are subject to the same obligations and commitments , each country defines its own market access schedule with the united states .

following the august 2004 signature of cafta - dr , the agreement had to be approved by the legislatures of all of the countries involved .

in costa rica , a qualified congressional majority ( 38 of 57 legislators ) was needed to ratify the agreement .

although costa rican leaders across the political spectrum support liberalized trade , there has been intense internal debate concerning the benefits of cafta - dr .

while the arias administration was able to create a cross - party alliance of 38 deputies , the pac opponents of the agreement were able to block ratification through various delaying tactics .

in order to avoid missing the ratification deadline , president arias asked the tse for a binding referendum on cafta - dr .

the referendum was held in october 2007 and reflected the polarization of the issue among the costa rican electorate .

trade unions , students , a variety of social movements , and the pac opposed the ratification of cafta - dr , while business groups and each of the other major political parties were in favor of the agreement .

the referendum campaign was often contentious .

just two weeks before the vote , arias' second vice president was forced to resign after authoring a memorandum recommending that the administration link the anti - cafta - dr forces to presidents castro of cuba and chávez of venezuela and play up the possible consequences of a failed referendum .

then , days before the referendum , costa rican media published statements by members of the bush administration saying it was unlikely that the united states would renegotiate the agreement or maintain the unilateral trade preferences costa rica received under the caribbean basin initiative should the country vote against cafta - dr .

in the end , 51.6% of costa ricans voted in favor of cafta - dr while 48.4% voted against the agreement .

referendum turnout was just over 60% , well above the 40% minimum necessary for it to be binding .

after the approval of cafta - dr by referendum , the costa rican legislature still had to pass 13 laws in order to implement the agreement .

these included a variety of intellectual property law reforms , an opening of the insurance and telecommunications sectors , reform of the criminal code , an anti - corruption law , and a law protecting agents of foreign firms .

costa rica's consensus - seeking tradition and the ability of pac legislators to challenge the constitutionality of the proposed legislation in the constitutional chamber slowed the implementation of cafta - dr significantly .

as of the original february 2008 deadline for implementation , costa rica had only passed five of the necessary reforms .

then , prior to the extended deadline of october 2008 , the constitutional chamber ruled that the intellectual property legislation was unconstitutional as a result of the arias administration's failure to meet with indigenous and tribal groups about the bill before sending it to the legislature .

after obtaining a second extension , costa rica passed all of the necessary reforms and implemented cafta - dr on january 1 , 2009 .

prior to the implementation of cafta - dr , the united states was already costa rica's largest trading partner as the destination of about 36% of costa rican exports and the origin of about 38% of its imports .

despite the global financial crisis and u.s. recession , u.s. trade with costa rica increased by over 7% in 2009 .

u.s. exports to costa rica amounted to about $4.7 billion and u.s. imports from costa rica amounted to about $5.6 billion .

electrical and heavy machinery and oil accounted for the majority of the exports while machinery parts , medical instruments , and fruit accounted for the majority of the imports .

