congress passed the america creating opportunities to meaningfully promote excellence in technology , education , and science act ( p.l .

110-69 ) , known as the america competes act , in august 2007 .

in response to concerns about u.s. competitiveness , the act provides for investments in science and engineering research and science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( stem ) education to foster u.s. competitiveness .

the purpose of this report is to provide information on the president's fy2010 budget request and the status of congressional budget and appropriation activities regarding that budget relative to the america competes act .

for more general information on the america competes act , see crs report rl34328 , america competes act: programs , funding , and selected issues , by [author name scrubbed] , and for information on the fy2009 budget , see crs report rl34396 , the america competes act and the fy2009 budget , by [author name scrubbed] .

the america competes act was a response to concerns about the potential erosion of u.s. industrial competitiveness and global technological leadership .

many believe that investments in science and engineering research , stem education , and stem workforce development can contribute to u.s. competitiveness .

the act mainly addresses concerns about the adequacy of investment in these areas .

the america competes act authorizes an increase in federal science and engineering research funding and support for stem education from kindergarten through the postdoctoral level .

the act authorizes funding increases through fy2010 for the national science foundation ( nsf ) , the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) laboratories , and the department of energy office of science ( doe sc ) .

the act also authorizes within doe the establishment of the advanced research projects agency – energy ( arpa - e ) and discovery science and engineering innovation institutes .

in addition , the act authorizes new stem education programs at doe , the department of education ( ed ) , and nsf , and increases the authorization levels for several existing nsf stem education programs .

the america competes act is an authorization act .

new programs authorized by the act will not be established unless funded through subsequent appropriations acts .

similarly , realization of the higher authorization levels of existing programs in the act depends on subsequent appropriations .

the america competes act was passed after much of the fy2008 appropriations process had already taken place during the 110 th congress .

although america competes act programs were not funded at their fy2008 authorized levels , the 110 th congress did provide fy2008 appropriations to establish ed's teachers for a competitive tomorrow program , and nist's technology improvement program ( tip ) , which replaced the agency's advanced technology program .

the 111 th congress provided funding in fy2009 for r&d and stem education through the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) and the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) .

some america competes act programs were funded at authorized levels ; others were not .

the following activities were funded at or above authorized levels: nist's scientific & technical research and services ( strs ) and construction and maintenance ; doe's office of science ; and nsf's research and related activities , major research instrumentation , major research equipment and facilities construction , professional science master's program , robert noyce teacher scholarship program , and graduate research fellowship program .

other programs were funded either below authorized levels or not funded .

the acts funded the establishment of doe's arpa - e and nsf's psm program .

also , portions of the p - 16 alignment of secondary school graduation requirements with the demands of 21 st century postsecondary endeavors and support for p - 16 education data systems were funded through the arra .

the obama administration contends that the following america competes act programs correspond to existing doe programs: summer institutes ( §5003 ) to the pre - existing doe academies creating teacher scientists program ( doe acts ) ; early career awards for science , engineering , and mathematics researchers ( §5006 ) to the pre - existing high energy physics outstanding junior investigator , nuclear physics outstanding junior investigator , fusion energy sciences plasma physics junior faculty development ; advanced scientific computing research early career principle investigator ; and the office of science early career scientist and engineer award programs ; discovery science and engineering innovation institutes ( §5008 ) to the pre - existing bioenergy research centers , scidac institutes , and the energy frontier research centers ; and protecting america's competitive edge ( pace ) graduate fellowship program ( §5009 ) to the pre - existing computer science graduate fellowships ; graduate research environmental fellowships ; american meteorological society / industry / government graduate fellowships ; spallation neutron source instrumentation fellowships , and the fusion energy sciences graduate fellowships .

this section provides an overview of president obama's fy2010 budget request for research and stem education activities as they relate to the america competes act .

table 1 ( located at the end of this report ) provides a program - specific comparison of the president's fy2010 budget request , america competes act authorization levels , and congressional actions .

following release of the president's fy2010 budget request , congress passed a budget resolution that sets the budgetary spending amounts for each functional category of the budget .

the budget resolution does not allocate funds among specific programs or accounts .

major program assumptions underlying the functional amounts , however , are often discussed in the reports accompanying the resolution .

these program assumptions and budget functions are not binding , although congressional action has been taken .

as congress deliberates the fy2010 budget , an issue for congress is what level , if any , will it appropriate funding for america competes act programs .

several new programs authorized in the act have never been funded .

an issue for these programs is whether or not they will receive the funding necessary to establish them .

the america competes act provides authorization levels only through fy2010 .

