this report discusses the environmental protection agency's ( epa's ) authority to regulate greenhouse gas ( ghg ) emissions from mobile sources of pollution .

mobile sources include cars , trucks , aircraft , ships , locomotives , nonroad vehicles ( eg , tractors , bulldozers ) , portable equipment ( i ncluding lawnmowers , chain saws , leaf blowers , and backup generators ) , and the fuels that provide power to each of these .

mobile sources account for close to 30% of the total u.s. emissions of ghgs .

as shown in figure 1 , more than three - quarters of the mobile source total comes from cars and trucks .

over the last eight years , the obama administration has worked with major stakeholders in the auto and truck industries and with states and other interested parties to develop and implement ghg standards .

because carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) from fuel combustion is the major ghg produced by cars and trucks , the white house directed epa to work with the national highway traffic safety administration ( nhtsa ) to harmonize the ghg standards with fuel economy standards under development by nhtsa .

in addition , under the clean air act , the state of california enjoys unique status to issue motor vehicle emission standards provided that they are at least as stringent as federal standards and are necessary to meet "compelling and extraordinary conditions. .

california had already promulgated ghg emission standards prior to 2009 , for which it had requested an epa waiver .

epa granted california a waiver in june 2009 , and president obama directed epa and nhtsa to harmonize the federal ghg and fuel efficiency standards with those developed by california .

the mobile source ghg standards moved forward even as congress and the obama administration reached an impasse over climate issues .

epa supported economy - wide ghg legislation that passed the house in 2009 , but the legislation died in the senate .

lacking what new authority might have been provided by congressional action , epa moved ahead with sectoral ghg emission standards using the authority of the existing clean air act ( caa ) .

in massachusetts v. epa , the supreme court had held in 2007 that the existing caa authorized the agency to address ghg emissions .

the key to using this authority was for the epa administrator to find that ghg emissions are air pollutants that endanger public health or welfare , and that motor vehicles cause or contribute to that pollution .

epa administrator lisa jackson issued these "endangerment and cause - or - contribute findings" in december 2009 .

following the issuance of the findings , epa promulgated four sets of standards for motor vehicles: 1. standards for model year ( my ) 2012-2016 light - duty motor vehicles ( cars , suvs , crossovers , minivans , and most pickups ) , may 7 , 2010 ; 2. standards for my2017-my2025 light - duty vehicles , october 15 , 2012 ; 3. standards for my 2014-2018 medium - and heavy - duty trucks and engines , september 15 , 2011 ; and 4. standards for my2021-my2027 medium - and heavy - duty trucks and engines and my2018-my2027 trailers , october 25 , 2016 .

under the trump administration , it is unclear whether this authority will be put to further use , and whether some of the standards already promulgated but not yet implemented might be rolled back or modified .

much may depend on the views of the affected industries: auto , truck , and truck engine manufacturers ; and their customers , especially those in the trucking industry .

in general , the auto manufacturing and trucking industries have been supportive of epa's ghg regulations , partly because of concerns that states would implement a patchwork of standards in the absence of federal action .

as the standards have been implemented , however , industry concerns have arisen regarding a lack of harmonization between epa , nhtsa , and related california ghg and fuel efficiency programs .

the 2017-2025 light - duty vehicle regulations provided for a midterm evaluation of the 2022-2025 standards for these vehicles , which offered an opportunity to modify the standards .

as discussed at greater length below , on january 12 , 2017 , epa announced a final decision that the my2022-my2025 standards remained appropriate and that a rulemaking to change them was not warranted .

congress may take an interest in that final determination .

congress may also take an interest in the phase 2 medium - and heavy - duty truck standards .

these standards , which were promulgated in october 2016 , would reduce oil consumption by up to 2 billion barrels over the lifetime of the vehicles sold under the program , saving vehicle owners fuel costs of about $170 billion according to epa .

the standards will increase the cost of a long haul tractor - trailer , but the buyer would recoup the investment in fuel - efficient technology in less than two years through fuel savings , according to the agency .

in general , the truck standards have been well - received by the affected industries , but given the new administration's general opposition to ghg regulations and the opposition to ghg rules among many in the leadership of the 115 th congress , there could be efforts to review or modify the regulations .

another looming issue in the mobile source arena concerns ghg emission standards for aircraft .

in october 2016 , the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) agreed on international co 2 emission standards for aircraft , beginning in 2020 .

icao also agreed on a system for offsetting future carbon emissions from aviation .

the emission standards and the offset system would be implemented in the united states by epa regulations issued under the caa .

u.s. airlines and aircraft manufacturers participated in the icao negotiations and have been supportive of the resulting agreements ; whether epa actions to implement them would run contrary to the president's and the administration's broader views on regulation and climate change is unclear .

this report focuses on these three actions to limit ghg emissions from mobile sources .

following the discussion of these issues , the report provides background information on ghg emissions from other mobile sources , including ships , nonroad vehicles and engines , locomotives , and fuels .

we begin with a brief discussion of the court action that led to epa's regulatory decisions .

whether epa could regulate ghgs through existing caa authority was under consideration at epa for more than a decade before the agency took action .

in 1998 , during the clinton administration , epa general counsel jonathan cannon concluded in a memorandum to the agency's administrator that greenhouse gases were air pollutants within the caa's definition of the term , and therefore could be regulated under the act .

relying on the cannon memorandum as well as the statute itself , on october 20 , 1999 , a group of 19 organizations petitioned epa to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from new motor vehicles under section 202 of the act .

section 202 gives the epa administrator broad authority to set "standards applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of new motor vehicles" if in the administrator's judgment they cause or contribute to air pollution which "may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. .

under the bush administration , epa denied the petition august 28 , 2003 , on the basis of a new general counsel memorandum the same day .

the new memorandum concluded that the caa does not grant epa authority to regulate carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) and other ghg emissions based on their climate change impacts .

denial of the petition was challenged by massachusetts , 11 other states , and various other petitioners in a case that ultimately reached the supreme court .

in an april 2 , 2007 , decision ( massachusetts v. epa ) , the court found by 5-4 that epa does have authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions , since the emissions are clearly air pollutants under the caa's definition of that term .

the court's majority concluded that epa must , therefore , decide whether emissions of these pollutants from new motor vehicles contribute to air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare , or provide a reasonable explanation why it cannot or will not make that decision , such as that there is insufficient information to make the decision .

if it makes a finding of endangerment , the act requires the agency to establish standards for emissions of the pollutants .

in nearly two years following the court's decision , the bush administration's epa did not respond to the original petition or make a finding regarding endangerment .

its only formal action following the court decision was to issue a detailed information request , called an advance notice of proposed rulemaking ( anpr ) , on july 30 , 2008 .

the obama administration's epa , however , made review of the endangerment issue a high priority .

on december 15 , 2009 , it promulgated a finding that ghgs do endanger both public health and welfare and that ghgs from new motor vehicles contribute to that endangerment .

four greenhouse gases are emitted by motor vehicles ( co 2 , methane , nitrous oxide , and hydrofluorocarbons ) .

according to epa , emissions of the four gases from motor vehicles ( including trucks ) accounted for 23.6% of the total inventory of u.s. ghg emissions in 2006 ( latest data available when the endangerment finding was being considered ) .

most of the emissions were ( and are ) in the form of co 2 ( see figure 2 ) , which is the product of combusting any fuel containing carbon .

hydrofluorocarbons ( hfcs ) , the chemicals used as coolants in vehicle air conditioning systems , are the second - most important motor vehicle ghg ; but , as the figure shows , they are a distant second .

even before it finalized the endangerment finding , the obama administration reached agreement with nine auto manufacturers and california ( which had developed its own ghg emission standards for motor vehicles ) , as well as other interested parties regarding the major outlines of a joint greenhouse gas / fuel economy rulemaking .

as announced by president obama , may 19 , 2009 , epa and the national highway traffic safety administration ( which administers fuel economy standards for cars and trucks under authorities that began with the energy policy and conservation act of 1975 ) would integrate corporate average fuel economy ( cafe ) standards for new cars and light trucks ( collectively known as "light - duty motor vehicles" ) with national greenhouse gas emission standards to be issued by epa .

the objective of the joint standards was to achieve "one national program," with ghg reduction levels similar to those adopted by california , which harmonized its own standards with epa's as part of the agreement .

as has happened on many previous occasions when epa set emission standards for conventional pollutants from motor vehicles , the ghg standards have forced the development or implementation of new technology .

in adopting technology - forcing regulations , epa has generally followed the lead of california .

because of its more severe air pollution and its pioneering role in establishing motor vehicle emission control requirements in the 1960s , california is allowed to adopt standards more stringent than federal requirements .

the state must apply for a waiver of federal preemption under caa section 209 ( b ) in order to enforce its more stringent standards , which epa is to grant if the state meets certain criteria , primarily a showing that the standards are needed to meet "compelling and extraordinary conditions. .

if california is granted a waiver , other states with air quality problems may adopt identical requirements , thus reinforcing the potential impact of california's standards .

besides adopting national standards for ghg emissions , epa has granted california waivers beginning in 2009 to enforce its own ghg standards .

section 202 ( a ) of the caa , the section that provided authority for the light - duty vehicle ghg standards , requires the administrator to set "standards applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines , which in his judgment cause , or contribute to , air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare" ( emphasis added ) .

this authority covers medium - and heavy - duty trucks: in fact , the december 15 , 2009 , endangerment and cause - or - contribute findings specifically identified the medium - and heavy - duty truck categories as among those that contributed to the ghg emissions for which it found endangerment .

as a result , epa promulgated standards for these vehicles on september 15 , 2011 .

these standards cover my2014-my2018 trucks .

a second round of standards , covering trucks from my2021-my2027 and trailers from my2018-my2027 , was promulgated in october 2016 .

separate from epa's authority to set ghg standards , the energy independence and security act of 2007 ( eisa , p.l .

110-140 ) , directed nhtsa to study the potential for fuel efficiency standards for medium - and heavy - duty trucks , and , if feasible , set efficiency standards reflecting the "maximum feasible improvement. .

thus , as with light duty vehicles , in order to harmonize their ghg and fuel efficiency requirements , epa and nhtsa have cooperated on the setting of standards .

medium - and heavy - duty trucks are trucks with a gross vehicle weight of 8,500 pounds or more .

the largest emitters , tractor - trailers ( class 8b trucks ) , account for roughly 30% of the total number of medium - and heavy - duty trucks , but , because they are heavier and are driven longer distances , they consume 67% of all fuel used by these vehicles and presumably emit about the same percentage of medium - and heavy - duty trucks' ghgs .

as shown in table 1 , medium - and heavy - duty trucks emitted more than 400 million metric tons of ghgs in 2014 , nearly 27% of ghg emissions from motor vehicles .

between 1990 and 2014 , emissions from these trucks grew 76% , the fastest growth for any major category of ghg sources .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

the epa administrator is given substantial leeway in the design and implementation of motor vehicle regulations .

the act states that the administrator may establish categories for purposes of regulation based on "gross vehicle weight , horsepower , type of fuel used or other appropriate factors. .

in addition , he may delay the effective date of regulations as long as he finds necessary "to permit the development and application of the requisite technology , giving appropriate consideration to the cost of compliance within such period. .

using this authority in regulating conventional pollutants , epa has used weight or power classifications to set differing levels of emission standards , particularly for trucks ; it has given manufacturers as much as four years lead time to develop emission controls ; and it has set different standards based on the type of fuel an engine uses .

except for specific conventional pollutants mentioned in section 202 , the act does not specify a level of stringency ( eg , best available control technology ) for prospective regulations .

on august 15 , 2016 , epa issued a finding that greenhouse gas emissions ( including co 2 emissions ) from commercial aircraft contribute to the pollution that causes climate change and endangers the health and welfare of americans .

the finding , under section 231 of the clean air act , is the precondition for ghg emission standards for commercial aircraft .

u.s. aircraft emit roughly 11% of ghg emissions from the u.s. transportation sector and 29% of ghg emissions from all aircraft globally .

in october 2016 , the international civil aviation organization ( icao ) agreed on international co 2 standards for aircraft , beginning in 2020 .

icao is a specialized body of the united nations with 191 member states .

for the past five years , icao had been working with the aviation industry and other stakeholders to develop international co 2 emission standards for aircraft engines .

epa and the federal aviation administration , representing the united states , participated in icao's process .

in october 2016 , icao's governing council also agreed on a system for offsetting future carbon emissions from aviation — dubbed the market - based mechanism , or mbm .

epa's endangerment finding lays the necessary foundation for the adoption and implementation of domestic aircraft co 2 standards , in accordance with the clean air act and the icao agreement .

the mbm agreed to in the icao process is voluntary for the next decade and has been agreed to by the u.s. industry .

in the united states , aircraft of all kinds were estimated to emit between 2.2% and 3.2% of the nation's total greenhouse gas emissions in 2014 .

when other factors are considered , the impact of u.s. aviation on climate change is perhaps twice that size .

these factors include the contribution of aircraft emissions to ozone formation , the water vapor and soot that aircraft emit , and the high altitude location of the bulk of aircraft emissions .

 ( for additional information on aircraft ghg emissions , see crs report r40090 , aviation and climate change . ) .

the epa and icao actions come years after five states and seven other parties petitioned epa to address aircraft ghg emissions ( see table 2 ) .

specifically , the petitions asked that epa make a finding that aircraft ghg emissions endanger public health or welfare , and that the agency adopt regulations that allow a range of compliance approaches: these might include emission limits , operational practices , fees , a cap - and - trade system , minimizing engine idling time , employing single engine taxiing , or use of ground - side electricity measures to replace the use of fuel - burning auxiliary power units at airport gates .

epa has authority to regulate emissions from aircraft under section 231 of the caa .

the language is similar to that for other mobile sources .

it requires the administrator to issue standards for the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of aircraft engines which , in his judgment , causes or contributes to air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

the regulations are to take effect "after such period as the administrator finds necessary ... to permit the development and application of the requisite technology , giving appropriate consideration to the cost of compliance. .

compared to other mobile sources , epa's caa authority vis - à - vis aircraft and aircraft engines contains an important difference: the administrator must consult with the administrator of the federal aviation administration and the secretary of transportation in developing emission standards , and is not allowed to impose new standards if doing so would significantly increase noise and adversely affect safety .

the president may also disapprove any such standards if the secretary of transportation finds that they would create a hazard to aircraft safety .

epa has rarely regulated emissions from aircraft without first negotiating international agreements through icao .

icao's agreements on standards for conventional pollutants from aircraft , unlike epa's regulation of the same pollutants from motor vehicles , has consistently avoided forcing technology .

the most recent standards for nitrogen oxides , for example , essentially ratified what the principal aircraft manufacturers had already achieved .

besides petitioning epa for action on aviation emissions , environmental groups brought suit in the district court for the district of columbia seeking to force epa to respond to their petitions on aircraft ( as well as their petitions on marine vessels , and nonroad engines and vehicles ) .

on july 5 , 2011 , the court found that epa has a mandatory duty to determine whether aircraft emissions endanger public health or welfare , and may be sued for unreasonable delay in doing so .

in march 2012 , however , the court ruled that plaintiffs had not shown that epa had unreasonably delayed such a decision .

by issuing an endangerment finding for ghg emissions from commercial aircraft , epa has now taken the first step toward setting aircraft ghg emission standards .

the endangerment finding itself , although it does not impose standards , is a final rule .

as explained earlier , final rules promulgated on or after june 13 , 2016 , are eligible for fast - track procedures in the senate under the congressional review act ; a cra resolution of disapproval overturning the rule could be approved by a simple majority , rather than the 60 votes generally needed to invoke cloture .

even more than the truck standards discussed earlier , however , the endangerment finding was welcomed by the affected industries , who participated in the icao process that has led to epa's action .

in response to epa's issuance of the finding , an airlines for america representative was reported as saying: as aviation is a global industry , with airlines operating internationally and manufacturers selling their aircraft in international markets , it is critical that aircraft emissions standards be set at the international level and not imposed unilaterally by one country or set of countries .

.. .

thus , we commend epa's action , which will enable the icao [carbon dioxide] certification standard for future aircraft to be adopted into u.s. law consistent with the clean air act , u.s. treaty obligations and in harmony with the international community. .

following the massachusetts v. epa decision , the agency received at least 12 petitions asking it to regulate ghgs from other categories — all but two of the 12 focused on mobile sources and their fuels ( see table 2 ) .

these petitions covered aircraft , ocean - going ships and their fuels , motor fuels in general , locomotives , and nonroad vehicles and engines — a category that includes construction equipment , farm equipment , logging equipment , outdoor power equipment , forklifts , marine vessels , recreational vehicles , and lawn and garden equipment .

the specifics of the caa sections that give epa authority to regulate pollution from these sources vary somewhat , but it has been generally believed that the endangerment finding and decision to regulate ghgs in response to the motor vehicle petition could provide precedents for ghg emission standards from other categories of sources .

with that in mind , we look at other mobile source categories , the authorities provided under title ii for each , and what epa's use of these authorities for conventional pollutants emitted by these sources indicates with regard to its ability to regulate greenhouse gases .

 table 4 summarizes epa's existing authorities over mobile source ghg emissions and the emissions of the sources discussed in this report .

given the supreme court's remand in massachusetts v. epa , the agency initially focused its efforts on motor vehicles , which account for three - quarters of all u.s. mobile source ghg emissions .

by issuing endangerment findings similar to the one it issued for motor vehicles , epa could move forward to control ghg emissions from other categories of mobile sources and / or their fuels .

as discussed , the agency took a step along this path by issuing an endangerment finding for aircraft on august 15 , 2016 .

this action was not particularly controversial , and was not challenged by aircraft manufacturers or airlines .

the aircraft manufacturing and aviation industries have participated in international negotiations that have produced agreement on emission standards for new aircraft and a voluntary system to offset what might otherwise be a growth in emissions from air travel .

as shown in table 4 , aircraft are the largest source of mobile source ghg emissions after cars and trucks .

although a framework for regulating ghg emissions from the largest categories of mobile sources is now in place , congress and the trump administration face a number of questions regarding ghg emissions from mobile sources in the first months of 2017 .

in campaigning for election , president trump promised to overturn epa regulations , including those addressing ghgs .

congressional republicans have also been critical of obama administration actions addressing climate change .

the early months of the new congress present the opportunity under the congressional review act to rescind epa regulations promulgated since june 2016 , which could include the phase 2 emission standards for medium - and heavy - duty trucks and the endangerment finding for aircraft .

these rules are not particularly controversial with the regulated industries .

somewhat more controversial is the mid - term evaluation of the light - duty vehicle ghg emissions standards for my2022-my2025 .

it is unclear whether that determination , which left the already promulgated ghg standards in place , could be subject to the congressional review act .

as shown in table 4 , after motor vehicles and aircraft , other mobile source categories are less significant: most of them accounted for less than 1% of total u.s. ghg emissions in 2014 .

thus , rather than develop standards for additional mobile sources , epa has expanded its focus to stationary sources .

stationary sources account for about 70% of the nation's ghg emissions ; within that group electric power plants account for about 30% of all u.s. ghg emissions , a higher percentage of the nation's total than all mobile sources combined .

to address power plant emissions , epa promulgated the clean power plan ( cpp ) on october 23 , 2015 .

although the cpp is currently stayed by the supreme court pending the outcome of judicial proceedings , resolving its future arguably poses a higher priority for the trump administration and many in congress than the pending decisions regarding mobile sources .

 ( for additional discussion of the clean power plan , see crs report r44341 , epa's clean power plan for existing power plants: frequently asked questions . ) .

