the recent trend in state laws requiring voters to present identification when casting their ballots has raised questions about the burdens imposed on individuals who do not have photo identification , including those who object to photographs based on religious beliefs .

proposed legislation in the 112 th congress addresses state efforts to implement these requirements , including one bill that would prohibit states from requiring voter identification in federal elections .

photo identification has been a recurring issue in a number of contexts , and congress recently has considered questions regarding whether photo id can or should be required under the real id act of 2005 .

intended to improve security for driver's licenses and personal identification cards , the real id act also requires , without exemption , that a digital photograph appear on each document .

a number of religious beliefs may interfere with requirements for photo identification , leading to questions about whether a religious exemption to photograph requirements may be required to comport with the free exercise clause of the first amendment and the religious freedom restoration act of 1993 ( rfra ) .

this report will analyze the legal issues associated with religious exemptions to photo identification laws .

although no lawsuits appear to have challenged federal laws with photo requirements , state photo identification laws have been challenged for several decades .

after discussing the legal requirements of the free exercise clause and rfra , the report will explain the elements of analysis necessary for legal challenges involving religious objections to photo requirements .

the report will also analyze lawsuits that have challenged state photo requirements , including significant factors of consideration in such cases .

finally , the report will analyze what factors may be relevant in future decisions that may arise related to federal photo identification requirements as well as u.s. supreme court opinions related to religious objections to voter identification requirements .

members of some religious groups may object to having their photograph taken as many identification laws require .

the teachings of several religious groups may prohibit their members from being photographed in general or from revealing some parts of their body .

for instance , some christians , including some amish , believe photographs violate the ten commandments .

members of other religious groups may believe that members must wear head coverings or veils for religious reasons .

identification laws that require individuals to be photographed or require individuals to be photographed without religious head covering may infringe upon these individuals' first amendment right to exercise their religious beliefs freely , leading to potential legal challenges to determine whether the individuals' first amendment right must be accommodated .

the most common type of identification law to be challenged are state driver's license laws , but the legal issues may also apply in other cases with photograph requirements .

although photo identification requirements most often are enacted at the state level , federal identification requirements also exist .

u.s. passports must include a photograph that displays "a good likeness" of the individual , and the u.s. department of state does not permit exemption from this requirement based on religious objections .

additionally , congress enacted the real id act of 2005 , which contains a number of provisions relating to improved security for driver's licenses and personal identification cards , as well as instructions for states that do not comply with its provisions .

the real id act requires , without exemption , that a digital photograph appear on each document .

although it is unclear because courts have not considered federal photo requirements under rfra , it appears likely that a religious exemption would not be required under either the free exercise clause or rfra .

based on considerations of lawsuits involving state law requirements , it appears that the government could provide a strong argument that uniform application of a federal photo identification law would meet even rfra's heightened standard requiring a compelling interest , depending on the purpose and actual application of the law .

again , congress also has authority to exempt statutes from complying with rfra , and may choose to do so if it believes a statute may not meet the strict scrutiny review that rfra would otherwise require .

in recent years , an increasing number of states have enacted voter identification laws , some of which have required individuals to show photo identification in order to cast a ballot in an election .

so - called voter id requirements have been very controversial amid claims that such requirements impose impermissible burdens on individuals' right to vote .

the u.s. supreme court considered the constitutionality of indiana's voter id law , and although a majority of justices did not agree upon a rationale , the court did uphold the law as constitutional on its face .

the decision held that the case presented insufficient evidence to demonstrate that indiana's requirement that voters present photo identification when voting in person imposed an unconstitutional burden as a general matter .

however , two of the opinions issued in the case , one supporting the decision and one written in dissent , revealed that a majority of justices questioned whether the requirements that the indiana law would impose on voters with religious objections would withstand an "as applied" challenge .

in other words , the court definitively upheld the law when presented with a challenge to the general requirement that voters present identification , but in nonbinding comments included in some opinions , it appears probable that the court may reach a different result if that law were challenged as it was applied to religious objectors .

such a challenge would involve a more substantial burden than that imposed on non - objectors , according to the opinions .

in the lead opinion , expressing the views of chief justice roberts and justices stevens and kennedy , justice stevens noted that in order to officially cast a ballot , voters with religious objections to photo id must "cast a provisional ballot that will be counted only if she executes an appropriate affidavit before the circuit court clerk within 10 days following the election. .

the opinion recognized that this imposed "a somewhat heavier burden" on these voters compared to the general electorate .

the justices noted that "even assuming that the burden may not be justified as to a few voters," the law's application to that narrow class would not justify invalidating it entirely .

the opinion critically commented that the burden imposed on religious objectors seemed unnecessary: "it is , however , difficult to understand why the state should require voters with a faith - based objection to being photographed to cast provisional ballots subject to later verification in every election when the [state] is able to issue these citizens special licenses that enable them to drive without any photo identification. .

justice souter's dissenting opinion , joined by justice ginsburg , also questioned the permissibility of the burden imposed by indiana on religious objectors .

noting that religious objectors have a less burdensome option for other forms of identification ( i.e. , driver's licenses ) , the opinion suggested that the two - step process for religious objectors to cast their vote ( casting a provisional ballot and appearing in person before a county official within 10 days ) was significantly more burdensome than necessary .

justice souter explained that the exemption for driver's licenses required objectors to appear only once every four years and may be done at any of the numerous license branches , whereas the exemption for voter id required objectors to appear for every election and could be done only at the county seat , which may be "particularly onerous. .

accordingly , "nothing about the state's interest in fighting voter fraud justifies this requirement of a postelection trip to the county seat instead of some verification process at the polling places. .

crawford is not binding precedent on the issue of the constitutionality of voter id for religious objectors .

furthermore , it considered only indiana's law , and it is notable that state laws requiring identification may vary significantly .

thus , the court may resolve the question differently in a different case involving religious objections to photo requirements .

it is important to note that these voter id requirements are state government actions , and therefore not subject to rfra's heightened standard of review .

however , because the u.s. constitution provides only a baseline of protection , it is possible that states may have imposed heightened review through their state constitutions or enacted separate statutory protections similar to rfra .

