on the first day of the 111 th congress , the house agreed to h.res .

5 , which made several changes to house rules affecting floor proceedings .

following a well - established practice , h.res .

5 provided that the rules of the previous congress be the rules of the new congress , but with a set of amendments .

four changes to the standing rules of the house concern the transaction of business on the floor in the 111 th congress .

at the start of each congress , the speaker customarily makes announcements to the chamber concerning house operations and the legislative process .

the announced policies are not rules of the house , but they indicate how the speaker intends to carry out various responsibilities granted to the speaker by law and house rules .

most of the policies announced by the speaker at the start of the 111 th congress were originally announced by previous speakers , and have been reiterated each congress since .

on january 6 , 2009 , however , the speaker did make two modifications to announced policies from previous congresses related to floor proceedings .

the first concerned the closing of votes taken by electronic device and the second addressed the use of the house floor .

the speaker announced that the 1995 policy concerning the conduct of votes by electronic device would continue , with a modification that gave the speaker's endorsement to the existing practices for closing a vote taken by electronic device .

the announcement did not change the long - standing practices for ending a vote .

prior to this modification , however , no policy was published concerning the manner of closing a vote taken by electronic device .

in the 110 th congress , the presiding officer closed an electronic vote without following the appropriate protocol , which led to the creation of the select committee to examine voting procedures and the recommendation to modify the speaker's policy .

as described above , the house rules set a minimum , but not a maximum , on the length of time an electronic vote will be held open .

in practice , the presiding officer exercises some discretion on when to close a vote .

the announced policy of the speaker states that electronic votes will be closed as soon as possible after the minimum time limit has expired .

generally , however , the presiding officer works to ensure that any member intending to vote has an opportunity to do so , and indeed the policy of the speaker includes the assurance that "no occupant of the chair would prevent a member who is in the well before the announcement of the result from casting his or her vote. .

the 2009 modification of the speaker's announced policy establishes that the best practice is "for presiding officers is to await the clerk's certification that a vote tally is complete and accurate. .

the select committee to investigate the voting irregularities of august 2 , 2007 did not recommend that a detailed description of the practice for closing a vote be included in the announcement , or raised to the level of a standing rule , in part because the clerks need flexibility to change processes of this nature that might be affected by changes to the electronic voting system or the house chamber .

for many years , the presiding officer and the clerks have followed established practices for closing a vote taken by electronic device .

after the minimum time has elapsed , the presiding officer indicates that the available time is about to expire by asking if any other members wish to vote or to change their votes .

after allowing members to respond , the reading clerk then reads the names of the members who changed their votes in the well from a list prepared by a tally clerk .

shortly after that announcement , the electronic voting stations are closed .

the clerks wait several moments after closing the electronic voting stations to allow any members to cast votes in the well , to ensure that all well cards are accounted for , and to be certain all information has processed through the system .

the final vote count is recorded on what is referred to as a "tally slip. .

the clerk gives the tally slip to the parliamentarian , who hands it to the presiding officer , who uses it to announce the outcome of the vote .

a recorded vote is considered to be over when the presiding officer makes an unequivocal statement of the result .

pursuant to authority granted to the speaker over "general control of the hall of the house" in house rule i , clause 3 , the speaker also announced that the chamber of the house should not be used for "mock proceedings on the floor" or "political rallies. .

clause 4 of house rule iv has long prohibited the use of the hall of the house for anything other than legislative sessions , caucuses of members of the house , and official ceremonies .

when the house is not in session , however , it is common for members and staff to escort visitors onto the house floor .

as referenced in the speaker's announced policy , during the august recess of 2008 , members of the house held simulated legislative proceedings in the hall of the house .

members delivered speeches on the house floor and distributed recordings of the proceedings with the stated intent of calling attention to energy policy issues they felt were not adequately addressed during the legislative session .

the speaker's announced policy aimed to clarify that such use of the chamber was not appropriate and should not occur again .

