the u.s. constitution — article 1 , section 2 , clause 3 , as modified by section 2 of the fourteenth amendment — requires a population census every 10 years , to serve as the basis for apportioning seats in the house of representatives .

decennial census data also are used for within - state redistricting and in certain formulas that determine the annual distribution of more than $450 billion in federal funds to states and localities .

census numbers , moreover , are the foundation for constructing national and state estimates of current population size and projections of future size .

the constitution stipulates that the enumeration is to be conducted "in such manner as they [congress] shall by law direct. .

congress , through title 13 of the united states code , has delegated this responsibility to the secretary of commerce and , within the department of commerce ( doc ) , the census bureau .

both the commerce secretary and the census bureau director are appointed by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate .

the census bureau's task in conducting the once - a - decade enumeration has been summarized very simply: count each person whose usual residence is in the united states ; count that person only once ; and count him or her at the right location , where the person lives all or most of the time .

far from being simple , however , the attempt to find and correctly enumerate 100% of u.s. residents is increasingly complicated and expensive , even though title 13 u.s.c. , section 221 , requires compliance with the census and provides for a fine of up to $100 for nonresponse .

in accordance with provisions of the sentencing reform act of 1984 , title 18 u.s.c. , sections 3559 and 3571 , the possible fine has been adjusted to not more than $5,000 .

this report discusses the major innovations that were planned for the 2010 census , problems encountered with the attempt to automate certain census field operations , the persistent differential census undercount of less advantaged groups in the population , and efforts to ensure an equitable census .

table 1 shows the completion of key census activities ; the production and release of 2010 census products continued through 2013 .

the 23 rd census began north of the arctic circle on january 25 , 2010 , in noorvik , ak , where the then - bureau director , among others , traveled by snowmobile and dogsled to enumerate the residents .

most u.s. households — about 120 million — received their census forms by mail in march , ahead of the official april 1 census day , and 74% of the households that received forms mailed them back .

from may through july , about 565,000 census takers contacted approximately 47 million households that either did not receive a questionnaire or did not answer and return it .

on december 21 , 2010 , 10 days before the legal deadline , the bureau released the official state population figures for house apportionment and the total u.s. resident population count of 308,745,538 as of census day .

a brief overview of modern census - taking shows how the bureau has collected the decennial data from 1940 onward .

in that year , for the first time , the census questionnaire contained 16 supplementary questions asked of a 5% sample of the population .

sampling continued to be done in conjunction with the 1950 through 2000 censuses , and in 1970 the census became primarily a mail - out , mail - back operation .

in 2000 , for example , the bureau sent a set of basic questions on a short form to most housing units ; a sample of units — about 17% — received a long form containing these questions and others designed to gather socioeconomic and housing data for various legislative and program purposes .

the forms were delivered to housing units on the bureau's address list , with instructions that respondents were to complete and return them .

departing from recent enumerations , the 2010 census questionnaire was a short form only .

it asked for the age , sex , race , and ethnicity ( hispanic or non - hispanic ) of each person in a household , as well as the individual's relationship to the person filling out the form .

the form also included a question about tenure , that is , whether the housing unit was rented or owned by a member of the household .

the long form was replaced by the american community survey ( acs ) , a "continuous measurement" survey of , from 2005 to 2011 , about 250,000 households per month , totaling about 3 million annually ( now about 295,000 households per month , totaling about 3.54 million a year ) , which , with few exceptions , gathers the same data as its predecessor .

the bureau highlights the more timely availability of information as a key benefit of the acs .

it provides annual data for areas with populations of at least 65,000 people , including the total united states , all states and the district of columbia , all congressional districts , about 800 counties , and about 500 metropolitan and micropolitan statistical areas .

for less populous areas , the bureau produces multi - year estimates based on acs data collected over several years .

in 2008 , the bureau released the first three - year estimates for areas with 20,000 or more people , and on december 14 , 2010 , the first five - year estimates became available for areas from the most populous to those with fewer than 20,000 people .

another innovation for 2010 was to have been the automation of two major census field operations: address canvassing and nonresponse follow - up ( nrfu ) .

the goal of pre - census address canvassing was for temporary bureau field staff to verify and correct census addresses and maps , technically called the "master address file" ( maf ) and "topologically integrated geographic encoding and referencing" ( tiger ) system .

an accurate maf / tiger was essential for directing the census forms to the right housing units and successfully conducting nonresponse follow - up .

indeed , as the bureau has noted , "maf / tiger is the foundation of the census — it creates the universe for all other operations that collect information from the public. .

nrfu required that enumerators try repeatedly to visit or telephone people who had not completed their census questionnaires and convince them to respond .

because of the problems discussed below , only address canvassing was automated ; nrfu was not .

as part of its 2010 census preparations , the bureau contracted with the harris corporation for field data collection automation ( fdca ) .

the objective was the development of highly specialized handheld computers to automate address canvassing and update maps with global positioning software , as well as conduct nonresponse follow - up .

testing eventually revealed significant flaws in the handhelds , such as slow operation , memory problems , and a tendency to lock up when users entered large quantities of data .

in april 3 , 2008 , congressional testimony , then - bureau director steve murdock acknowledged that the bureau had abandoned the plan to use the handhelds for nrfu , would resort to the traditional paper - based approach , and would rely on the handhelds only for address canvassing .

the change required the bureau to hire and train more nrfu staff , at increased expense .

the government accountability office ( gao ) testified to congress on june 11 , 2008 , that the bureau had re - estimated the total life - cycle cost of the 2010 census at between $13.7 billion and $14.5 billion , instead of the previously estimated $11.5 billion .

a 2009 house committee on appropriations report raised the estimate to $14.7 billion , where it remained in march 2010 .

nrfu was expected to account for about $2.3 billion of the $14.7 billion .

on november 18 , 2008 , the commerce department's office of inspector general ( oig ) issued a report that identified the top management challenges doc faced as it prepared for the transition to a new president and new commerce secretary .

heading the list was the need to "overcome the setbacks experienced in reengineering decennial processes and conduct a successful 2010 census. .

the failure of the handhelds was prominent among the setbacks noted .

according to the report , the bureau "originally intended to develop the handhelds in - house and tested prototypes in ... 2004 and 2006 .

the devices had serious problems in both tests," which , in the oig's view , "should have better informed the bureau's efforts to define requirements. .

the decision to contract for fdca came "too late in the decade ... to meet ambitious fixed deadlines for the dress rehearsal tests starting in 2007 and decennial operations starting in 2009. .

not until january 2008 , almost two years after awarding the contract , did the bureau deliver "a first draft of a complete , user - validated set of requirements for the handhelds and supporting infrastructure. .

by then , the mitre corporation , which periodically advised the bureau about its information technology ( it ) programs for the 2010 census , had found that fdca is in serious trouble .

it is not clear the system will meet census' operational needs and quality goals .

the final cost is unpredictable .

immediate , significant changes are required to rescue the program .

however , the risks are so large considering the available time that we recommend immediate development of contingency plans to revert to paper operations .

the oig report acknowledged that the bureau had taken important actions , such as management changes and better oversight , to address these problems , but stated that "significant risks remain for the 2010 decennial. .

similarly , the government accountability office pointed out vulnerabilities in the bureau's management of its information technology systems , including the handheld computers .

in a november 6 , 2008 , press release to announce its presidential transition website , gao included the upcoming census among its 13 "urgent issues ... needing the attention of [then - ] president - elect obama and the 111 th congress during the transition and the first year of the new administration and congress. .

the 2010 census , in large part because of it problems and a substantial total estimated cost , remained one of the areas gao designated as "high risk" in a january 2009 update of its high - risk series .

among the concerns gao noted in a march 2009 report were the following: the dress rehearsal was originally conceived to provide a comprehensive end - to - end test of key 2010 census operations ; however , ... because of the problems encountered with the handheld devices , among other things , testing was curtailed .

as a result , although several critical operations underwent end - to - end testing in the dress rehearsal , others did not .

according to the associate director for the 2010 census , the bureau tested approximately 23 of 44 key operations during the dress rehearsal .

examples of key operations that underwent end - to - end testing ... are address canvassing and group quarters validation .

an example of a key operation that was not tested is the largest field operation — nonresponse follow - up... .

in december 2008 , after additional development and improvements to the handheld computers , the bureau conducted a limited field test for address canvassing , intended to assess software functionality in an operational environment .

we observed this test and determined that users were generally satisfied with the performance of the handhelds... .

however , the test ... included only a limited subset of functionality to be used during the 2009 address canvassing operations .

gao further observed that although nonresponse follow - up was paper based in previous censuses , the paper - based nrfu in 2010 would rely on "newly developed systems" that had "not yet been fully tested in a census - like environment.... any significant change to an existing it system introduces the risk that the system may not work as intended ; therefore , testing all systems after changes have been made ... is critical to the success of the 2010 census. .

gao noted that testing had "only recently started" for the 2010 nrfu , including the it systems and infrastructure necessary to support this operation and certain other activities , such as group - quarters enumeration .

at a march 25 , 2010 , congressional hearing , as nonresponse follow - up was about to begin , the commerce department's oig again identified "serious issues" facing the bureau: much of the ... plan is on track , but the success of nrfu — which is critical — hinges on how effectively census controls the enormous nrfu workload and workforce.... [i]t must do so using a paper - based operations control system ( pbocs ) with less functionality than planned and currently experiencing significant performance problems .

pbocs is essential for efficiently making assignments to enumerators , tracking enumeration forms , and reporting on the status of operations .

and census must recruit , hire , and pay its massive temporary workforce with a decennial applicant , personnel , and payroll system ( dapps ) also experiencing persistent performance limitations .

at the same hearing , gao , too , expressed reservations about the bureau's it systems , especially dapps and pbocs .

gao called them "the most significant risk jeopardizing the cost and quality of the enumeration... .

indeed , neither system has yet demonstrated the ability to function reliably under full operational loads. .

since december 2009 , gao noted , the bureau had "completed many steps to improve dapps performance," and more were planned .

the system still , however , was "experiencing capacity limitations and slow response ... even though approximately 100,000 temporary employees were ... being paid using the system versus the more than 600,000" who would require payment "at the peak of field operations. .

with respect to pbocs , continued gao , early releases in january and february 2010 had "known defects , such as limited functionality , slow performance , and problems generating certain progress and performance reports. .

moreover , testing for "the component of the second release that will be used to manage nrfu" was incomplete as of mid - march .

the third pbocs release had to be developed and tested before being "ready for later field operations," among them "the final check of housing unit status ( known as field verification ) , scheduled to begin in august 2010. .

in april 30 , 2010 , congressional testimony , gao reiterated that "the reliability of the bureau's automated systems , and in particular an information technology ... system used for managing the bureau's field operations , is an open question... .

the bureau has taken steps to mitigate the risks posed by the unreliable it systems , including upgrading hardware and software , but time will tell whether they will be able to perform as needed under full operational loads. .

in a december 2010 report , gao revisited the performance of pbocs , observing that "despite efforts to upgrade its hardware and software , pbocs continued to experience system outages , slow performance , and problems generating and maintaining timely progress reports" at the beginning of nonresponse follow - up .

the bureau attributed these problems , gao continued , "in part , to the compressed development and testing schedule , as well as to inadequate performance and interface testing. .

the problems led to a backlog of census questionnaires in local census offices , and impaired the bureau's ability to monitor nrfu workers' productivity and the quality of their interviews .

nevertheless , in july 18 , 2012 , congressional testimony , gao offered this largely positive assessment of the bureau's 2010 census operations: "despite some significant initial setbacks that raised the cost of the enumeration , the bureau eventually developed workarounds to the challenges facing the 2010 census and it was ultimately an operational success as the bureau generally completed its peak census data collection activities consistent with its plans. .

as noted at the beginning of this report , the idealized expectation that the decennial census should count every person once , only once , and in the right place is deceptively simple .

in reality , the task is immense and a perfect count elusive .

the failure of the handhelds for nonresponse follow - up fueled concerns , like those of the commerce department oig and gao cited previously , that the late - date alterations to nrfu could threaten the success of the 2010 census .

the attempt to achieve complete , accurate population coverage is challenging not only because the u.s. population is large , tends to be mobile , and is distributed over a wide geographic area , but also because the population is increasingly heterogeneous .

many households consist of racial and ethnic minorities ; multiple families ; low - income people ; inner - city residents ; those whose living circumstances are atypical ; international migrants to the united states who may lack english language proficiency , lack legal status in this country , or distrust all governmental activities ; or various combinations of these attributes .

any of them can make enumeration difficult , and some of them contribute markedly to recurrent undercounts of racial and ethnic minorities .

overcounts of some groups within the population can occur to the extent that the bureau receives multiple census forms from the same people or households , then does not capture and eliminate the duplications .

a husband and wife , for example , might own a vacation home and fill out a questionnaire there as well as at their usual residence .

another example would be parents who erroneously list a child on the form for their household , when the child actually is away at college and , in accordance with census residence rules , has been correctly enumerated there .

the greater tendency for minorities and less affluent members of society than for whites and wealthier people to be undercounted can lead to differential undercounts of the former .

differential undercounts are a persistent problem in the decennial census and can diminish the perception that the count is equitable to the entire population .

the census bureau's mandate to conduct the 2010 decennial census , which would have been demanding and costly under the best circumstances , faced additional challenges because the bureau's contract with the harris corporation to produce handheld computers for field data collection automation yielded only partial success .

the bureau's decision not to use the handhelds for nonresponse follow - up called into question whether a paper - based nrfu , with persistent it problems , could account adequately for historically under - enumerated population groups .

the bureau reported an encouraging national participation rate of 74% for the mail - out , mail - back part of the 2010 census , which matched the rate in 2000 .

the census coverage measurement estimates indicated a net percentage overcount of the total population and of non - hispanic whites in 2010 , as the accuracy and coverage evaluation estimates indicated for the 2000 census .

the estimates suggested that in 2010 , as in previous decades , the census tended to undercount racial minorities and hispanics .

concerns about possible bias in the enumeration , and about whom the census counts , miscounts , or omits , likely will persist into the future because the census numbers serve such important national , state , and local purposes .

