concurrent receipt refers to the simultaneous receipt of two types of monetary benefits: military retired pay and department of veterans affairs ( va ) disability compensation .

with several separate programs , varying eligibility criteria , and several eligibility dates , some observers find the subject complex and somewhat confusing .

there are , however , two common criteria: first , all recipients are military retirees ; second , they are also eligible for va disability compensation .

this report addresses the two primary components of the concurrent receipt program: combat - related special compensation ( crsc ) and concurrent retirement and disability payments ( crdp ) .

it reviews the possible legislative expansion of the program to additional populations and provides several potential options for congress to consider .

an understanding of military retirement , va disability compensation , and the interaction of these two elements is helpful in discussing concurrent receipt .

the fy2003 ndaa , as amended by the fy2004 ndaa , authorized combat - related special compensation ( crsc ) .

military retirees with at least 20 years of service and who meet either of the following two criteria are eligible for crsc: a disability that is "attributable to an injury for which the member was awarded the purple heart," and is not rated as less than a 10% disability by the va ; or a disability rating resulting from involvement in "armed conflict," "hazardous service," "duty simulating war," or "through an instrumentality of war. .

this liberal definition of combat - related encompasses disabilities associated with any kind of hostile force ; hazardous duty such as diving , parachuting , or using dangerous materials such as explosives ; individual training and unit training and exercises and maneuvers in the field ; and "instrumentalities of war. .

retirees must apply for crsc to their parent service , and the parent service is responsible for verifying that the disability is combat - related .

this process is not automatic ; it is application - driven .

crsc payments will generally be equal to the amount of va disability compensation that has been determined to be combat - related .

the legislation does not end the requirement that the retiree's military retired pay be reduced by the amount of the total va disability compensation the retiree receives .

instead , crsc beneficiaries are to receive the financial equivalent of concurrent receipt as "special compensation," but the statute states explicitly that it is not retired pay per se .

crsc payments are paid from the department of defense military retirement fund .

as of september 2017 , a total of 90,740 retirees were receiving crsc ( see figure 1 ) .

the fy2004 ndaa authorized , for the first time , actual concurrent receipt for retirees with at least a 50% disability , regardless of the cause of disability .

however , the amount of concurrent receipt was to be phased in over a 10-year period , from 2004 to 2013 , except for 100% disabled retirees , who became entitled to immediate concurrent receipt effective january 1 , 2005 .

depending on the degree of disability , the initial amount of retired pay that the retiree could have restored would vary from $100 to $750 per month , or the actual amount of the offset , whichever was less .

in 2014 , all offsets ended and military retirees with at least a 50% disability became eligible to receive their entire military retired pay and va disability compensation .

in fy2017 there were 577,399 retirees receiving crdp .

a retiree cannot receive both crsc and crdp benefits .

the retiree may choose whichever is more financially advantageous to him or her and may change the type of benefit to be received during an annual o pen s eason to maximize the payments received .

there are currently two groups of retirees who are not eligible for crdp benefits ( see figure 4 ) .

the first group is nondisability military retirees with service - connected disabilities that have been rated by the va at 40% or less .

the second group includes chapter 61 disability retirees with service - connected disabilities of 100% or less and with less than 20 years of service .

the blended retirement system ( brs ) , effective for all servicemembers joining on or after january 1 , 2018 , offers servicemembers the option to select a lump sum payment of a portion of their military retired pay in lieu of a monthly annuity .

if a member retiring under the brs is eligible for crdp and elects the lump sum payment of retired pay , the individual will continue to receive a monthly va disability payment .

if the member electing the lump sum payment is not eligible for crdp ( i.e. , the retired pay offset applies ) , the va will withhold disability payments until the sum of the amount withheld over time equals the gross amount of the lump sum payment .

if the member is eligible for crsc , the procedures for withholding va disability payments relate to the combat - related portion of the total va entitlement .

crsc and crdp share some common elements , but are unique benefits .

table 1 summarizes some of the similarities and differences between crsc and crdp .

crdp and crsc are paid from the dod military retirement fund .

costs have been rising every year as a consequence of the phased implementation and a rise in the number of eligible recipients .

as of september 2017 , one - third of all military retirees collecting retired pay were receiving either crdp or crsc .

veteran advocacy groups continue to lobby for changes to the concurrent receipt programs that would expand benefits to a larger population of retirees .

other groups have pressed congress to offset or streamline duplicative benefits , contending that the dual receipt of va and dod payments amounts to double - dipping , or in some cases triple - dipping for those veterans also eligible for social security disability insurance ( ssdi ) from the social security administration .

some of the factors that congress might consider regarding potential changes include program costs , program efficiencies , individual eligibility requirements , and interaction with other servicemembers' and veterans' benefits and programs .

below are some options to change concurrent receipt programs that have been proposed or considered .

the congressional budget office has estimated that eliminating the crdp program would save the government $139 billion between 2018 and 2026 .

while achieving significant cost savings , eliminating or sunsetting concurrent receipt programs could be unpopular among servicemembers , veterans , and their families .

previous efforts to reduce benefits to servicemembers have typically included a grandfather clause that would allow all current servicemembers and retirees to maintain existing benefits while the law would only apply to those who joined the service after a specific date .

as previously discussed , the fy2008 ndaa extended crsc eligibility to chapter 61 retirees who retired due to combat - related physical disability prior to completing 20 years of service .

however , chapter 61 retirees with service - connected disabilities rated less than 50% or with less than 20 years of service are not eligible for crdp .

congress could expand the crdp provision to include this cohort .

this option would extend crdp eligibility to approximately 100,000 additional disability retirees at an estimated 10-year cost of $5.8 billion .

at present , those military retirees with service - connected disabilities rated at 50% or greater are eligible for crdp .

congress could revise the concurrent receipt legislation to include the entire population of military retirees with service - connected disabilities .

in 2014 , cbo estimated that to extend benefits to all veterans who would be eligible for both disability benefits and military retired pay would cost $30 billion from 2015 to 2024 .

with the extension of crsc to chapter 61 disability retirees , the special rule factors significantly into the concurrent receipt calculations .

for those whose crsc payment is limited or eliminated by the special rule , there may be a perceived inequity between crsc recipients with 20 or more years of service ( longevity retirees ) and chapter 61 ( disability retirees who generally have less than 20 years of service ) retirees .

to resolve this potential issue , congress could modify or eliminate the special rule or limit its application to specific military operations .

however , some observers may note that eliminating or modifying the special rule would result in paying for the same disability twice , by dod and by va .

it might also complicate future initiatives to simplify and streamline postservice compensation whereby dod would only compensate for years of service and the va would only compensate for disability , as recommended by the dole / shalala commission .

