on june 11 , 2009 , in response to the global spread of a new strain of h1n1 influenza ( "flu" ) , the world health organization ( who ) declared the outbreak to be a flu pandemic , the first since 1968 .

officials believe the outbreak began in mexico in march , or perhaps earlier .

the novel "h1n1 swine flu" virus was first identified in california in late april .

since then , cases have been reported around the world .

the h1n1 pandemic virus is a reassortment of several existing strains of influenza a , subtype h1n1 virus , including strains typically found in pigs , birds , and humans .

since the h1n1 pandemic virus emerged in the spring , the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) has continued the operation of u.s. seasonal ( routine ) flu surveillance systems , which are normally suspended during the summer .

these systems track trends in rates of illness and hospitalization but are imprecise in their accounting for the total numbers of deaths and hospitalizations due to the pandemic .

cdc has published an estimate of these counts , stating that between april and october 17 , there were between 14 million and 34 million cases of h1n1 infection , between 63,000 and 153,000 h1n1-related hospitalizations , and between 2,500 and 6,000 h1n1-related deaths in the united states .

 ( see " cdc: disease surveillance , and estimates of illnesses and deaths ." ) .

the cdc reports that the symptoms and transmission of the novel h1n1 flu from person to person are generally similar to seasonal flu .

laboratory testing of the new strain indicates that the antiviral drugs oseltamivir ( tamiflu ) and zanamivir ( relenza ) are generally effective in treating illnesses caused by the pandemic strain .

in contrast to seasonal flu , the pandemic strain appears to cause serious illness more often among children , and less often among the elderly .

however , like seasonal flu , pregnant women and individuals with serious chronic diseases appear to be at greater risk of serious illness from the pandemic strain .

in response to the outbreak in april , janet napolitano , secretary of the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , assumed the role of principal federal official , coordinating federal response efforts .

charles e. johnson , then the acting secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) , declared a public health emergency , which remains in effect .

among other things , this has allowed the food and drug administration ( fda ) to issue emergency use authorizations ( euas ) , permitting certain unapproved uses of antiviral drugs ( such as in very young children ) and some types of protective facemasks , the use of unapproved diagnostic tests for the new flu strain , and the use of the unapproved antiviral drug peramivir .

hhs has established a government - wide informational website ( www.flu.gov ) with information for planners , health care providers , and the public .

on october 24 , president obama declared the pandemic to be a national emergency , which allowed waivers of some requirements under medicare and medicaid law to help health care facilities manage increased numbers of patients .

to date , there has not been a presidential declaration regarding the pandemic under the robert t. stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act ( the stafford act ) .

the applicability of this act to infectious disease incidents is unclear .

 ( see " key federal government authorities and actions " and figure 1 , "selected federal emergency management authorities applicable to the h1n1 influenza pandemic." ) .

many u.s. communities closed schools when students were found to be infected with the new flu strain .

school closure decisions , made by local officials , were based on initial cdc guidance , which was revised as it became clear that the virus was in wide circulation , and that the illnesses it caused were generally mild .

cdc now recommends against routine school closures when small numbers of students are infected , arguing that such closures may do little to reduce the spread of the virus , while placing a considerable burden on the affected community .

 ( see " pandemic preparedness and response in schools ." ) .

the u.s. response to the pandemic triggered a slate of plans that were developed , beginning around 2004 , to address concerns about the global spread of another novel flu strain , the h5n1 avian flu .

 ( see box below for definitions. ) .

in fy2006 supplemental appropriations , congress provided $6.1 billion for pandemic planning across several departments and agencies .

these earlier efforts , and others aimed at preparedness for bioterrorism and emerging infections in general , have generally streamlined the response to the h1n1 pandemic .

to address the h1n1 outbreak , the obama administration requested $2 billion in fy2009 emergency supplemental appropriations , and transfer authority for an additional amount of almost $7 billion from existing hhs accounts .

on june 26 , the president signed p.l .

111-32 , which provided $1.9 billion in fy2009 supplemental appropriations immediately , and an additional $5.8 billion contingent upon a presidential request documenting the need for additional funds .

the president has twice requested portions of the contingent funding .

 ( see " appropriations and funding ." ) .

a voluntary national pandemic vaccination campaign is underway .

in june , hhs secretary kathleen sebelius issued a declaration waiving liability and enabling a compensation program in the event that injuries result from use of pandemic vaccine .

cdc has developed recommendations for groups of individuals who should be given priority for vaccine when it is available in limited amounts .

costs associated with the vaccination program are being funded through both public and private sources .

vaccine is being provided to states as it becomes available , according to states' populations .

vaccine delivery is carried out by a cdc contractor .

decisions regarding vaccine distribution to health care providers , clinics , schools , and other vaccination sites are the responsibility of state and local governments .

there have been a number of problems associated with shortfalls of actual ( versus predicted ) vaccine availability , and charges that vaccine would not be available for most of the individuals in designated priority groups until after the peak of pandemic virus transmission had passed .

 ( see " vaccines and pandemic influenza ." ) .

this report provides information about selected federal emergency management authorities and actions taken by dhs and hhs , and actions taken by state and local authorities , in response to the pandemic .

it then lists congressional hearings held to date ; provides information about appropriations and funding for pandemic flu preparedness and response activities ; summarizes u.s. government pandemic flu planning documents ; and lists sources for additional information about the pandemic .

an appendix describes the who process to determine the phase of a threatened or emerging flu pandemic , and touches on several related issues .

all dates in this report refer to 2009 unless otherwise specified .

this report will be continually updated to reflect unfolding events .

congressional committees in both chambers have convened hearings to assess the emergence of the new strain of h1n1 influenza .

hearings are listed in table 2 .

in the george w. bush administration , pandemic flu preparedness efforts were coordinated by the homeland security council .

numerous federal and other documents that are specific to preparedness and response for a flu pandemic have been published .

selected documents are listed below .

these plans are intended to address a pandemic caused by any so - designated flu strain , but they were written when there was significant global concern about h5n1 avian flu .

to date , that flu strain has behaved quite differently from the h1n1 pandemic strain .

in particular , the h5n1 strain has not shown the ability to transmit efficiently from person to person , but human infections that result directly from contact with infected poultry have generally been very severe , and there has been a high fatality rate .

unless otherwise noted , the u.s. pandemic flu plans below can be found on a government - wide pandemic flu website managed by hhs .

the national strategy for pandemic influenza , november 2005 , published by the homeland security council , outlines general responsibilities of individuals , industry , state and local governments , and the federal government in preparing for and responding to a pandemic .

national strategy for pandemic influenza , implementation plan , may 2006 , published by the homeland security council , assigns more than 300 preparedness and response tasks to departments and agencies across the federal government ; includes measures of progress and timelines for implementation ; provides initial guidance for state , local , and tribal entities , businesses , schools and universities , communities , and non - governmental organizations on the development of institutional plans ; provides initial preparedness guidance for individuals and families .

one - and two - year implementation status reports have also been published .

the hhs pandemic influenza plan , november 2005 , provides guidance to national , state and local policy makers and health departments , outlining key roles and responsibilities during a pandemic and specifying preparedness needs and opportunities .

this plan emphasizes specific preparedness efforts in the public health and health care sectors .

the hhs pandemic influenza implementation plan , part i , november 2006 , discusses department - wide activities: disease surveillance ; public health interventions ; medical response ; vaccines , antiviral drugs , diagnostic tests , and personal protective equipment ( ppe ) ; communications ; and state and local preparedness .

interim pre - pandemic planning guidance: community strategy for pandemic influenza mitigation in the united states – early targeted layered use of non - pharmaceutical interventions , february 2007 , published by cdc , guidance for "social distancing" strategies to reduce contact between people , with respect to: closing schools ; canceling public gatherings ; planning for liberal work leave policies ; teleworking strategies ; voluntary isolation of cases ; and voluntary quarantine of household contacts .

department of defense implementation plan for pandemic influenza , august 2006 , provides policy and guidance for the following priorities: ( 1 ) force health protection and readiness ; ( 2 ) the continuity of essential functions and services ; ( 3 ) defense support to civil authorities ( i.e. , federal , state , and local governments ) ; ( 4 ) effective communications ; and ( 5 ) support to international partners .

va pandemic influenza plan , march 2006 , provides policy and instructions for department of veterans affairs ( va ) in protecting its staff and the veterans it serves , maintaining operations , cooperating with other organizations , and communicating with stakeholders .

pandemic influenza preparedness , response , and recovery guide for critical infrastructure and key resources , published by dhs , september 2006 , provides business planners with guidance to assure continuity during a pandemic for facilities comprising critical infrastructure sectors ( eg , energy and telecommunications ) and key resources ( eg , dams and nuclear power plants ) .

state pandemic plans: all states were required to develop and submit specific plans for pandemic flu preparedness , as a requirement of grants provided by hhs .

2009 h1n1 " swine flu ": crs experts: crs report r40845 , 2009 h1n1 "swine flu": crs experts , by [author name scrubbed] .

current crs reports on public health and emergency preparedness in general: http: / / apps.crs.gov / cli / cli.aspx ? prds_cli_item_id=3276&from=3&fromid=13 current cr s reports on specific aspects of the pandemic influenza threat : crs report r40560 , the 2009 influenza pandemic: selected legal issues , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21414 , mandatory vaccinations: precedent and current laws , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl34724 , would an influenza pandemic qualify as a major disaster under the stafford act ? .

by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40531 , fy2009 spring supplemental appropriations for overseas contingency operations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40575 , potential farm sector effects of 2009 h1n1 "swine flu": questions and answers , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40588 , the 2009 influenza pandemic: u.s .

responses to global human cases , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40619 , the role of the department of defense during a flu pandemic , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33609 , quarantine and isolation: selected legal issues relating to employment , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs21507 , project bioshield: purposes and authorities , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40570 , immigration policies and issues on health - related grounds for exclusion , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl32724 , mexico - u.s. relations: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33381 , the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) : allocation of scarce medical resources during a pandemic , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22327 , pandemic flu and medical biodefense countermeasure liability limitation , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl31873 , banking and financial infrastructure continuity: pandemic flu , terrorism , and other challenges , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22264 , federal employees: human resources management flexibilities in emergency situations , by [author name scrubbed] .

archived crs reports on the threat of pandemic influenza: these products generally discuss concerns about a possible human flu pandemic resulting from h5n1 avian influenza , and enhanced federal preparedness efforts during 2005 through 2007 .

crs report rl33145 , pandemic influenza: domestic preparedness efforts , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rl33219 , u.s. and international responses to the global spread of avian flu: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report rs22576 , pandemic influenza: appropriations for public health preparedness and response , by [author name scrubbed] .

information about the current h1n1 pandemic flu situation: http: / / www.who.int / csr / disease / swineflu / en / index.html ( see also the appendix . ) .

pandemic influenza preparedness and response: a who guidance document , ( april 2009 ) : http: / / www.who.int / csr / disease / influenza / pipguidance2009 / en / index.html current phase of flu pandemic alert: http: / / www.who.int / csr / disease / avian_influenza / phase / en / index.html pan american health organization ( paho ) , a regional office of the who , h1n1 flu page: http: / / new.paho.org / hq / index.php ? option=com_content&task=blogcategory&id=805&itemid=569 international health regulations ( 2005 ) : http: / / www.who.int / topics / international_health_regulations / en / .

government - wide information: http: / / www.flu.gov / dhs , "department response to h1n1 ( swine ) flu," with links to information in other federal departments and agencies: http: / / www.dhs.gov / xprepresp / programs / swine - flu.shtm cdc , h1n1 ( swine flu ) page: http: / / www.cdc.gov / h1n1flu / cdc public health law program , 2009 h1n1 flu legal preparedness , http: / / www2a.cdc.gov / phlp / h1n1flu.asp fda , 2009 h1n1 ( swine ) flu virus , http: / / www.fda.gov / newsevents / publichealthfocus / ucm150305.htmcenters for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , h1n1 information page , http: / / www.cms.hhs.gov / h1n1 / u.s. department of education , h1n1 flu information , http: / / www.ed.gov / admins / lead / safety / emergencyplan / pandemic / index.htmlu.s .

department of agriculture ( usda ) , h1n1 flu , http: / / www.usda.gov / wps / portal / ? navid=usda_h1n1usda nutrition program policies for pandemic flu , http: / / www.fns.usda.gov / disasters / pandemic / default.htm department of defense pandemic influenza watchboard: http: / / fhp.osd.mil / aiwatchboard / hhs pandemic planning updates , addressing monitoring and surveillance , vaccines , antiviral medications , state and local preparedness , and communications , through january 2009: http: / / www.flu.gov / professional / federal / index.html ( note: much of this information is in the context of planning for the h5n1 avian flu threat. ) .

canada: public health agency of canada: http: / / www.phac - aspc.gc.ca / alert - alerte / swine_200904-eng.php ; canadian food inspection agency: http: / / www.inspection.gc.ca / english / anima / disemala / swigri / swigrie.shtml security and prosperity partnership of north america , north american plan for avian and pandemic influenza , august 2007 , http: / / www.spp - psp.gc.ca / eic / site / spp - psp.nsf / vwapj / pandemic - influenza.pdf / $file / pandemic - influenza.pdf center for infectious disease research and policy ( cidrap ) , at the university of minnesota , frequent updates , including scientific and technical information , http: / / www.cidrap.umn.edu / cidrap / content / influenza / swineflu / index.htmlpublic health law and policy program at the sandra day o'connor college of law , at arizona state university , global legal triage and the 2009 h1n1 outbreak ( including prior and existing declared emergencies at the federal and state levels ) , http: / / www.law.asu.edu / ? id=203 .

determination of influenza pandemic phase the world health organization is the coordinating authority for health within the united nations system .

it is responsible for providing leadership , guiding a research agenda , setting norms and standards , articulating evidence - based policy options , providing technical support to countries , and monitoring and assessing health trends .

who does not have enforcement powers .

an influenza pandemic occurs when a novel flu strain emerges and spreads across the globe , causing human illnesses .

for that to happen , the virus must have the following features: it must be genetically novel so that there is a lack of preexisting immunity ; it must be pathogenic ( i.e. , capable of causing illness in humans ) ; and it must be easily transmitted from person to person .

who , in consultation with experts in member countries , monitors the spread of influenza among human populations , and has developed a scale to monitor pandemic risk .

it consists of five "pre - pandemic" phases with increasing incidence of animal and then human illness and transmission , and a sixth phase that represents a full - blown human pandemic , with sustained viral transmission and outbreaks in most or all regions of the world .

historically , flu pandemics have occurred in multiple waves before subsiding .

table a - 1 describes the phases of a flu pandemic , as defined by who .

as a result of the rapid spread of the new flu strain , who raised the pandemic alert level from phase 3 , where it had been for several years because of the threat of h5n1 avian flu , to phase 4 on april 27 , and then to phase 5 on april 29 .

phase 3 meant that a novel flu strain was causing sporadic small clusters of human illness , but was not sufficiently transmissible to sustain community - level outbreaks .

phase 4 , by contrast , signaled that human - to - human transmission of the new h1n1 virus was sufficient to sustain community - level outbreaks .

according to who , raising the alert level to phase 5 meant that there was sustained community - level transmission in two or more countries within one who region , and that a pandemic could be imminent .

on june 11 , who raised the level to phase 6 , declaring that an influenza pandemic , caused by the new h1n1 strain , was underway .

according to who director general dr. margaret chan: spread in several countries can no longer be traced to clearly - defined chains of human - to - human transmission .

further spread is considered inevitable... .

the world is now at the start of the 2009 influenza pandemic .

we are in the earliest days of the pandemic .

the virus is spreading under a close and careful watch .

no previous pandemic has been detected so early or watched so closely , in real - time , right at the very beginning .

the world can now reap the benefits of investments , over the last five years , in pandemic preparedness .

for several years , who urged governments , corporations , and other interests to develop pandemic influenza preparedness and response plans .

generally these plans are staged according to who pandemic phases .

who has noted that under the current definitions , pandemic phases do not reflect the severity of illness , but rather the global extent of sustained community - level outbreaks .

some members of the public , however , had come to think of any flu pandemic as a catastrophic incident on the scale of the one that occurred in 1918 , or that many feared could result from the deadly h5n1 avian flu if it became transmissible among humans .

some argued that the definition of a pandemic should be rewritten to take severity into account , and that a phase 6 pandemic designation for the h1n1 flu situation would trigger over - reactions that were more disruptive than the disease .

international health regulations in 2005 , the world health assembly adopted revised international health regulations ( ihr ) , revising the roles and responsibilities of who and member states in the protection of international public health .

the ihr ( 2005 ) require signatory nations ( which include the united states ) to notify who of all events that may constitute a "public health emergency of international concern," and to provide relevant information .

the ihr ( 2005 ) also include provisions regarding designated national points of contact , definitions of core public health capacities , disease control measures such as quarantine and border controls ( which are to be no more restrictive than necessary to achieve the desired level of health protection ) and others .

on april 25 , 2009 , upon the advice of the emergency committee called under the rules of the ihr ( 2005 ) , the who director - general declared the h1n1 flu outbreak a public health emergency of international concern , thereby calling upon signatories to provide timely and transparent notification of events to who , to collaborate in disease reporting and control , and to adopt effective risk communication strategies to reduce the potential for international disease spread and the unilateral imposition of trade or travel restrictions by other countries .

travel guidance a number of governments have instituted enhanced passenger screening practices at their borders , and policymakers have debated more extensive prohibitions against the entry of travelers from countries or areas affected by the outbreak .

the who has consistently advised against movement restrictions as a means to control influenza , citing a lack of evidence of their effectiveness , coupled with their potentially harmful effects on public confidence , local economies , and trade .

food safety guidance who has published a joint statement with food and agriculture organization of the united nations ( fao ) , the world organization for animal health ( known by its french acronym , oie ) , and the world trade organization ( wto ) , saying: in light of the spread of influenza a ( h1n1 ) , and the rising concerns about the possibility of this virus being found in pigs and the safety of pork and pork products , we stress that pork and pork products , handled in accordance with good hygienic practices recommended by the who , fao , codex alimentarius commission and the oie , will not be a source of infection .

to date there is no evidence that the virus is transmitted by food .

there is currently therefore no justification in the oie terrestrial animal health standards code for the imposition of trade measures on the importation of pigs or their products .

