recent breakdowns in u.s. financial markets have prompted congressional interest in criminal provisions available to federal prosecutors in cases involving mortgages .

because the role of weak mortgage loans in the economic downturn involves complex and systemic factors , criminal prosecution will necessarily be only one part of a broader governmental response .

numerous federal agencies enforce laws and regulations designed to stabilize markets and ensure the integrity of financial transactions within their respective areas of jurisdiction .

thus , regulatory reform will likely be an important response to the downturn .

however , although regulations might provide an adequate means of enforcement in many situations , criminal provisions support prosecution in egregious cases involving criminal intent .

this report focuses on federal criminal provisions relevant to prosecutions of mortgage fraud and related criminal actions .

mortgage fraud , per se , is not a federal crime .

however , several federal criminal provisions – most notably mail and wire fraud , financial institutions fraud , and a number of crimes involving false statements – may encompass various fraudulent activities at issue in mortgage fraud cases .

the mail and wire fraud statutes have a relatively broad application and are perhaps most likely to apply to those at the high end of the mortgage transaction ladder .

various provisions criminalizing false statements will also apply in some circumstances .

in addition , financial institutions fraud provisions apply to instances in which an entity against whom a fraud is perpetrated falls within the definition of "financial institution" under federal law .

money laundering , conspiracy , and racketeering provisions may provide additional grounds for federal criminal liability .

other statutes , such as securities fraud provisions , may apply to fraudulent transactions within the secondary mortgage market .

finally , some provisions criminalize violations of federal regulations , creating an important connection between regulatory reforms and the scope of authorities for federal criminal liability .

looking forward , legislative proposals address a perceived need to expand the scope of federal statutory authority for mortgage fraud prosecutions .

although the u.s. constitution's ex post facto clauses prohibit the states and federal government from imposing retroactive criminal penalties , congress may choose to amend existing law to enhance liability for future crimes and deter fraud which targets people who are newly vulnerable to foreclosure proceedings in the current market or to ensure that wrongdoers are held liable in future situations .

the fraud enforcement and recovery act of 2009 ( fera , s. 386 ) , versions of which have been passed by the senate and house , would , in addition to authorizing funding for prosecution efforts and other measures , expand federal criminal law authorities for combating mortgage fraud and related crimes .

the many relevant federal criminal statutes , discussed infra , are indicative of the various types of activities related to mortgages that might constitute criminal fraud .

however , despite the diversity of schemes and motives , mortgage fraud can be broadly described as involving material misstatements , misrepresentations , or omissions made with an intent to deceive an individual or entity in connection with a mortgage .

it is also possible to describe general categories and trends .

for example , the federal bureau of investigation has drawn a general distinction between fraud - for - housing and fraud - for - profit schemes .

in response to "rising public anger" in the wake of the economic downturn , some have called for increased mortgage fraud prosecutions on both the state and federal levels .

such calls prompt questions regarding the respective roles of federal and state prosecutors .

for schemes perpetrated for the purpose of defrauding a federal regulatory agency , federal prosecutors are likely to have sole prosecutorial authority .

for other schemes , including schemes involving federally regulated institutions , federal and state prosecutors are likely to have overlapping prosecutorial jurisdiction .

in those situations , generally speaking , the federal focus is on the prosecution of relatively large fraudulent schemes .

however , state prosecutors are not limited to prosecution of smaller schemes and often pursue fraud involving institutions or industry insiders .

as discussed , numerous federal regulatory agencies play vital roles in the enforcement and supervision of financial institutions .

since the recent financial downturn , some agencies have implemented regulatory reforms on their own initiative , whereas others have implemented new regulations in response to congressional mandates .

for example , as part of the 2009 omnibus spending legislation , congress directed the federal trade commission to initiate a rulemaking proceeding to regulate mortgage loans pursuant to its existing regulatory authority within 90 days of the act .

regulatory agencies also often partner with the justice department during criminal investigations , although the discretion to pursue criminal prosecution at the federal level ordinarily rests with the justice department .

since the breakdown in financial markets , resources for federal criminal investigations and prosecutions have shifted or expanded to emphasize mortgage fraud .

the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) has more than 2,000 active mortgage fraud investigations and has increased the number of mortgage fraud investigators .

the united states has obtained guilty pleas in some cases involving "straw borrower" schemes .

in addition , in june 2008 , the department of justice conducted "operation malicious mortgage," wherein u.s .

attorneys , with help from the fbi and others , brought charges against more than 400 defendants involved in lending fraud , foreclosure rescue scams , and mortgage - related bankruptcy schemes .

in addition , the treasury and justice departments have announced that the obama administration will initiate a coordinated crackdown on foreclosure - rescue and mortgage loan modification fraud in an effort to protect homeowners from new frauds that might be perpetrated to take advantage of individuals "during these challenging times. .

the role of mortgage fraud in the economic downturn has prompted concerns regarding the adequacy of existing federal criminal statutes .

in particular , noting the large role that private ( i.e. , non - federally - chartered ) mortgage lending businesses played in the residential mortgage market during the years preceding the recent financial crisis , some perceive a need for an expansion of federal criminal liability to encompass actions perpetrated to defraud such institutions .

such proposals have noted that false statements and schemes to defraud a private mortgage lending businesses currently escape liability under several traditional federal fraud statutes .

namely , neither the institutions fraud statute nor the statute criminalizing false statements on mortgage applications , both discussed infra , applies to frauds perpetrated against a private mortgage lending business .

because many such institutions relaxed their loan standards and are perceived as having contributed to an environment that invited fraud , proposals for expanded authorities generally deemphasize the victimization of such institutions and emphasize the importance of holding accountable the mortgage brokers and others who may have taken advantage of mortgage lending businesses' lax loan standards .

on the other hand , other federal fraud statutes , most notably the mail and wire fraud statutes , also discussed infra , authorize criminal liability over frauds perpetrated against private mortgage lenders in many circumstances .

in addition , the sarbanes oxley act of 2002 and other measures enacted during the past few decades have substantially increased the penalties pertaining to the mail and wire fraud federal statutes , making the provisions very powerful prosecutorial tools .

consequently , some have indicated that existing statutes provide a sufficient basis for prosecutions connected with the current economic downturn .

the fraud enforcement and recovery act of 2009 ( s. 386 ) , a bill introduced by senators leahy , grassley , and kaufman and passed by the senate – together with authorizing new funding for the justice department , establishing a new federal crime for the misuse of the troubled assets relief program funds , and amending the federal false claims act – would amend several federal criminal statutes to expand federal criminal liability "to improve enforcement of mortgage fraud , securities fraud , financial institution fraud , and other frauds. .

the amendments most relevant to mortgage fraud include: ( 1 ) expanding the definition of "financial institution," which applies in the context of institutions fraud and other sections , to include a "mortgage lending business," defined as "an organization which finances or refinances any debt secured by an interest in real estate ..." ; ( 2 ) adding "mortgage lending business whose activities affect interstate or foreign commerce , or any person or entity that makes ... a federally related mortgage loan" to the list of entities to which the crime of false statement on a loan or credit application applies ; ( 3 ) expanding the crime of major fraud against the united states to apply to grants , loans , subsidies , insurance , and other categories , rather than only contracts received from the government ; and ( 4 ) expanding the definition of "proceeds" for money laundering to include gross receipts ( as discussed infra , courts currently interpret the definition as encompassing only profits and not gross receipts ) ; and ( 5 ) amending the federal securities fraud statute to extend to commodities , including derivatives comprised of mortgage - backed securities .

the house passed s. 386 after replacing the text with a substitute amendment .

the house version includes some measures from the fight fraud act of 2009 ( h.r .

1748 ) , which was favorably reported by the house judiciary committee and would have similarly amended federal criminal statutes , including expanding the "financial institution" definition to cover private mortgage lending businesses .

the measure has drawn support from the obama administration and some commentators .

statements of support have generally focused on the likely return on investment from added resources for prosecutions or on the need for amendments to the false claims act and have not emphasized the perceived inadequacy of criminal provisions related to mortgage fraud .

multiple , interrelated federal criminal provisions provide alternative bases for criminal liability in mortgage fraud prosecutions .

federal criminal statutes most commonly relied upon include mail and wire fraud , financial institutions fraud , and false statements .

other criminal provisions , including some arising from banking law and others that establish criminal penalties to enforce federal regulations in specified areas , are also relevant .

in addition , federal money laundering , conspiracy , and racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations provisions may provide secondary bases for federal criminal liability in some situations .

a few preliminary points regarding federal criminal law are relevant .

first , although criminal provisions provide maximum penalty amounts , which serve as upper limits for federal courts during the sentencing process , courts determine specific sentences in individual cases after considering recommendations in the u.s .

sentencing guidelines .

second , under federal law , those who aid and abet a perpetrator are treated as principals and are typically punishable for commission of the underlying offense .

some individuals have raised concerns regarding additional federal criminalization of white collar crimes .

this caution might be especially relevant given the increased penalties that have been established for existing federal crimes over the past few decades .

however , as discussed , congress may choose to amend federal criminal statutes , such as the financial institutions fraud and false statement on a mortgage loan application provisions , to include a broader basis for federal prosecutorial authority in cases involving criminal actions taken related to mortgages .

any legislative proposal to amend criminal provisions will inevitably be shaped by the broader response to the financial downturn .

in the mortgage fraud arena , many activities likely walk a fine line between maneuvers that were legal under loose regulatory enforcement , on one hand , and illegal activity , on the other .

partly for that reason , there has been renewed attention given to revamping the federal financial institution regulatory structure .

for example , the acting director of the federal office of thrift supervision has called for amendments to existing regulatory authorities that would ensure that more housing debt and finance entities would be subject to federal supervision .

in addition , some agencies , such as the federal reserve board and the securities and exchange commission , have recently enacted new regulations for which statutory authority already existed or are considering boosting enforcement activities under current authorities .

in many cases , such actions would trigger the existing criminal provisions which provide penalties for violations of regulatory provisions .

thus , in some cases , regulatory reforms might effectively expand the scope of federal authority in criminal prosecutions involving mortgage fraud .

