the administration's 2010 and 2011 budget outlines contain a proposal to cap the value of itemized deductions at 28% , for high - income taxpayers .

in the 2010 plan , the expected revenue was dedicated to addressing health care issues .

other revenue sources have been proposed for this purpose and the current proposal is part of the administrations tax provisions for upper income taxpayers .

the itemized deduction cap has generated considerable concern about its potential negative effect on charitable contributions , especially in light of the difficulties charities are having during current economic conditions .

the proposed tax change , however , would not go into effect until 2011 and could actually increase current contributions in the short term .

thus , it is the longer - term , or permanent , effect on giving that is considered in this analysis .

the analysis also considers the effects of other income tax changes and of the estate tax .

deductions normally save taxes at the marginal tax rate .

if a taxpayer's top bracket is 35% , a dollar of deduction would lower taxes by 35 cents .

the proposal would limit the reduction to 28 cents .

taxpayers claim deductions for charitable gifts when they itemize .

most taxpayers ( 70% ) do not deduct their contributions because they take the standard deduction or in some cases do not file tax returns .

in addition , the provision would affect only the top two marginal tax rates , which affect only about 1.4% of returns .

limiting the value of itemized deductions or converting deductions into credits is not a radical idea .

the congressional budget office , for example , discussed converting deductions into a credit in its 2009 budget options study .

president bush's advisory panel proposed to apply a credit to mortgage interest deductions and eliminate tax deductions although it would have retained and extended the charitable deduction .

the reason for proposed credits and caps on itemized deductions is that itemized deductions create subsidies that differ across income classes .

for the 70% of households that do not file returns or file returns but do not itemize , there is no subsidy .

for returns that do , the subsidy rates vary ; the lowest income taxpayers receive a subsidy of 10% to 15% , while the highest income taxpayers have a subsidy rate of 35% .

in evaluating the proposed contribution deduction and its implications for charitable giving , this report first compares the magnitude of the proposal with past tax changes .

the lack of any clear indication in historical experience of powerful effects of tax changes suggests a small response .

the following section provides calculations of the consequences for charitable giving , which are estimated based on the share of giving that is affected by the cap , the magnitude of the price change , and the elasticity ( behavioral response to tax changes ) .

it also considers the effects of other income tax provisions in the budget and the effects on different types of charitable organizations .

the study also discusses the role of the estate tax .

it concludes with discussions of policy trade - offs and alternative policy options .

some insight into the expected impact of the deduction cap might be found by comparing tax changes to past tax revisions .

the price of charitable contributions for itemizers is ( 1-t ) , where t is the tax rate at which contributions are deducted .

for example , if the individual is in a 25% tax bracket , the tax price is 0.75 , indicating that a taxpayer has to give up 75 cents for each dollar of contributions .

that is , if the taxpayer in that bracket contributes a dollar , he or she saves 25 cents and only loses 75 cents that could have been used for other purposes .

the tax price of giving is affected by a cap on the rate at which deductions occur but is also affected by the marginal statutory rate .

consider the top tax rate .

it has fluctuated substantially since the income tax was introduced in 1913 , beginning at rates as low as 7% and rising as high as 92% .

starting in the mid - sixties , the top rate was 70% for many years ( although it rose slightly with the vietnam war surcharge ) .

beginning with legislation in 1981 , the top tax rate has been reduced substantially .

effective in 1982 , it was reduced from 70% to 50% .

in 1986 , it was further reduced to 28% .

rate increases occurred in 1990 and 1991 , and decreases in 2001 .

table 1 compares the magnitude of those past changes in tax price to the effects of the proposed itemized deduction cap .

two effects are considered for the cap: the effect of imposing a cap on the current ( 2009 ) top tax rate of 35% and the effect of imposing a cap on the top rate of 39.6% which is scheduled for 2011 .

the percentage changes in tax price in the 1981 and the 1986 legislation were very large compared with the current proposal .

if their effects are compared with the proposal's effect with current tax rates , the 1981 legislation is over six times as large and the 1986 change is over four times as large .

the combined changes are 12 times the size of the proposed tax increase at the top rate ( where the main effects of the proposal will be directed ) .

tax rate changes differ from caps on deductions because they also have an offsetting income effect .

this effect tends to be smaller than the price change , however , because of graduated rates , and in some cases were offset by other provisions .

for example , the tax policy center reports that allowing the individual rates to rise to their planned 2012 levels in the top 1% would result in an 11.6% reduction in tax price but only a 4.4% reduction in income .

the 1986 tax reform act , with one of the deepest tax cuts in the top rates , maintained the pre - existing revenue yield and distribution across income classes .

thus , it contained no income effects .

table 1 addresses rate changes that affected the top rate , but the 1981 and the 1986 tax changes also reduced marginal tax rates across a broad range of taxpayers .

in addition , non - itemizers were allowed an itemized deduction in 1985 and 1986 .

figure 1 shows the pattern of giving as a percentage of gdp over this period .

there is no indication in this pattern of significant shifts due to tax rate changes .

contributions after 1981 , despite tax price increases , remained relatively stable as a percentage of price .

the small peak around 1986 is generally attributed by most researchers to a temporary rise in deductions reflecting a timing shift as tax cuts for 1987 and 1988 were pre - announced in the 1986 tax cut , but by 1989 contributions had returned to their previous levels .

contributions following the 1993 tax increase fell rather than increased .

a more detailed discussion of the potential effects is presented in the next section , but this historical comparison suggests it is unlikely that a significant effect on charitable giving will occur .

to estimate the effect on charitable giving arising from the itemized deduction cap , three elements are required: the share of donations affected , the percentage change in price for those donations , and the permanent price elasticity .

different types of charities may be affected differently by the change because the negative effects are more concentrated on higher - income donors .

higher - income donors contribute larger shares of their donations to contribute to health , education , art , environmental , and similar organizations , and less to religious organizations , those meeting basic needs , and combined purpose organizations .

the different types of recipients for all contributions are shown in figure 3 .

if higher - income individuals contributed the same shares as overall contributions , the estimated effects in table 4 would apply to all charities .

however , evidence indicates that patterns for giving for high - income individuals differ from those of overall giving .

table 5 uses data in a study on high - net - worth philanthropy to estimate the differential effects across different types of organizations , combining both price and income effects ( as shown in table 4 ) .

 ( see appendix b for the methodology used. ) .

the study also estimated the shares of each type of charity that were directed to the needs of the poor ; in general , higher - income donors give a small share of their donations to charities that benefit the poor .

as the table indicates , charities that are not relatively favored by high - income donors will have very small reductions or gains , depending on the comparison made .

these include religious organizations , combined purpose charities and charities designed to meet basic needs .

organizations that are more likely to be recipients of donations from high - income individuals will be more likely to have reductions in gifts and those reductions will be larger .

health will experience the greatest declines , followed by arts , other , and education .

the modern u.s. estate tax was enacted as part of the revenue act of 1916 and almost from its onset a deduction for charitable bequests was allowed .

as noted above , charitable bequests make up approximately 8% of all charitable giving .

as with the more familiar income tax deduction , the estate tax deduction for charitable bequests reduces estate tax liability by the dollar value of the charitable bequest times the estate tax rate .

since 1916 , the top marginal estate tax rate trended upward ( increasing the value of the deduction ) for roughly 65 years , before reversing course and trending downward ( reducing the value of the deduction ) over the past 25 years .

under current law , the estate tax has been repealed in 2010 , before reappearing at its 2001 level the following year , although there are legislative proposals to revise that .

these fluctuations in estate taxation could have important implications for the level of charitable bequests in the coming years .

in contrast , the president's fy2010 and fy2011 budget outlines maintain the estate tax in its 2009 form and the senate budget resolution for fy2010 reduces the top marginal tax rate by 10 percentage points .

unlike the personal income tax , the deduction for charitable bequests is not subject to a cap .

that is not to say that similar distributional issues are not present .

in fact , the benefit of the deduction for charitable bequests against the taxable estate is more heavily skewed towards higher wealth estates than under the income tax .

this follows from the structure of the estate tax which has historically had a high exemption , resulting in a narrow base of roughly 2% of adult deaths each year since 1916 .

for this narrow base , however , the tax ( subsidy ) rate has been historically quite high , though trending downward from 70% to 45% over the part quarter century .

as in the case of the income tax discussion , this section examines historical changes in the estate tax , the estimated effect of different regimes on charitable giving through bequests , the effects of temporary changes , and the effects of the estate tax on gifts during the lifetime .

it also discusses what types of charities might be most affected .

some insight into the expected impact of a change in the estate tax might be found by comparing tax changes to past tax revisions .

the price of charitable bequests for estates subject to the estate tax is ( 1-t ) , where t is the tax rate at which contributions are deducted .

for example , for an estate in the 45% tax bracket , the tax price is 0.55 , indicating that the estate tax reduces bequeathable wealth by 55 cents for each dollar of charitable bequest .

as shown in figure 4 , the top marginal estate tax rate has fluctuated considerably since 1916 , ranging from rates as low as 10% to rates as high as 77% .

the estate tax's origin as a revenue source in times of crisis can be observed in its early years by spikes in the top rates which correspond , roughly , to world war i and world war ii .

the gradual shift away from this original purpose may be observed by the persistence of the world war ii rate increase lasting through 1976 .

beginning with the tax reform act of 1976 ( tra76 ) , the top rate has been consistently reduced .

table 6 examines how these reductions in the top marginal estate tax rate have affected the tax price of charitable bequests .

taken together , the tax price of charitable bequests has risen 139% since the enactment of tra76 .

the result is that individuals engaged in estate planning face a much reduced incentive for charitable bequests than 40 years ago .

figure 5 shows the pattern of charitable bequests as a percentage of gdp over the 1967-2007 time period .

the pattern of bequests shows some evidence of shifting in response to tax changes .

while little can be said concerning the 1976 tax change , it appears that estates may have increased charitable bequests prior to the tax price increases brought about by the 1981 and 2001 reductions in the top marginal estate tax rate .

this evidence is harder to pin to the tax changes , compared to changes in the personal income tax rate , as the timing of bequests is tied to the timing of death , which is not generally thought to be strongly correlated with taxes .

it is also worth noting that relative to gdp , bequests have generally stayed within a narrow range over this time period .

for example , both the 1969 and 2000 levels of bequests were 0.2% of gdp .

given the inability to smooth charitable bequests over time and narrow affected populations year - to - year variation in bequests as a percentage of gdp is not unexpected .

to estimate the effect on charitable giving of changes in the estate tax , four elements are required: the share of bequests affected , the percentage change in price for those bequests , the price elasticity and the wealth elasticity .

although changes in either the estate tax rate or the estate tax exemption are expected to elicit behavioral responses , estimates in this study are confined to the effect of changes in the estate tax rate in this study .

in addition to the overall effect , categories of charities are likely to be affected differentially .

as mentioned above , higher - income donors contribute larger shares of their donations to health , education , art , environmental , and similar organizations , and less to religious organizations , those meeting basic needs , and combined purpose organizations during their lifetimes .

figure 7 breaks out charitable bequests by type of charity .

compared to lifetime giving , foundations receive a much greater share of charitable bequests .

of the remaining charities , only education also rises , in percentage terms relative to lifetime giving , whereas the arts and health organizations hold up better than religion or human services organizations .

because of the large share of bequests that involve foundations , the effects on actual charitable spending changes are likely to be delayed as foundations tend to retain assets and spend in the future .

 ( these effects can also occur with inter - vivos giving where gifts can be made to foundations , to endowments and supporting organizations , and through donor advised funds , all of which delay the spending of charitable funds ; the importance of this effect is likely to be more limited , however , because of the smaller share of foundation giving in lifetime contributions. ) .

the ultimate timing and distribution of contributions to foundations is difficult to determine , although they may likely be devoted to the same ultimate purposes as are generally favored by high - income individuals' lifetime giving .

of course , when evaluating the effect of policy changes on different types of charities the initial share of bequests is only one determinant of the effect , with the relative elasticities for each charity being a second factor .

according to one study , bequests to the arts and social welfare organizations are relatively unresponsive to changes in the tax price , while bequests to education and medical organizations , along with religious organizations , are relatively responsive .

although these results generally conform to observed bequest patterns , the tax price effect on education appears to be an anomaly , likely due to aggregation bias .

charitable contributions have a public goods aspect , which means they are undersupplied in a market economy , providing a justification for government subsidies to private contributions , provision of grants , or direct provision of goods ( such as assistance for the poor , health research and care , education , and other goods ) .

the argument typically made for limiting itemized deductions , such as those for charitable giving , points to the differential subsidies for some individuals as compared to others due to the difference in marginal tax rates .

in addition , if the price elasticity is less than one , the government loses more in revenue than the charity gains in donations , an attribute that is referred to as inefficiency .

alternative policy options might be to find a different source of revenue .

the type of revenue source could reflect efficiency goals ( which might include limits on itemized deductions ) or distributional objectives ( such as raising revenue from higher - income taxpayers ) .

one approach if the concern about the itemized deduction cap is primarily directed at charitable contributions is to exclude charitable deductions from the cap .

according to internal revenue service statistics of income for 2006 , charitable contributions accounted for 23% of itemized deductions for the $500,000-and - over adjusted gross income class , representative of the group of taxpayers affected by the itemized deduction cap .

thus about a quarter of revenue projected from the itemized deduction cap would be sacrificed by excluding charitable contributions .

a revenue - raising alternative to the cap on itemized deductions is to impose a floor or ceiling , allowing deductions only in excess of a percentage of income or directly limiting the amount of deductions that can be taken .

 ( there is a ceiling of 50% of adjusted gross income for charitable gifts , and smaller ceilings for other types of gifts , such as gifts of appreciated property .

ceilings already exist for mortgage interest deductions based on the amount of the mortgage , and percentage of income floors exist for medical expenses , casualty losses , and miscellaneous deductions. ) .

a floor would likely preserve the incentive effects at the margin of charitable contributions .

according to the 2004 statistics of income public use file , 96% of contributions are made by taxpayers who contribute at least 1% of income and 88% are made by those who contribute at least 2% of income .

the overall cap on itemized deductions is projected to raise about $31 billion when fully effective in fy2012 ; thus the annual cost of excluding the charitable deductions would be about $7 billion .

cbo estimated that a 2% floor on charitable deductions would raise about $25 billion .

thus , the revenue could be made up with a lower floor .

a more limited option would be to impose a floor under the higher tax rates for charitable contributions .

that is , the general cap could be imposed , but itemized deductions in excess of some percentage of income would be excluded .

if the main objective is to raise revenue from higher - income taxpayers , an alternative is to increase the top rates or add a surcharge , a proposal that was made by then - chairman rangel in his 2007 tax reform proposal .

raising top income rates further would increase the subsidy to charitable giving , although a surcharge based on adjusted gross income ( i.e. , pre - deduction income ) would not .

other provisions to raise revenue that affect high - income individuals would be to increase the tax rate further on dividends ( which prior to 2003 were taxed at ordinary rates ) and capital gains ( taxed at various rates in the past ) .

another provision that would affect higher - income individuals and encourage charitable giving would be to return to the pre - 2001 treatment under the estate tax .

concerns about dire consequences for charitable giving in the wake of a proposed cap on the rate at which itemized deductions are valued appear to be overstated .

depending on which set of tax rates are used as the baseline , charitable deductions would decrease by less than 1% or less than 2% , and if income effects are incorporated , the budget outline taken as a whole would increase charitable giving .

moreover , since the change is not scheduled to take place until 2011 it would not reduce current giving and , indeed , could increase it .

the provisions on the estate tax also have consequences for charitable giving that could be more important per dollar of revenue .

the retention of the current estate tax rates compared with the elimination of the tax now scheduled for 2010 would increase charitable giving , but would lower it compared with the pre - 2001 rates scheduled to be in effect if the bush tax cuts expired .

the effects of the cap on itemized deductions and any changes in bequests that might arise differentially affect certain types of charities .

appendix a .

evidence on elasticities for inter - vivos giving table a - 1 reports the results of six different studies ( with a number of specifications which attempt to measure both permanent and transitory effects of changes in price and income on charitable giving .

two of these studies ( bakija , and bakija and mcclelland ) also provided some critiques of other studies and some sensitivity analysis that is useful in understanding the studies and their strengths and weaknesses .

results that are not statistically significant have an asterisk .

lack of statistical significance means that , although a relationship that most closely fits the data is estimated , there is such deviation from that relationship in the observations that there is not a clear causal effect .

they are usually , although not always , associated with very small values that are close to zero .

while the studies differ in methodology , as discussed below , one difference is the type of data used .

tax return data are available for general use only to researchers in the treasury department and the joint committee on taxation .

 ( the congressional budget office , cbo , has access to taxpayer data but must have uses approved by the joint committee on taxation. ) .

the data on giving and tax rates are probably superior in these studies and contain a larger sample of high - income taxpayers ; however , such research cannot be replicated or subjected to any sensitivity analysis by others .

other researchers have to use public use data constructed from other sources .

of the six studies in table 3 , three ( randolph , auten et al. , and bakija and heim ) used taxpayer data and all had as authors or coauthors a treasury employee .

the bakija and mcclelland study , with a cbo coauthor , included a sensitivity analysis for the auten et al .

study , but used a public use file , not the tax data .

the other two studies also used a public use file .

many of the studies listed below report multiple results using different specifications and , in general , an attempt is made to report the results that appear to be preferred by the author ( s ) .

for comparison with this table and to illustrate the importance of dealing with transitory effects , bakija and mcclelland , who presented a range of strategies , also estimated a standard pooled cross section estimate , the type that had been done prior to the evidence shown by the 1980s tax cuts that did not deal with transitory effects .

that estimate showed results that are typical of past cross section studies , a price elasticity of - 1.22 and an income elasticity of 0.84 .

in general , the theoretical expectation is that transitory price effects are large and transitory income effects are small ( due to the permanent income hypothesis or consumption smoothing ) .

price elasticities and income elasticities in cross section studies are a combination of permanent and transitory effects .

thus , a lower permanent price elasticity and a higher permanent income elasticity would be expected than those observed in cross section studies .

only two studies , randolph ( 1995 ) and bakija and heim ( 2008 ) find these results , and the bakija and heim income elasticity is only marginally higher .

randolph ( 1995 ) was the first study to focus on the problem of transitory effects , and the technique used a 10-year panel that treated deviations from average income ( and the resultant deviations from tax rates ) as transitory .

permanent tax rates varied through changes in the tax law ( and years around the 1981 and 1986 changes were excluded ) .

this study allowed a long period of time to be transitory ; therefore , it is possible that some of the permanent price and income effects are reflected in the transitory estimates , as the author acknowledges .

other studies tend to allow much shorter - term transitory effects , which might go too far in the other direction .

randolph's model allowed the price elasticity to vary by the share of giving , and he reports two measures: one unweighted with a price elasticity of - 0.08 which is not statistically significant and one weighted more heavily toward large contributors , which randolph appears to prefer .

the results in the randolph study are consistent in general magnitude with the expectations based on the aggregate data discussed in the text: a small permanent price elasticity , a large transitory price elasticity , an income elasticity of around one and a smaller transitory income elasticity .

bakija ( 2000 ) , who among other things , replicates the randolph results with public use data , argues that the second weight , which yields an insignificant price elasticity , is more appropriate ( although he criticizes other aspects of the model ) .

in his own replications with public use files he finds effects similar to randolph's unweighted results but suggests the appropriate measure of the aggregate elasticity evaluated over the full sample .

these results are similar to randolph's unweighted results: he also finds similar results for the elasticity when confined to incomes over $100,000 .

based on the specification he prefers and his replication , this approach basically finds no evidence of a permanent price response .

the randolph study differs from the other studies in some important ways .

by using average income over the panel as permanent income and estimating transitory effects based on deviations , he allows a broad scope for shifting over time , whereas other studies use shorter periods .

this choice may be influenced by experience with capital gains realizations studies where using short periods to control for transitory effects were not successful in producing results that were reasonable .

barrett et al .

allow limited intertemporal shifting variation and also a lagged value of giving to deal with adjustment .

they focus particularly on how quickly adjustment takes place , which they find to be very rapid .

their panel also does not include tax rate changes after 1986 which are an important exogenous source of variation .

they find a lower price elasticity than a standard cross section , but also a small income elasticity .

like the other studies , this study includes individual fixed effects which are designed to control for heterogeneity among taxpayers ( e.g .

a taste for philanthropy , religiosity , etc ) .

 ( randolph could not employ individual fixed effects because he used an average over the entire panel for permanent income which was then indistinguishable from a fixed effect. ) .

one drawback , however , of fixed effects , as barrett et al .

acknowledge , is that the fixed effect could also be picking up permanent income effects , and so suppressing the value of that elasticity .

the barrett et al .

study also allowed a more limited scope for intertemporal substitution .

auten et al .

also use fixed effects and more limited intertemporal substitutions .

as pointed out by bakija and mcclelland , they also had a problem in that they did not deal with known changes in the tax law ( that is , 1986 was a higher - tax year than 1987 even though the high realizations in 1989 were associated with a pre - announced drop in tax rates ) which would tend to bias their price elasticities up .

this was a particular problem for panels that included 1986 , and bakija and mcclelland reestimated their model using a public data file and found a much lower elasticity .

bakija ( 2000 ) mainly contrasted his model with randolph's by using legislated transitory changes in tax rates as the way to determine the transitory component of taxes .

bakija and mcclelland base their analysis off auten et al .

and while they introduce a number of innovations , their main changes are to model expected tax changes and introduce adjustment lags .

bakija and heim use a panel approach with tax data , with fixed effects , with more limited substitution frameworks than randolph , and with attention to expectations of tax changes .

they characterize intertemporal substitution mainly through those pre - announced tax changes and allow shorter substitution periods .

the main source of determining the price elasticity is the difference in response across taxpayers who had different changes in their tax rates .

they also examine separate estimates for higher - income individuals .

they obtain very different estimates depending on how they deal with fixed time effects ( variables meant to control for changes that affect all observations in a given year ) , which cannot be introduced into the higher - income levels because they are so closely correlated across the sample with legislated changes in tax rates .

the first one they reported , which did not use fixed time effects but incorporated a time trend , is included in the assessment .

ultimately no study is perfect , and thus it is difficult to choose a central elasticity from among these .

excluding the high elasticities in auten et al .

for the panel that covers 1986 and that are likely overstated the elasticities range from essentially zero to 0.8 .

it seems likely that the unweighted randolph estimate may be biased downwards , but some others may be biased upwards because of fixed effects or short periods for intertemporal substitution .

ultimately a center elasticity of 0.5 is used .

income elasticities may be biased in the other direction but should be above the cross section results for that era and typical of the past ( 0.84 ) so , for that reason , and for reasons stated in the body of the paper , a unitary elasticity is used .

appendix b .

methodology for estimating effects by type of charity and charitable purpose the first step in the estimation is to measure the ratio of the charitable giving share for each type of charity to the total share .

for example , if affected donors give half a share to a given charity as their share overall , the price effects of the cap will have half the effect of the total .

these shares were taken from table 10 of the center of philanthropy's study of patterns of household giving .

affected taxpayers fell into two categories in this study , $1 million or more and $200,000 to $1,000,0000 .

shares were weighted based on the share of total giving in each tax - rate class , adjusted for limits on giving ; the result was that 89% of the allocation was based on taxpayers with $1 million and over .

note that this methodology assumes that price elasticities are the same for different types of giving .

once these ratios were obtained , they were multiplied by the overall price effects to obtain the reductions in demand due to price effects .

to incorporate the income effects , data on the top 1% and the overall income effects , along with the share of income allocated to the top 1% , subtracting out the effects of the estate tax , were used .

this income effect was used for their share of the contributions of each type , with the remaining 99% income effect used for the remaining contributions .

for the comparison with current tax rules , income of the top 1% fell by 5.3% and income of the remaining 99% increased by 1.1% .

for the comparison with law in 2011 , there was a 0.1% increase in income in the top 1% and a 4.4% increase in income in the remaining 99% .

denoting "a" as the ratio of the share by high - income taxpayers of each category divided by the share of all contributions by these taxpayers .

the weighted income effect was a times 0.1747 times the income effect of the top 1% + ( 0.75-a times 0.1747 ) .

the share of income in the high - income category is 17.47% and 75% of contributions are from individuals .

appendix c. evidence on elasticities for charitable bequests table c - 1 reports the results of seven different studies that attempt to estimate both the price and wealth elasticities of charitable bequests .

although these studies find a diverse set of estimated elasticities , they reach two common general conclusions: the price elasticity dominates the wealth elasticity and charitable bequests , generally , respond elastically to changes in the tax price of bequests .

the exception to this second conclusion is provided by greene and mcclelland ( 2001 ) and is likely explained by their focus on the portion of the tax price related to the exemption level .

