in recent years , federal education legislation has placed an increased emphasis on assessment in schools .

perhaps most notably , title i - a of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as reauthorized by the no child left behind act ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) , has required all states that receive title i - a funds to test all public school students annually in grades 3 through 8 and once in high school in the areas of reading and mathematics .

these assessments are used as key indicators in an accountability system that determines whether schools are making progress with respect to student achievement .

to receive title i - a funding , states must also participate in the national assessment of educational progress ( naep ) , a standards - based national test given at grades 4 and 8 .

the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ; p.l .

108-446 ) requires states to use assessments to identify students with disabilities and track their progress according to individualized learning goals .

in addition to assessments required by federal law , elementary and secondary school students generally participate in many other assessments , which range from small - scale classroom assessments to high - stakes exit exams .

this report provides a framework for understanding various types of assessments that are administered in elementary and secondary schools .

it broadly discusses various purposes of educational assessment and describes comprehensive assessment systems .

common assessment measures currently used in education are described , including state assessments , naep , and state exit exams .

the report also provides a description and analysis of technical considerations in assessments , including validity , reliability , and fairness , and discusses how to use these technical considerations to draw appropriate conclusions based on assessment results .

finally , this report provides a brief analysis of the use of assessments in accountability systems , including implications for curriculum , students , and testing .

while this report does not comprehensively examine all of the assessment provisions in federal education laws , it summarizes several of the major provisions and draws on examples from federal laws , such as idea and nclb , to help situate assessment concepts in the context of federal policies .

it should be noted that at this writing , nclb provisions are still in effect in several states .

whereas in other states , alternative educational accountability systems are being developed in response to a flexibility package made available by the secretary of education ( hereafter referred to as the secretary ) in september 2011 .

the flexibility package provides states with waivers exempting them from certain nclb accountability requirements if , in their place , states develop alternative accountability systems .

as it is not feasible to characterize the array of features associated with the accountability systems being developed across states , the accountability system employed under nclb is the principal example used to discuss the application of assessments in accountability systems .

a great many of the concepts related to the uses of assessments in nclb are likely to be relevant to the use of educational assessments in other test - based accountability systems .

educational assessment is a complex endeavor involving gathering and analyzing data to support decision - making about students and the evaluation of academic programs and policies .

the most common type of assessment used in current education policy is achievement testing .

although educational assessment involves more than achievement testing , this report will use the words "assessment" and "test" interchangeably .

there are many ways to classify assessments in frameworks .

the framework offered below is meant to provide a context for the remainder of the report and present an easily accessible vocabulary for discussing assessments .

this framework addresses the various purposes of assessment , the concept of comprehensive assessment systems , and the scoring of assessments .

after outlining a general assessment framework , this report will discuss current assessments in elementary and secondary schools , technical considerations in assessment , innovation in assessment , and the use of assessments in test - based accountability systems .

a glossary is provided at the end of this report to provide definitions of common assessment and measurement terms .

the glossary provides additional technical information that may not be addressed within the text of the report .

an acronym reference is also provided at the end of this report to provide an easily accessible list of common education and testing acronyms .

students in elementary and secondary schools are assessed using a wide range of tests .

the following sections describe some of the common types of assessments used in elementary and secondary schools ; these assessments are situated within the framework described above .

first , assessments that are required by federal law are discussed , followed by a discussion of assessments that are required by state policies , assessments that are administered at the discretion of local districts , and voluntary assessments .

the first three sections provide a discussion of assessments that are or have been required by federal law: state assessments for ayp , naep , and assessments to identify students for special services .

in the next section , state exit exams are discussed .

these assessments are not required by federal law , but state policies often require that students participate in these assessments as a high school graduation requirement .

next , benchmark assessments are discussed .

benchmark assessments are also not required by federal law , but they are widely used by districts and states .

the next section provides a discussion of international assessments .

these assessments are voluntary assessments in which schools and students are periodically selected at random to participate .

the final section describes the practice of linking assessments — a statistical technique used to compare scores across different tests .

this section will discuss technical considerations in assessment , such as validity , reliability , and fairness .

it is generally the responsibility of the test developer to investigate technical characteristics of an assessment and to report any relevant statistical information to test users .

usually , this information is reported in testing manuals that accompany the assessment .

it is the responsibility of the test user to administer the test as intended and to use the reported information concerning validity , reliability , and fairness to interpret test results appropriately .

learning how to evaluate the validity , reliability , and fairness of an assessment allows test users to make appropriate inferences .

an inference is a conclusion that is drawn from the result of a test .

inferences may be either appropriate or inappropriate based on a number of technical and contextual factors .

this section will conclude with a discussion on how to avoid making inappropriate inferences from educational assessments .

it will also highlight some of the issues to consider when making inferences from high - stakes assessments vs. low - stakes assessments .

nclb greatly increased the emphasis on student assessment .

under nclb , student scores on state assessments are used as key indicators in an accountability system that determines whether schools are making progress with respect to student achievement .

some have viewed this shift towards test - based accountability as a positive move because it places more emphasis on developing rigorous content standards in reading , mathematics , and science and teaching to the standards .

test - based accountability as implemented by nclb also leads to increased attention on traditionally underperforming subgroups of students , including disadvantaged students , students with disabilities , and lep students .

on the other hand , test - based accountability has been criticized for narrowing the curriculum and focusing all instruction on the tested subjects of reading and mathematics at the expense of other subjects .

the current practice of test - based accountability may also create incentives to set low expectations for proficiency and to focus on a subset of children who are near the proficiency level instead of focusing on children at all achievement levels .

another criticism is that the increased emphasis on test - based accountability can lead to score inflation , which may inhibit policymakers from measuring the actual impact of accountability .

in the sections below , the potential positive and negative implications of test - based accountability are discussed , including implications for curriculum , students , and testing .

it is important to note that the issues discussed below are specific to current test - based accountability systems under nclb ; however , all test - based accountability systems may not have the same positive and negative implications .

one potentially positive outcome of test - based accountability has been an increased focus on state - level content standards and teaching to those standards .

under nclb , states have been required to develop rigorous content standards for reading and mathematics , which many see as core subjects that will lead to improved learning in other content areas .

there is some evidence that using content standards and assessments can help teachers focus their instruction and obtain feedback on the effectiveness of their instruction .

there are also some data to suggest that high - performing schools have a stronger alignment between state content standards and school curriculum .

furthermore , schools that include teachers in the development of these standards tended to have a higher degree of teacher "buy - in" to the standards .

on the other hand , test - based accountability may be affecting the curriculum in less desirable ways .

one criticism of test - based accountability systems is that they lead to a narrowing of the curriculum .

there are several ways in which these systems might narrow the curriculum .

first , the time spent administering the actual assessments , sometimes called the "testing burden," could detract from classroom instruction .

second , test - based accountability systems may lead to increases in test preparation , leaving less time for instruction .

there is some evidence to suggest that teachers feel pressure to "teach to the test" and engage in test preparation activities at the expense of instruction .

test - preparation activities take several forms , including altering typical classroom assignments to conform to the format of an expected response on the state assessment ( eg , if the state assessment requires a five paragraph constructed response , teachers may assign a disproportionate number of five - paragraph essays ) .

third , in test - based accountability systems , teachers report reallocating instructional time towards tested subjects and away from non - tested subjects .

surveys of teachers have consistently reported that their instruction emphasizes reading and mathematics over other subjects like history , foreign language , and arts .

although there is consistency in the survey results , it is difficult to understand the extent to which instructional time is reallocated towards tested subjects .

most of these reports do not collect data through experimental observation , but rather they rely on self - reported data from teachers and administrators , which is often less reliable .

nclb has required states to disaggregate student assessment data for major subgroups , including racial / ethnic groups , economically disadvantaged students , students with disabilities , and lep students .

under nclb , schools are held accountable for the performance of each of these subgroups , and each subgroup shares a common goal of reaching 100% proficiency in reading and mathematics by 2014 .

designing an accountability system in this way has increased the attention given to the achievement of certain subgroups that may have been previously masked by overall student performance .

in general , disaggregating data by subgroups has been seen as a positive step in terms of equity in education because the performance of all subgroups "counts" towards ayp .

supporters of disaggregation believe that it leads to increased access to rigorous academic curriculum for students who otherwise may not have had access to such curriculum due to low expectations of performance .

along with the increased attention to subgroups of students , there has been increased attention to the achievement gaps between white students and minority students and between economically advantaged students and disadvantaged students .

over the last several decades , a general goal of public education has been to "close the achievement gap," and thus , improve equity in education .

by disaggregating assessment results , nclb has led to consistent measurement of the achievement gap and allows researchers to examine the size of the achievement gap over time .

one of the unintended consequences of nclb accountability is the way instruction may be focused on students just below the "proficient" level , possibly at the expense of other students .

under nclb's test - based accountability system , the goal is for 100% of students to reach proficiency by 2014 .

in an effort to raise the percentage of proficient students , schools and teachers may target instructional time and resources towards those students who are near proficiency .

since time and resources are a zero - sum game , fewer instructional resources may be available for students who are far below proficiency or even those who achieve at advanced levels .

this disincentive to focus instructional resources on all children has led to possible alternative methods of measuring achievement , including growth models .

within certain accountability systems , the use of growth models may give teachers and schools credit for student growth , even if the growth occurs far below the proficiency level .

test - based accountability systems use high - stakes assessments to make decisions about students , teachers , and schools .

under nclb , individual schools are held accountable for student achievement , and if schools fail to meet their ayp goals , there are consequences .

in an effort to avoid these consequences , schools often make conscious efforts to prepare students for high - stakes assessments .

although these efforts are often undertaken with good intentions , they can lead to score inflation .

score inflation is a phenomenon in which scores on high - stakes assessments tend to increase at a faster rate than scores on low - stakes assessments .

the validity of an inference is greatly reduced when score inflation is present .

test preparation can take many forms , and it is difficult to distinguish appropriate test preparation from inappropriate test preparation .

many schools provide test preparation to young students who have little experience with standardized testing , and this form of test preparation can actually increase the validity of a test score because it is less likely that students will do poorly due to unfamiliarity with the testing process .

other test preparation strategies , such as working more effectively or working harder , are also usually desirable .

test preparation begins to affect validity in a negative way , however , when there are excessive amounts of alignment between test items and curriculum , excessive coaching of a particular type of item that will appear on the test , or even outright cheating .

studying the prevalence of score inflation is difficult because school districts may be reluctant to give researchers access to test scores for the purpose of investigating possible inflation .

nevertheless , several studies have documented the problem of score inflation by comparing gains on state assessments ( high - stakes ) to those made on naep ( low - stakes ) .

studies have consistently reported discrepancies in the overall level of student achievement , the size of student achievement gains , and the size of the achievement gap .

the discrepancies indicate that student scores on state assessments may be inflated and that these inflated scores may not represent true achievement gains as measured by another test of a similar construct .

in this case , the validity of the inference made from state assessments may be questioned .

one possible way to reduce the problem of score inflation is to consistently use a low - stakes "audit" assessment , such as naep , to corroborate gains on state assessments .

if gains on state assessments generalize to another "audit" assessment , it increases the likelihood that gains are due to true achievement gains .

this type of corroboration may help policymakers separate the policies that lead to true student achievement from those that lead to score inflation .

appendix a. glossary appendix b .

acronym referenc .

