medicare , authorized under title xviii of the social security act , is the nation's health insurance program for persons aged 65 and older and certain disabled persons .

in 2008 , medicare expenditures totaled approximately $468 billion for 45 million beneficiaries .

medicare consists of four distinct parts: parts a , b , c , and d. medicare part a ( hospital insurance ) covers inpatient hospital services , skilled nursing facility services , home health , and hospice services .

medicare part b ( supplementary medical insurance ) covers a variety of other medical services , such as physician visits , outpatient hospital care , laboratory services , and durable medical equipment .

parts a and b constitute the fee - for - service ( ffs ) portion of the program , otherwise known as "original" or "traditional" medicare .

beneficiaries also have the option to enroll in a private part c or medicare advantage ( ma ) plan to receive part a and b benefits , and a private part d or prescription drug plan ( pdp ) for drug coverage .

the agency responsible for administering medicare is the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) at the department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

cms contracts with a variety of private entities to carry out the day - to - day operations of the program , such as paying provider claims , detecting alleged fraud and abuse , and overseeing the quality of care delivered to beneficiaries .

as opposed to specializing in one particular function , these entities are often responsible for performing multiple administrative activities under one contract .

for example , in addition to processing claims , medicare's administrative contractors may enroll providers in the medicare program , educate physicians on appropriate billing practices , adjudicate appeals , and identify and recover improper payments .

an improper payment is any payment that should not have been made or that was made in an incorrect amount .

this includes duplicate payments , payments to ineligible recipients , payments for ineligible services , or payments for services not received .

in medicare , improper payments include both underpayments and overpayments to providers and largely result from provider billing mistakes and inadvertent claims processing errors .

since 1990 , the government accountability office ( gao ) has declared medicare at high risk for improper payments and fraud due to its size , scope , and decentralized administrative structure .

in 2002 , congress enacted the improper payments information act ( ipia , p.l .

107-300 ) , which requires federal agencies to estimate and report an annual amount of improper payments for all programs and activities .

hhs began estimating an error rate for its medicare ffs program in 1996 .

at that time , improper payments totaled an estimated $23.2 billion dollars , or 14.2% of total paid claims .

that same year , congress passed the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa , p.l .

104-191 ) , which included provisions designed to increase and stabilize funding for activities directed at reducing health care fraud and improper payments in federal health programs .

in addition to creating a health care fraud and abuse control ( hcfac ) program , hipaa established the medicare integrity program , or mip , to decrease improper payments in medicare .

since 1996 , the improper payment rate has progressively declined , reaching $10.8 billion , or 3.9% of total paid claims in 2007 .

in the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma , p.l .

108-173 ) congress authorized a demonstration project for recovery audit contractors ( racs ) in parts a and b of the medicare program .

recovery auditing is the term used to describe activities directed at identifying and recovering overpayments .

the legislation required that the secretary enter into contracts with racs for the purpose of identifying medicare overpayments and underpayments , and recouping overpayments for services for which payment is made under parts a and b .

the legislation also granted cms the authority to reimburse racs using contingency fees .

a contingency fee is a negotiated payment , typically a percentage , of every overpayment recovered .

cms conducted the demonstration in five states ( california , florida , massachusetts , new york , and south carolina ) between march 2005 and march 2008 .

over the course of three years , the racs returned $693.6 million in overpayments to the medicare trust funds and corrected a total of $1 billion in improper payments ( overpayments and underpayments ) at a cost of only 20 cents for every dollar collected , a return of 5 to 1 .

prior to the conclusion of the demonstration , congress passed the tax relief and health care act of 2006 ( trhca , p.l .

109-432 ) , which made racs permanent and mandated their expansion nationwide by january 1 , 2010 .

the legislation was passed in december 2006 ; one month after a preliminary status report on the demonstration was released .

the statutory language expanding the rac program required rather than authorized the secretary to reimburse racs using contingency fees .

the legislation also granted the secretary permission to pay racs for identifying underpayments .

additional requirements include stipulations related to deposits of overpayments , audit and recovery periods , contractor qualifications , and a mandate for an annual performance report .

as in the demonstration , racs are not authorized to look for improper payments in the ma or pdp programs .

on october 6 , 2008 , cms announced the national rollout of the permanent program and released the names of the four rac contractors: diversified collection services ( dcs ) , cgi technologies , connolly consulting associates , and health datainsights ( hdi ) .

beginning in march 2009 , the four racs began reviewing claims for select states in approximately one - fourth of the country .

more states will be added to each rac's jurisdiction as the program expands over the next two years .

all providers who receive payment under medicare parts a and b are subject to a rac audit , including inpatient hospitals , physicians , skilled nursing facilities , inpatient rehabilitation facilities , dme suppliers , home health agencies , and other part a or b providers .

the racs were to begin conducting outreach for the permanent program in november 2008 .

however , shortly after announcing the names of the four new racs , cms imposed an automatic stay on the implementation of the nationwide program after two unsuccessful bidders for a rac contract — viant payment systems and prg schultz — filed a protest with the gao .

viant and prg , which served as racs in the demonstration program , have subsequently settled their protest with the agency and are now acting as subcontractors for the permanent racs .

table 1 lists the regions and initial 19 states served by each of the four rac contractors .

to identify improper payments , racs are instructed to use a combination of both automated and complex review processes .

under automated review , there is no human review of the claim or medical record .

computer edits within the claims processing system automatically check claims for evidence of improper coding or mistakes .

racs may use automated review only when the following two conditions are met: ( 1 ) there is certainty that the service is not covered by medicare , and ( 2 ) there exists a written medicare policy , such as a medicare statutory provision , regulation , national or local coverage determination , or manual instruction that specifies the circumstances under which a service will not be covered by medicare .

racs may also use medicare articles or coding guidelines approved by cms to serve as the basis for an automated review .

in the absence of written medicare policy , racs are required to perform complex review .

complex review involves human review of the medical record and other documentation supporting the claim .

racs must use complex review in situations where there is a high probability that the claim contains an overpayment .

they are also instructed to refer to appropriate medical literature and clinical judgment when making complex claim determinations .

although there is no specific requirement that racs consult with physicians when conducting complex review , cms does mandate that racs use nurses and certified coders to review all medical records .

all medicare administrative contractors , including racs , are required to employ one full - time medical director to oversee the claims review process .

although this was not a requirement for the racs during the demonstration program , it has been mandated for the permanent program .

to select claims for review , racs utilize data analysis .

although the actual data analysis techniques used by the contractors is proprietary , the process typically involves examining billing histories of providers to identify unusual or suspicious claims and comparing billing patterns to peers in a provider group to identify aberrancies .

rac contractors are also encouraged to review reports prepared by the hhs office of inspector general ( oig ) and the gao to identify claims likely to contain improper payments .

there are other contractors that review medicare claims for improper payments as part of their administrative responsibilities .

these include medicare administrative contractors ( macs ) , fiscal intermediaries ( fis ) , and carriers ; medicare's comprehensive error rate testing , or cert , contractor ; program safeguard and zone program integrity contractors ( pscs and zpics ) ; and quality improvement organizations or qios .

all of these contractors have the authority to review any claim they suspect may be improper , subject to certain limitations .

an improper payment determination may be made for claims that were incorrectly coded , claims for services that were not medically necessary , claims resulting from incorrect payment amounts , and claims for services that were already provided ( duplicate claims ) .

although the claims review processes followed by racs is relatively similar to that of other medicare contractors , there are some differences .

for example , macs , fis , carriers , pscs , and zpics can review claims prior to payment , otherwise known as pre - payment review .

racs , the cert contractor , and qios can only review claims post - payment .

additionally , the statute and cms have set restrictions on how many years contractors can "look - back" and select claims for review .

these time periods are called "look - back" periods .

unless there is evidence of fraud , medicare regulations prohibit contractors from reviewing claims more than four years past the date the claim was initially paid .

during the demonstration program , the racs were authorized to review claims in accordance with this four - year look - back period .

however , in response to concerns from providers that rac requests for medical records were becoming too burdensome , cms reduced the claim look - back period from four to three years in the permanent program .

medicare's other administrative contractors will still be allowed to look - back four years .

in the permanent program , racs will also be prohibited from reviewing any claim paid prior to october 1 , 2007 .

finally , cms manual instructions direct certain administrative contractors to use physician consultants and other health professionals in the various specialties as necessary to perform complex review of medical documentation .

this is not a requirement for racs .

table 2 highlights the similarities and differences among the various contractor claims review processes .

on july 11 , 2008 , john dingell , chairman of the house energy and commerce committee ; charles rangel , chairman of the house ways and means committee ; pete stark , chairman of the house ways and means subcommittee on health ; frank pallone , chairman of the house energy and commerce subcommittee on health ; and representative lois capps wrote a letter to the gao requesting that the agency undertake a study of the rac program .

as part of its study , the gao will be examining any actions cms is taking to prevent future improper payments in high - risk areas identified during the demonstration as well as the agency's plans for the ongoing monitoring and oversight of its rac contractors .

the oig is also conducting a study of the rac initiative , which is expected to be completed in march 2010 .

improper payments pose a significant risk to medicare .

in fy2010 , medicare spending is expected to exceed $500 billion for approximately 47 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries .

excluding improper payments in the part c and d programs , overpayments in medicare ffs amount to over $10 billion annually .

historically , cms has relied on its claims administration contractors to reduce improper payments in the medicare program .

however , shortly after hhs began reporting the first medicare improper payment rate in 1996 , concerns surrounding the contractors' effectiveness at safeguarding the program began to emerge .

as noted by various experts , at least one contributing factor to the perceived weakness in this area was budget constraints and the lack of incentives for contractors to direct specific efforts at reducing payment errors .

prior to the mma , which mandated contracting reform , medicare statute precluded cms from offering financial incentives to its contractors to improve performance .

contractors were paid under cost - based contracts , which prohibited them from making a profit .

additionally , these entities were evaluated based on their ability to pay claims quickly and efficiently and not necessarily accurately .

therefore the rac program , which authorizes the use of payment incentives to reimburse contractors , could be viewed as an opportunity for cms to enhance its program integrity efforts .

on the other hand , paying contractors a fee for every improper payment they identify and recover has many policymakers and provider groups concerned .

results from the demonstration showed that while the racs were successful in returning millions of dollars to the medicare trust funds , some of their audits were inaccurate and overly burdensome for providers , raising questions about cms's oversight of the program .

the agency has since made a number of changes to the permanent program to mitigate some of these concerns , such as requiring racs to return all contingency fees for overpayments overturned on appeal , hiring a validation contractor to review rac audits , and setting limits on the number of medical records racs can request from providers at one time .

however , anxiety among providers remains .

as the roll - out of the permanent program unfolds , results of the upcoming gao and oig evaluations will likely be critical to helping policymakers assess the pros and cons of using recovery audit contractors in medicare .

