initially , as domestic pork sales fell in response to the spread of the h1n1 flu , futures prices for corn , soybeans , and wheat declined sharply .

this was a result of concerns that lower pork demand and production could reduce demand for other commodities , including u.s. feed grains and protein meals ( like soybeans ) , as well as other farm inputs .

there were also fears that reduced demand for pork would have adverse ripple effects throughout the hog sector , resulting in production changes as producers respond to lower prices .

analysts predicted that feed prices would likely continue to be volatile , but difficult to anticipate .

for example , grains prices have moved higher since their initial drop following early reports of the outbreak .

in other livestock markets , wholesale beef and cattle futures prices were initially higher following reports of the outbreak .

the u.s. produce sector also expressed concerns about possible restrictions on fresh produce trade with mexico and the processing of agricultural guest labor workers from mexico because of the 2009 h1n1 outbreak , but these fears so far have not materialized .

initial reports of the aggregate economic effects of h1n1 on the farming sector — especially on u.s. hog producers — were grim .

however , as time has passed and the general economic downturn in the u.s. hog industry has deepened , it has become difficult to separate out the economic effects of h1n1 from generally unfavorable market conditions in the u.s. hog sector .

early estimates by analysts at the university of missouri estimated that the u.s. pork industry could see losses of up to $400 million in the months following initial reports of the outbreak , given expected lower market prices .

in its may 2009 outlook report , usda revised its second - quarter hog prices downward to reflect lower prices in april due to the negative effects of h1n1 flu virus .

in june 2009 , ustr reported updated estimates by the university of missouri , indicating that the u.s. pork industry could face losses of about $270 million in income in the second quarter of 2009 alone , based on market conditions in the first few days since the virus was identified .

more recent estimates , however , indicate that the economic effect of the h1n1 virus has not been as negative as some analysts had predicted .

pork producers in the united states began to see a downturn in u.s. pork markets in late 2007 .

following years of favorable returns in 2004-2006 , the domestic industry began to expand and eventually pushed up slaughter rates to record levels in 2008 .

at the same time , pork prices started to decline while feed costs and other production input costs were rising .

starting in 2008 , the worldwide economic downturn resulted in a decrease in meat demand .

the h1n1 outbreak compounded this already worsening situation , and newly imposed trade restrictions in u.s. export markets , particularly in russia and china , only further strained demand for u.s. pork products .

at the same time , despite industry efforts to downsize and reduce sow numbers , increased herd productivity and efficiency gains — given higher litter rates and also higher slaughter weights owing to favorable weather over the summer of 2009 — kept overall production volumes stable and put downward pressure on prices .

in part because of the surplus situation , in may 2008 and march 2009 , usda announced that it would purchase $50 million and $25 million , respectively , in pork products for federal food and nutrition assistance programs .

subsequent usda pork product purchases followed later in 2009 .

following the h1n1 outbreak , usda predicted that prices would recover and did not alter its outlook for hog prices during the second half of 2009 , based on expectations that market disruptions from trade restrictions and consumer concerns would be short - lived .

in mid - june , smithfield foods company reported that , although it remained concerned about restrictions on international markets , the company believed that h1n1 had had "only a short - term effect on u.s. fresh pork demand," with "no significant effect on the quarter" based on the company's consolidated income statement .

in august , representatives for smithfield reiterated that quarterly returns would be favorable despite existing hog market conditions that are expected to persist until may 2010 .

usda also predicted pork prices would remain low through 2009 .

market forecasts for 2010 indicate that u.s. hog producers should fare better and might at least break even during the year , as market prices are expected to be near or close to production costs .

u.s. pork exports for may and june 2009 were reportedly 31% - 36% lower , respectively , compared to the same period for 2008 , which also coincided with a time of record high u.s. pork exports .

usmef reported that , overall , "april pork exports were not down as much as had been predicted," particularly given the continued economic downturn .

preliminary estimates indicate that , overall , total 2009 pork export volumes were roughly 12% below that for 2008 , which was a record year for u.s. pork exports .

nevertheless , at an october 2009 house agriculture subcommittee hearing on the economic conditions facing the u.s. pork industry , both administration and industry officials acknowledged the economic effects on the sector from reduced exports and trade restrictions because of concerns about the h1n1 flu virus .

exports in 2010 are expected to be much higher , although slightly below 2008 record levels .

overall , analysts predicted that 2009 h1n1 would have less of an impact on the pork industry than bse had on the beef industry in 2003 or avian influenza on the poultry industry in 2005-2006 .

analysts with world perspectives , inc. , noted that although pork prices have declined , supplies are also lower than last year , and it was unclear whether pork sales had actually decreased following the outbreak .

in other markets , analysts at the university of illinois highlighted that "grains have had quite a rally in prices , after the market's initial 'knee - jerk' reaction," although pork prices continued to be lower .

among meat packers , analysts predicted that the trade restrictions would have less of an effect on larger diversified companies , such as cargill inc. and jbs s.a. , but could affect single - product firms such as national beef packing company and companies already operating under financial distress , such as pilgrims pride .

the ongoing economic crisis in the u.s. hog sector , coupled with potentially negative effects of the h1n1 virus , remains a concern to the sector .

in may 2009 , nppc sent a letter to usda to request assistance for the u.s. pork industry to compensate for losses it says it has incurred since the 2009 h1n1 outbreak .

specifically , nppc asked usda to implement a purchase program for $50 million of pork products to help boost cash hog prices ; to work with u.s. trading partners to remove all restrictions on exports of u.s. pork and pork products ; to develop a comprehensive surveillance program for early detection of swine diseases ; and to work to keep open the border between the united states and canada to allow for movement of hogs .

again , in august , nppc asked usda for up to $250 million in support for usda pork purchases and for other assistance .

also in august , another group of producer organizations , including the producers livestock marketing association , the national farmers organization , and the allied producers cooperative , asked usda to consider a $200 million federally funded sow buy - out program to reduce pork supplies .

in september 2009 , usda announced it would purchase another $30 million in pork products .

at that time , usda claimed it has purchased "approximately $151 million in pork products for food and nutrition assistance programs this year. .

in november 2009 , usda announced it would purchase another $50 million in pork products for domestic nutrition programs .

these actions are largely intended to "help stabilize prices and markets , stimulate the economy , and provide high quality food to americans in need of usda's nutrition assistance programs. .

