the 12 th amendment to the constitution provides backup , or standby , procedures by which the house of representatives would elect the president , and the senate the vice president , in the event no candidate wins a majority of electoral votes .

although this procedure , known as contingent election , has been implemented only once for each offic e since the amendment's ratification , the failure to win an electoral college majority is theoretically possible in any presidential election .

some contingencies that might lead to an electoral college deadlock include: an election that is closely contested by two major candidates , leading to a tie vote in the electoral college ; one in which multiple candidates gain electoral votes so that no candidate wins a majority ; or an election where a number of electors sufficient to deny a majority to any candidate votes against the candidates to whom they are pledged .

any one of these developments would require congress to consider and discharge functions of great constitutional significance .

moreover , the magnitude of these responsibilities might well be further highlighted by the fact that an electoral college deadlock would arguably lead to a period of protracted and contentious political struggle .

this report examines constitutional requirements and historical precedents associated with the contingent election process .

it also identifies and evaluates contemporary issues that might emerge in the modern context .

the 12 th amendment to the u.s. constitution , with its provisions for contingent election , was proposed by congress and ratified by the states in response to the constitutional crisis that marred the presidential election of 1800 and threatened the still - new american system of government under the constitution .

as noted previously , congress has conducted contingent elections twice since the 12 th amendment was ratified .

the first instance occurred in 1825 , following the presidential election of 1824 .

in this election , four candidates split the electoral vote for president , requiring contingent election in the house of representatives .

in the second case , the senate elected the vice president in 1837 , when no candidate for the second office received a majority of electoral votes in the 1836 election .

rules governing contingent election of the president in the house of representatives may be divided into two categories: constitutional requirements and procedures adopted by the house to "flesh out" the rules for its 1825 contingent election .

in addition , the house in 1825 made certain other procedural decisions that were not dictated by the 12 th amendment .

the 12 th amendment's requirements for contingent election of the vice president are less complex than those for the house in the case of the president .

it prescribes only the quorum necessary to conduct the election , two - thirds of the whole number of senators ( 67 of 100 at present , assuming there are no vacancies ) , and the margin necessary to elect the vice president , a majority of the whole number of senators ( 51 at present , again assuming there are no vacancies ) .

some constitutional requirements for the house do not appear in contingent election procedures for the senate .

for instance , there is no requirement that the senate vote "by ballot. .

in 1837 , the senate decided that the election would be by voice vote — viva voce .

the roll was called in alphabetical order , at which time each senator named the person for whom he voted .

further , there is no language requiring the senate to vote "immediately," to the exclusion of other business .

in 1837 , this presented no problem , as the likely result was known well in advance , and richard mentor johnson was elected with a comfortable majority .

it is unclear whether the senate conducted its 1837 contingent election behind closed doors , but neither the senate journal nor the register of debates in congress entries for the session stated that the gallery was closed , so it may be assumed that spectators from the house and the general public were present .

it is also interesting to note that president pro tempore william r. king , rather than outgoing vice president martin van buren , presided over the 1837 contingent election .

van buren had "retired" from duties as president of the senate on january 28 , 1837 .

the contingent election process was modified twice in the 20 th century , first by the 20 th amendment to the constitution , which took effect in 1933 , and later by the presidential succession act of 1947 .

almost two centuries have passed since the house of representatives last elected a president of the united states , and nearly as long since contingent election of a vice president .

what are some of the factors the house or senate might consider should either chamber — or both — be called on to perform this function in the contemporary context ? .

the 12 th amendment , as noted earlier , imposes fewer procedural demands on the senate in its language establishing contingent election of the vice president than it does on the house of representatives .

the comparative simplicity of the process would thus arguably require fewer process - driven decisions by the senate if it were called on to elect a vice president today .

as noted earlier in this report , in 1837 , the roll was called and the senators declared their preference viva voce — by voice vote .

further , it is likely that the proceedings were open to the public , since neither the register of debates in congress nor the journal of the senate provides any indication that the galleries were cleared , or that the senate otherwise met in closed session .

for the senate , therefore , historical precedent appears to support , but does not mandate , a voice vote in open session .

in the senate , proposals relating to procedures for contingent election of the vice president would likely be referred to the committee on rules and administration .

under the rules of the senate , this committee has jurisdiction over both "congressional ... rules and procedures , and senate rules and regulations , including floor ... rules," and "federal elections generally , including the election of the president [and] vice president.... " the senate customarily refers each measure in its entirety to the committee with predominant jurisdiction over the subjects in the legislation .

as in the house , the senate committee on the judiciary has jurisdiction over constitutional amendments , and would presumably receive proposals for constitutional change in this area .

during the 108 th through 110 th congresses , constitutional amendments were proposed that would have changed house of representatives voting in a contingent election of the president .

in addition , contingent election has traditionally figured indirectly in most proposals to reform the electoral college or establish direct popular election .

direct popular election would eliminate contingent election and effectively repeal the 12 th amendment with respect to changing contingent election , the most recent proposals were introduced in the 110 th congress by representative brad sherman ( h.j.res .

73 ) , and representative virgil h. goode jr. ( h.j.res .

75 ) .

both resolutions proposed a fundamental change in contingent election of the president .

instead of each state casting one vote , each representative would cast a vote .

the person receiving the greatest number of votes would be elected , provided that this number constituted a majority of votes cast .

the only difference between the two proposals centered on quorum requirements for the house in contingent election sessions .

h.j.res .

73 would have changed the 12 th amendment's quorum , "a member or members from two - thirds of the states" to "a majority of the house. .

by comparison , h.j.res .

75 proposed a higher threshold for contingent election: "two thirds of the members of the house shall constitute a quorum. .

the evident purpose of these provisions was to ensure that a majority ( h.j.res .

73 ) or a super majority ( h.j.res .

75 ) would be present for a contingent election .

the 12 th amendment's existing quorum requirement of a member or members from two - thirds of the states is markedly less rigorous ; in fact , it would be theoretically possible to hold a contingent election session under the present arrangements with as few as 34 members present .

the argument favoring this change is straightforward: since contingent election of the president is one of the most constitutionally significant functions assigned to the house of representatives , it is appropriate that the largest possible number of members be present for this session .

perhaps the most important element in both proposals was the proposed elimination of state equality in the contingent election process for the president .

instead of each state casting a single vote , each representative would cast one vote .

the change in comparative state voting power in a contingent election would be dramatic .

for instance , wyoming and california , respectively the nation's least and most populous states , would no longer cast one vote each ; instead , under the proposed formula , wyoming would cast one vote in a contingent election , but california would cast 53 , one for each member of its house of representatives delegation .

the argument here is that the change in formula would be more democratic , reflecting the great differences in population among the states .

arguments against these proposed amendments could center on the assertion that either one would weaken the federal nature of the existing contingent election process , in which each state casts a single vote .

moreover , it might be noted the contingent election process for both executive officers is roughly symmetrical , with all states having the same weight in election of the president in the house and the vice president in the senate .

why , they might ask , change the formula for election of the president , while that for the vice president remains unchanged ? .

logic , they might assert , suggests that the same population - based formula be established for the contingent election of both executive officers .

both h.j.res .

73 and h.j.res .

75 were referred to the house committee on the judiciary , but no further action was take on either measure before the 110 th congress adjourned .

no similar proposal has been introduced since that time .

american presidential elections have generally been dominated by two major parties since the early 19 th century , with major party candidates for president and vice president having won a majority of electoral votes in every election since 1836 .

a popular third party or independent candidacy , however , has always had the potential of disrupting this traditional rhythm .

while they seldom have a realistic expectation of winning the presidency , such efforts carry with them the potential for denying either major party ticket a majority in the electoral college .

such candidacies have , in fact , emerged in four presidential elections since 1968 .

another possibility involved the contest over election results in florida in the closely fought 2000 presidential election ; the extended political struggle about which candidate won the state raised the possibility that its electoral votes might be challenged and excluded by congress , an action that would have denied either candidate a majority of electoral votes , thus requiring contingent election .

under either of the scenarios cited above , the house and senate could be called on to choose the president and vice president in some future election .

barring any comprehensive reform of the existing arrangements , a contingent election would be governed by the provisions of the 12 th amendment and such other supplementary procedures as the house and senate would establish .

rules adopted for past contingent elections would offer guidance , but would not be considered binding in any future contingent election .

as previously noted , constitutional amendments that would substitute direct popular election and thus eliminate the contingent election process were regularly introduced in congress through the first decade of the 21 st century , but these experienced the fate of the vast majority of proposed amendments: assignment to the appropriate committee , and then , oblivion .

by design of the founders , the constitution is not easily amended ; the stringent requirements include passage by two - thirds vote in both chambers of congress , followed by approval by three - fourths of the states , generally within a seven - year time frame .

these constraints have meant that successful amendments are usually the products of several factors , including , but not limited to the following: a broad national consensus , arrived at after lengthy debate , sometimes measured in decades , that an amendment is necessary and desirable , eg , the 17 th amendment ( direct election of senators ) , and the 24 th amendment ( the 18-year - old vote ) ; or an equally broad , but in this case urgent , consensus demanding a response to a galvanizing event or events , eg , the 12 th amendment itself , and the 25 th amendment ( providing for presidential succession and disability , in the wake of the 1963 assassination of president john f. kennedy ) ; and the active and persistent support and guidance of prominent members , relevant committee chairs , and chamber leaders in both houses of congress .

the time and energy of congress is limited , and the institution must pick and choose from among the most pressing demands for its attention .

would - be constitutional amendments sharing one or more of the characteristics noted above are far more likely to reach "critical mass," and meet the political and constitutional hurdles faced by such proposals .

failing in that , it seems more likely that existing provisions , such as contingent election , which has been unused since 1837 , will remain unaltered unless or until their alleged failings become so compelling that the necessarily large majorities among the public and in congress and the states are prepared to undertake reform .

