the congressional budget act establishes the budget resolution as a central coordinating mechanism for budgetary decision making .

the budget resolution creates enforceable parameters with which spending , revenue , and debt legislation must be consistent .

it is not a law .

it is not signed by the president nor can it be vetoed .

instead , its purpose is to establish a framework within which congress considers legislation dealing with spending and revenue .

the budget resolution is not intended to establish details of spending or revenue policy .

instead , details of such policy , and legislative language to implement it , are to be included in legislation reported from the committees with legislative jurisdiction subsequent to the adoption of the budget resolution .

all spending or revenue legislation reported from legislative committees , however , is expected to be consistent with the levels and priorities agreed to in the budget resolution .

the spending policies in the budget resolution encompass two types of spending legislation: discretionary spending and direct ( or mandatory ) spending .

discretionary spending is controlled through the appropriations process .

appropriations legislation is considered annually for the fiscal year beginning october 1 .

appropriations legislation provides funding for numerous activities such as national defense , education , and homeland security , as well as general government operations .

direct spending , alternately , is provided for in legislation outside of appropriations acts .

direct spending programs are typically established in permanent law that continue in effect until such time as they are revised or terminated by another law .

the actual annual cost of direct spending is not determined by congress .

it is instead dictated by formulas within the legislation providing for the program .

the overall cost of a program depends on the eligibility requirements and benefits set forth in the legislation .

these criteria determine who will be eligible to receive benefits and how much benefit they will receive .

only by altering these formulas can congress adjust how much money will be spent .

the budget resolution sets forth levels for new budget authority , outlays , revenue , and public debt for the budget year and four outyears .

the levels in the budget resolution deal with aggregates , not programmatic spending details .

assumptions concerning some major programs may be discussed in the reports accompanying the budget resolution , but these assumptions are not in the form of legislative language and are not binding on the committee of jurisdiction .

the house budget resolution provided for revenue levels of $2,328 billion and outlays of $3,550 billion in fy2010 , differing slightly from the senate budget resolution levels of $2,288 billion in revenues and $3,534 billion in outlays .

the house budget resolution also included reconciliation instructions to allow for health care and education initiatives , while the senate did not include any reconciliation instructions .

there were some other differences in the house and senate budget resolutions , including assumptions regarding future legislation concerning estate tax rates and the number of years for which the alternative minimum tax ( amt ) would be patched , as well as the number of reserve funds .

a budget resolution conference agreement was filed on april 27 , 2009 and included $2,322 billion in revenues and $3,555 billion in outlays for fy2010 , resulting in a projected deficit of $1,233 billion .

by fy2014 , the budget resolution cuts the projected deficit by half to $523 billion .

the conference agreement passed both the house and senate on april 29 , 2009 .

the budget resolution includes programmatic totals broken out by 21 functional categories .

though these amounts are non - binding , these funds are later allocated to house and senate committees in order to create department and programmatic spending totals for the upcoming fiscal year .

an amount of $130 billion in new budget authority is provided for overseas deployment and other activities ( i.e. , war costs ) .

rather than including levels of spending for specific agencies or programs , the budget resolution establishes congressional priorities by dividing spending among the 21 major functional categories of the federal budget .

these 21 functional categories do not correspond to the committee system by which congress operates .

as a result , the spending levels in the 21 functional categories are allocated , or "crosswalked," to the house and senate committees having jurisdiction over discretionary spending ( appropriations committees ) and direct spending ( legislative committees ) .

these "crosswalked" totals appear in the joint explanatory statement of the conference report on the budget resolution and are referred to as 302 ( a ) allocations .

these 302 ( a ) amounts hold committees accountable for staying within the spending limits established by the budget resolution .

spending allocations may be revised subsequent to the adoption of the budget resolution if provided for in the budget resolution .

congress frequently includes provisions referred to as "reserve funds" in the annual budget resolution , which provide the chairs of the house and senate budget committees the authority to adjust the committee spending allocations if certain conditions are met .

typically these conditions consist of legislation dealing with a particular policy being reported by the appropriate committee or an amendment dealing with that policy being offered on the floor .

once this action has taken place , the budget committee chairman submits the adjustment to his respective chamber .

title iii of s.con.res .

13 is composed of 34 reserve funds , 20 of which appear under subtitle a and apply only to the senate .

there are 14 reserve funds in subtitle b that apply only to the house .

these reserve funds include policies such as education , energy , healthcare , and tax relief .

all of the reserve funds in s.con.res .

13 require that the net budgetary impact of the specified legislation be deficit neutral .

deficit - neutral reserve funds provide that a committee may report legislation with spending in excess of its allocations , but require the excess amounts be "offset" by equivalent amounts .

the budget committee chairman may then increase the committee spending allocations by the appropriate amounts to prevent a point of order under section 302 of the budget act .

in addition to the senate discretionary spending limit described above , title iv of s.con.res .

13 includes a number of provisions concerning budget enforcement .

these provisions include limit on advance appropriations , emergency spending , legislation increasing the short term deficit and legislation related to surface transportation funds .

