in april 2009 , a novel influenza virus began to spread around the world .

early in the outbreak , public reports referred to the virus as "swine flu," which reflected the dominant genetic makeup of the unknown disease .

at the end of april , the world health organization ( who ) formally named the disease and explained how the disease emerged: pigs can be infected by avian ( bird ) , human , and swine ( pig ) influenza ( flu ) viruses .

when flu viruses from different species infect pigs simultaneously , the viruses can reassort ( swap genes ) and new viruses that are a mix of swine , human or avian flu viruses can emerge .

this type of reassortment has already happened in pigs ; avian and human genes have been circulating among swine in the united states since 1998 .

this type of reassortment can also occur in humans .

the currently circulating influenza a ( h1n1 ) virus is such a reassortment , composed of genes of swine , avian and human origin .

this particular combination had not been seen in humans or in swine .

the origin of this reassortment , and when and where it happened , is not known .

this virus is now being transmitted from human to human in a sustained manner .

the role of swine in the emergence of this virus is under investigation .

who refers to the virus as influenza a ( h1n1 ) .

the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) and other administration officials refer to it as 2009 h1n1 flu .

throughout this report , the virus is referred to as h1n1 .

the virus does not appear to be as lethal as h5n1 avian influenza — which reemerged in 2005 — but is slightly more lethal than seasonal flu .

although h1n1 has spread enough to be characterized as a pandemic , researchers are not yet sure how virulent the virus will become .

most countries , with the exception of china , have adhered to the who recommendation against banning international travel or closing borders .

china has reportedly quarantined and prevented a number of mexican nationals , including those living in china at the time of the outbreak , from traveling .

mexico reportedly responded by barring all flights to china until "concerns about discrimination were addressed. .

though no other country has reportedly quarantined mexican nationals or any other citizens from countries with outbreaks , some countries have warned against nonessential travel to the united states and mexico .

on april 27 , 2009 , the european union health commissioner androulla vassiliou reportedly urged europeans to postpone nonessential travel to the united states and mexico .

on the same day , the cdc recommended that u.s. travelers avoid all nonessential travel to mexico .

on may 15 , 2009 , it downgraded the recommendation to a "travel health precaution. .

in defending the decision not to close u.s. borders with mexico , homeland security secretary janet napolitano testified at an april 29 , 2009 , senate homeland security committee hearing that "closing the border [to mexico] would yield only very marginal benefits ; at the same time , closing the border has very high costs .

the strain of the virus that was first detected in mexico is already present throughout the united states , and there is no realistic opportunity to contain the virus through border closures , so our focus must now be on mitigating the virus. .

closing u.s. borders could involve a series of legal and logistical issues .

a number of countries have reportedly installed or are in the process of installing "thermal ( temperature ) scanners" in airports to detect the body temperature of travelers and further screen those whose body temperature exceed 100 degrees fahrenheit .

there is some debate , however , on the effectiveness of such measures .

several countries have instituted actions to prevent the spread of h1n1 among animals .

egypt is reportedly the first country to order the slaughter of pigs , though pigs have not yet been identified as a source of human transmission .

several countries have also banned the import of pork and pork products from the united states , canada , and mexico .

on may 1 , 2009 , usaid established the pandemic influenza response management team — composed of its bureaus of global health and democracy , conflict , and humanitarian assistance — to coordinate the u.s. humanitarian response to h1n1 outbreaks .

as of may 18 , 2009 , the united states has provided more than $16 million to assist countries in latin america and the caribbean respond to h1n1 outbreaks .

u.s. aid focuses on h1n1 specifically , and builds on influenza pandemic preparedness efforts that began in earnest after the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) outbreak .

u.s. responses to global h1n1 outbreaks are conducted mostly by cdc and the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) , though the department of defense ( dod ) has also provided support ( table 1 ) .

foreign assistance efforts largely focus on commodity delivery and disease detection and surveillance .

in addition to the support listed above , usaid announced on may 27 , 2009 , that it had donated "4,000 personal protection equipment ( ppe ) kits to vietnam and 100 boxes of biodegradable powder — enough to produce over 20,000 liters of disinfectant to help animal health workers respond quickly to potential new outbreaks of avian or h1n1 influenza. .

the kits — valued at over $57,000 — can be used in response to h5n1 bird flu or h1n1 outbreaks .

infectious diseases are estimated to cause more than 25% of all deaths around the world .

a number of infectious disease outbreaks over the past decade , such as h5n1 avian influenza and severe acute respiratory syndrome ( sars ) , have heightened concerns about how infectious diseases might threaten global security .

most recently , the emergence of influenza a h1n1 has demonstrated the threat that infectious diseases pose .

it is important to note that about 75% of the diseases that have emerged over the past decades have originated from animals .

as a result , effective responses to the growing threat of infectious diseases require a multidisciplinary approach that brings together stakeholders from a variety of sectors , including agricultural and animal health .

investments that the united states and other international players have made to prepare for a possible influenza pandemic , and to monitor the spread of other infectious diseases , have been applied to the most recent global response to h1n1 .

while health experts have made considerable gains against the disease — including developing strain specific tests that are capable of identifying h1n1 , identifying and distributing effective treatments against the disease , and utilizing a global surveillance system — other questions remain .

some health experts are concerned that some of the poorer countries may not yet have the capacity to sufficiently monitor and respond to h1n1 .

others warn that it is too early to become complacent about h1n1 , as transmission of influenza viruses tend to accelerate in winter months .

countries in the southern hemisphere are only beginning to enter their winter season and are beginning to report cases .

questions still remain about whether the virus could change or reassort its genes , particularly should outbreaks in countries simultaneously contending with h5n1 bird flu cases occur ( such as egypt , vietnam , and indonesia ) .

the section below raises some questions that health experts are considering about the global spread of h1n1 .

in may 2009 , there was vigorous debate about whether who should maintain its pandemic influenza phase system , which reflects the spread of the virus and transmission patterns , not severity .

some argued that who should develop an alert system that is based on severity .

supporters of this idea asserted that the public might not understand that widespread death may not occur at the highest pandemic phase level .

critics of the system , including some european leaders , warned that if who raised the pandemic threat level to phase 6 , panic might ensue and considerable economic and social disruptions may occur .

other health experts maintained that recent cases of sustained human - to - human transmission of h1n1 in japan justified raising the pandemic threat level to phase 6 .

on june 11 , 2009 , who raised the pandemic phase level from 5 to 6 .

while announcing her decision , director general margaret chan underscored that the shift did not reflect a change in severity .

who also released a pandemic influenza preparedness and response guide that was updated and replaced its 2005 guide .

among other changes , the update "retained the six - phase structure , but regrouped and redefined the phases to more accurately reflect pandemic risk and the epidemiological situation based upon observable phenomena. .

the update also outlines steps governments should take in planning and preparing for an epidemic ( table a - 2 ) .

u.s. agencies have recognized the threat of infectious diseases , particularly zoonotic ones that have their origins in animals .

usaid announced in april 2009 that it would launch a new five - year emerging pandemic threats program in october 2009 .

the program will be conducted in collaboration with cdc and usda to support the development of a global early warning system for the threat posed by diseases of animal origin that infect humans , such as sars , h5n1 , and hiv / aids .

usaid expects that a significant proportion of the funds will be used to invest in establishing a network of laboratories within africa specifically intended to improve the ability to diagnose , both within animal and human populations , new emergent pathogens .

usaid did not specify , however , how much will be provided for this effort or how extensive it will be .

some observers are concerned that south africa is the only sub - saharan country to have confirmed any cases human cases of h1n1 human cases .

with the exception of south africa ( and to a certain extent botswana ) , laboratory and surveillance systems in sub - saharan africa are in relatively poor condition .

some experts suggest that the absence of case reports from most african countries reflects limited public health and surveillance capacity , not a true absence of disease .

although there is consensus that laboratory and disease surveillance capacity is weak in most african countries , cdc , usaid , and other international health experts have been working to improve those systems .

cdc has sent h1n1 testing kits to 237 laboratories in 107 countries , including 18 in africa .

countries without the kits send viral samples to one of four who collaborating centers in atlanta , britain , japan , and australia .

the ability of poor countries to purchase treatments and vaccines against diseases has been a debatable issue for some time .

arguments about access were raised when hiv / aids transmission was at its peak and many countries could not afford patented treatments .

discussions about access resurfaced at the peak of global h5n1 avian flu outbreaks .

indonesia intermittently sent viral samples to who , citing concerns that once a vaccine was developed , poorer countries would be unable to afford them or wealthier producing countries would hoard the vaccines .

some have raised similar concerns again with the recent h1n1 outbreaks .

the link between access , poverty and health have been well - documented .

usaid estimates that about 30% of the world's population lacks regular access to medicines and more than 50% of the poorest areas in africa and asia lack access .

who estimates that more that 90% of the global capacity to develop influenza vaccines is located in europe and in north america .

with the bulk of capacity to develop and purchase treatments and vaccines concentrated in richer countries , poorer countries rely on the generosity of donor countries .

some are concerned that should a pandemic arise , richer countries will hoard treatments and vaccines for their populations .

in addition to questions of access , others raise concern about the capacity of poorer countries to effectively administer mass vaccination and treatment campaigns .

who reported that it would not conduct mass h1n1 vaccination campaigns should a vaccine be developed .

instead , the organization expects that national authorities will undertake such efforts .

some argue that countries that are already incapable of administering routine vaccines will be unlikely to successfully undertake such an effort .

according to the most recent estimates compiled in 2002 , some 1.4 million of deaths among children under five years of age were due to diseases that could have been prevented by routine vaccination .

this represents 14% of total global mortality in children under five years of age .

health experts — including the who — are concerned that other factors could alter the severity of the h1n1 strain currently circulating the globe .

one concern raised is the possibility of having strains of h5n1 bird flu and h1n1 circulating in the same area .

this could allow the two flu strains to reassort ( i.e. , intermix their genes ) to create yet another strain with the potential to cause human illness .

concerns about the likelihood that h5n1 might cause an influenza pandemic began in january 2004 , when thailand and viet nam reported their first human cases of avian influenza .

health experts were particularly concerned about h5n1 outbreaks , because all prerequisites for the start of a pandemic were met except one: efficient human - to - human transmission .

the human cases were directly linked to historically unprecedented outbreaks of highly pathogenic h5n1 avian influenza in poultry that began in 2003 and rapidly affected eight asian nations .

by 2006 , about 50 countries worldwide had confirmed outbreaks of h5n1 bird flu among its animal and human populations .

in 2008 and 2009 , six countries reported human h5n1 cases , though the disease has apparently become endemic in asia .

health experts are closely watching whether countries contending with ongoing h5n1 cases begin to experience h1n1 cases .

of the six countries that reported human h5n1 cases in 2008 and 2009 , only indonesia and cambodia have not reported h1n1 cases .

h5n1 bird flu kills about 60% of humans who contract the virus .

while h5n1 is more virulent than h1n1 , it is not as easily transmissible .

most human deaths of h5n1 have occurred after direct contact with a sick bird , while animals have not yet been identified as a source of transmission for h1n1 .

