the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) has a long relationship with the department of defense ( dod ) to facilitate correspondence and the exchange of gifts between service personnel and their families .

post offices throughout the country accept mail and packages for military personnel and deliver these items to military installations in the united states .

overseas military mail delivery is somewhat more complicated .

the usps delivers mail and packages to usps gateway sites in new york , newark , san francisco , miami , and chicago .

domestic postage covers the cost of this service .

the cost of transporting the mail from those sites to overseas army / air force post offices ( apos ) and fleet post offices ( fpos ) that serve members of the armed forces is borne by the military mail service .

for mailers , then , the postage is subsidized — they pay only the domestic portion of the cost .

when the armed forces are engaged in combat or other dangerous activities , the president has the authority to permit service members to send personal correspondence , free of charge , to places within the delivery limits of a u.s. post office ( 39 u.s.c .

3401 ( a ) ( 1 ) ) .

this privilege is currently available to service members in iraq , afghanistan , and certain surrounding countries and seas , and to service personnel hospitalized in a military facility as a consequence of service in the designated areas .

the dod pays the usps for the costs of delivering this mail from the u.s. gateway sites to any domestic address .

free mail must have a complete apo or fpo return address and the word "free" written in the upper right corner with an apo or fpo postmark .

however , citizens of the united states have never been authorized to send mail to service members , whether overseas or not , without paying postage .

it is the case that the government created "v - mail" as a means for americans to correspond with members of the armed forces during world war ii .

but only members of the armed forces could send v - mail free of postage .

families and friends had to pay postage at the standard rates of the day .

those wishing to send written correspondence to members of the armed forces overseas currently pay postage between $0.44 and $3.28 per letter ( 1 to 13 ounces ) .

someone wishing to send a package will pay the standard domestic package postage rates , which are calculated on a range of factors , including package size , shape , and weight .

alternatively , a mailer may take advantage of the discounted apo / fpo priority mail flat - rate box .

the usps offers "free military kits" to military families who want to send packages overseas .

the mailing kits can be ordered by phone by calling 1-800-610-8734 and asking for the care kit .

each kit includes two priority mail boxes , six priority mail flat - rate boxes , eight priority mail labels , one roll of priority mail tape and eight customs forms with envelopes .

a sender must pay postage of $12.95 , a discount of $2 off the standard postage , for each 12" by 12" by 5" box .

representative peter king introduced h.r .

1935 , the supply our soldiers act of 2011 , on may 23 , 2011 .

it was referred to the house committee on armed services .

h.r .

1935 would establish a postage benefit for members of the armed services on active duty in iraq or afghanistan , and for individuals who are "hospitalized at a facility under the jurisdiction of the armed forces of the united states as a result of a disease or injury incurred as a result of service in iraq or afghanistan," provide a beneficiary with one coupon or voucher per month , which he or she could give to anyone who wished to send a letter of no more than 13 ounces or a parcel of no more than 15 pounds ; and authorize an appropriation to the dod to cover the cost of this program to the usps .

funding is "not to exceed $75 million for the total period beginning with fiscal year 2012 and ending with fiscal year 2017. .

h.r .

1935 is nearly identical to bills introduced in previous congresses by representative king — h.r .

704 ( 111 th congress ) and h.r .

1439 ( 110 th congress ) .

legislation to establish a free - mail - to - troops postage benefit has been introduced in the 109 th , 110 th , and 111 th congresses .

none of the bills were enacted .

the recent postage benefit bills prompt at least two observations and four questions .

 ( 1 ) it is unclear whether any concerns exist about the voucher - type free postage proposals .

as indicated above , during the 109 th , 110 th , and 111 th congresses , measures advanced but were not enacted .

in each instance , the house bill carried the free postage benefit , and the senate bill did not .

the conference committee reports did not elaborate on why the senate version was preferred , and the congressional research service has not located any published accounts that detail any objections to these postage benefit bills .

 ( 2 ) it is unclear how much a free - mail - to - troops postage benefit would cost annually .

only one of the aforementioned bills was scored — the cbo scored the final version of h.r .

923 ( 109 th congress ) , at $30 million for the 2006 calendar year , "including $17 million for postage , and $13 million for the dod's transportation and administrative costs. .

 ( 1 ) none of the free postage for troops bills described the means through which the dod was to provide postage vouchers to military personnel overseas ; nor did the bills describe how these individuals would transfer these vouchers to family members or friends back in the united states .

rather , legislation has required the dod to devise the means for administering the benefit .

 ( the cbo's scoring of h.r .

923 during the 109 th congress , it should be noted , did not include an estimate of the costs of either voucher distribution to military personnel or voucher transference to persons in the united states. ) .

should legislation provide guidance or direction for this aspect of implementation ? .

 ( 2 ) what precautions would be adopted to ensure that vouchers were not counterfeited ? .

is there any risk that individuals could sell or trade postage vouchers for cash ? .

 ( 3 ) recent bills would have permitted a voucher to be used either to send correspondence or a package .

as noted above , currently a mailer must pay between $0.44 and $3.28 in postage to send written correspondence .

should this relatively low - cost mailing be further subsidized by enacting a free - mail - to - troops postage benefit ? .

and are senders likely to use a voucher for letters that can be used to cover the more expensive parcel postage ? .

 ( 4 ) the dimensions and shape of a package significantly affect the usps's costs to deliver it .

for example , mailing 15 pounds of widgets in a 20" by 4" by 4" package ( 320 cubic inches ) from the silver lake , ohio zip code 44224 to the apo zip code 96278-2050 would require over $20 in postage .

sending the same 15 pounds of widgets in a 12" by 12" by 5" priority mail flat - rate box ( 720 cubic inches ) would cost $14.95 .

 ( whether the dod experiences similar cost differences for package delivery is unclear. ) .

to reduce delivery costs , should any free postal benefit require recipients to use a box of a particular size and shape ? .

