despite international naval efforts to counter acts of piracy in the waters off somalia , pirates in this region continue to increase not only the sophistication and geographic range of their attacks , but also the level of violence against hostages .

hostages are also being detained longer , as pirates hold out for ransom payments that now reportedly average over $5 million per ship .

heightened military presence in an internationally recommended transit corridor in the gulf of aden has reduced attacks in that area , but pirates have adopted tactics that now allow them to attack more than 1,000 nautical miles off the somali coast .

pirate attacks in the gulf of aden , the red sea , and the waters far off somalia's eastern coast , including the arabian sea , have been attributed to somali pirates .

the number of attacks in this area , which had roughly doubled annually from 2007 to 2009 , rising from 51 reported attacks to 217 , appeared to level off in 2010 , when 219 attacks were reported .

attacks in the gulf of aden declined by more than half in 2010 , attributed in large part to international naval patrols .

attacks east and south of somalia , however , increased substantially , up from 19 reported attacks in 2008 and 80 in 2009 to over 140 in 2010 .

as of march 2011 , somali pirates had been sighted as far east as off the coast of india , and as far south as the mozambique channel .

the two monsoon seasons in the indian ocean appear to dampen pirate activity in these waters , but , with the end of the winter monsoons , the spring months of 2011 have corresponded to a spike in attacks .

the international maritime bureau ( imb ) reports that , in 2010 , over 1,016 crew members on dozens of hijacked vessels were taken hostage by somali pirates .

most were released following ransom negotiations , but at least 13 were injured and 8 killed .

in the first three months of 2011 , imb data indicate that almost 100 vessels in the region reported being attacked , with 15 successful hijackings involving approximately 300 hostages .

these attacks represent a substantial increase from the same period last year , when 35 vessels were attacked in the waters off somalia .

at least seven hostages have been killed to date in 2011 , including four americans .

as of april 2011 , somali pirates were holding over 26 ships and 530 crew hostage while seeking ransoms .

piracy has reemerged as a global security threat , most recently in the waters off the horn of africa , but also in west africa , the waters off india , the south china sea and the strait of malacca , and the caribbean .

pirates tend to operate in regions with large coastal areas , high levels of commercial activity , small national naval forces , and weak regional security cooperation mechanisms .

these characteristics facilitate other maritime security threats , including terrorism , weapons and narcotics trafficking , illegal fishing and dumping , and human smuggling operations .

worldwide rates of piracy began to increase in the early 1990s , peaking at roughly 350 to 450 reported attacks per year during the period 2000-2004 , then declining by almost half by 2005 .

in 2007 , almost half of the world's reported pirate attacks took place in african waters , mainly near nigeria and somalia .

the number of attacks in somali waters doubled in 2008 , accounting for an estimated 40% of the 293 pirate attacks reported worldwide .

the recent increase in pirate attacks off somalia has caused the total number of worldwide pirate attacks to return to the levels of 2000-2004: of the 406 worldwide attacks in 2009 , 217 of them occurred off the coast of somalia .

in 2010 , 219 of the 445 reported attacks took place in the waters off the horn .

moreover , high - profile attacks on high - value vessels in the gulf of aden and the west indian ocean have brought renewed international attention to the problem of piracy in these waters .

the u.s. national maritime security strategy , issued in 2005 , stated that the "safety and economic security of the united states depends upon the secure use of the world's oceans," and identified "well organized and well equipped" pirates and criminals as threats to international maritime security .

the bombing of the uss cole in 2000 in the yemeni harbor of aden and the bombing of the french oil tanker mv limburg in 2002 illustrated the threat of potential maritime terrorism in the region .

the united states , working with international partners , established a combined naval task force to meet the terrorism threat ( combined task force 150 ) , and increased bilateral military assistance to regional navies .

however , prior to the establishment in january 2009 of the new combined task force 151 , the united states had not assigned any naval assets the sole task of performing anti - piracy operations in the horn of africa region .

similarly , until 2008 , the international community did not respond to the threat of piracy in the waters off of somalia in a coordinated , dedicated manner .

in december 2008 , the european union launched eu navfor operation atalanta , the first naval operation under the framework of the european security and defense policy ( esdp ) .

similarly , nato launched a dedicated anti - piracy mission , operation ocean shield , and other navies have deployed ships to provide security for vessels bearing their flags .

the development of a collaborative regional response in east africa in 2009 mirrored regional reactions to the threat of piracy in the strait of malacca between malaysia , singapore and indonesia , which are credited with having drastically reduced the instance of piracy in southeast asia since 2005 .

eradicating piracy off the horn of africa region may prove to be a more daunting task .

the vast areas of the west indian ocean and the gulf of aden where the pirates operate are remote , somalia remains largely ungoverned , and regional states have relatively weak naval capabilities .

furthermore , somalia's transitional government currently lacks the capacity to prosecute and imprison pirates and few countries have demonstrated the will to prosecute those apprehended in international counter - piracy operations .

piracy in the waters off the horn of africa is a symptom of the wider instability that has plagued somalia and the region since the early 1990s .

the internationally recognized transitional federal government ( tfg ) has struggled in recent years to form a functional unity government and to reconstitute national security and law enforcement entities .

the united states has supported reconciliation efforts in somalia and has taken a leadership role in coordinating diplomatic and military responses to the threat of piracy in the region , in coordination with the united nations security council .

international donors have pledged funds for somalia that are intended in part to support the development of security forces by the tfg , with the aim of improving local authorities' ability to act against pirates ashore .

some caution , however , that assistance and equipment provided to tfg forces may in some cases be transferred to insurgents .

international donors have also supported efforts by countries in the region to prosecute and imprison pirates .

to date , u.s. and international efforts to respond to the threat of piracy have taken on a multi - faceted approach .

in order to provide a short term response to the immediate threat to international navigation in the region's waters , the u.n. security council has authorized third party governments to conduct anti - piracy operations in somali territorial waters and ashore , but only with authorization from and in coordination with the tfg .

among ctf - 151 , the eu's operation atalanta , nato's operation ocean shield , and other navies' "national escort" operations , roughly 3 dozen combatant ships are patrolling in the region .

attacks continue in both the west indian ocean and the gulf of aden , in spite of increased international maritime security efforts in those waters , but the number of attacks in the gulf of aden has diminished significantly since 2009 .

regional bodies such as the african union , the arab league , and ad hoc groupings have held consultative meetings and issued policy statements condemning piracy in the region and providing guidance for the development of coordinated , collaborative regional responses .

attacks by somali pirates on u.s. flagged vessels or u.s. - bound commerce to date have been high - profile but limited in number , however the broader threat that somali piracy poses to free navigation in the gulf of aden and the west indian ocean has global implications .

the u.s. government has identified piracy in the waters off somalia as a direct threat to national security interests , as have several foreign governments , notably china , russia , and the eu member states .

policies developed by the bush administration to address the threat have been revisited and enhanced by the obama administration , and recent statements by senior u.s. officials suggest that these policies remain under review .

congress appropriates funding and provides oversight for a number of administration efforts with implications for piracy in the region .

the risk of attack in the waters off somalia is unlikely to disappear in the near term .

most defense analysts acknowledge that while the unprecedented level of naval patrols in the area — conducted by more than 20 nations — has deterred some attacks , the area is simply too vast to prevent all incidents .

when the maersk alabama was attacked in 2009 , the closest naval vessel , the uss bainbridge , was approximately 300 nautical miles away .

similarly , the uss bainbridge was only able to arrive on the scene of the aborted attack on the liberty sun a reported six hours after the attack ended .

the continuing anti - piracy operations of international navies also comes at significant cost , as governments around the world weigh budget priorities and military requirements in other theaters of operation .

secretary of state hillary clinton told congress in march 2011 , "we have put together an international coalition , but , frankly , we're just not , in my view , getting enough out of it," noting that international counter - piracy patrols do not appear to be having a deterrent effect and that the payment of ransoms continues to exacerbate the problem .

she has tasked the state department , in collaboration with the department of defense , with developing a more comprehensive approach .

like terrorism , acts of piracy in african waters pose a transnational security threat that emanates from areas plagued by conflict , weak governance , and economic insecurity .

continuing conflict in somalia and yemen illustrate the unstable regional context surrounding current counter - piracy operations .

regional security forces have limited maritime capability , and many governments have prioritized the development of their armies at the expense of navies or coast guards .

that has changed to some extent in recent years , as international studies have highlighted the threat to local economies posed by illegal fishing , in addition to more traditional maritime security threats .

regional coordination and intelligence sharing also is weak .

the united states and its international partners have used various policy tools to address similarly complex security circumstances in other regions .

however , ongoing u.s. and international security operations in environments such as afghanistan , pakistan , iraq , and colombia suggest that military intervention and foreign assistance require political consensus , political will , local partnership , and significant coordination in order to be successful .

maritime security efforts in the persian gulf , the caribbean , the waters of west africa , and the strait of malacca have had the same requirements .

while short term results in containing other transnational threats have proven to be achievable , the long - term ability of international intervention to eliminate these threats is less certain in the absence of committed and capable regional and local actors .

secretary clinton stated in her remarks to congress in march 2011 , "its hard to imagine that we're going to be able to resolve this until we go after their land - based ports. .

both civilian and military officials have repeatedly stated , however , that the problem of somali piracy will not ultimately be solved militarily .

the secretary of the navy testified in march 2011 , we are treating the symptoms of piracy , rather than its fundamental cause: somalia`s failure as a state .

despite the international community`s commitment , piracy has both continued to increase and move further offshore , a measure of pirate resiliency and the strong economic incentives that underpin it .

nine of ten pirates captured are ultimately freed as there is often insufficient evidence or political will to prosecute them , or to incarcerate them after conviction .

we strongly endorse additional international efforts to address these concerns .

the effective use of force against pirate strongholds in coastal towns would likely require significant military planning and considerable resources in order to avoid or minimize civilian casualties .

the number of naval ships that would be needed to completely halt piracy in the gulf of aden and the waters of somalia's eastern coast is probably much larger than the force currently operating there .

by some estimates , as many as 60 ships might be required to fully suppress piracy in the gulf of aden alone .

the adjoining area of concern in the indian ocean off somalia's eastern coast , which has been measured at more than 2 million square miles , is much larger , so completely halting piracy in that area would likely require an even larger number of ships .

the 111 th congress explored options for protecting maritime traffic in the horn of africa region and around the world .

h.r .

3376 , the u.s. mariner and vessel protection act of 2009 , aimed to eliminate liability for death or injury caused by the use of force during the self - defense of u.s. mariners against acts of piracy ( see " arming merchant ships " below ) .

s. 3639 , the maritime transportation security act of 2010 , introduced in july 2010 , would have eliminated liability for monetary damages in some cases of self - defense against piracy at sea .

the bill also would have directed the department overseeing the coast guard to work through the imo to promote coordinated anti - piracy action and to ensure similar limitations on liability .

the monetary liability provisions of the senate bill were incorporated into section 912 of the coast guard authorization act of 2010 ( h.r .

3619 , p.l .

111-281 ) enacted october 15 , 2010 .

section 3505 of the fy2010 national defense authorization act ( ndaa , h.r .

2647 , p.l .

111-84 ) requires any vessel carrying cargo for the department of defense in areas of high risk of piracy to be equipped with "appropriate non - lethal defense measures to protect the vessel , crew , and cargo from unauthorized seizure at sea. .

section 3506 of the act further required the administration to report on steps taken by the u.s. government to facilitate the embarkation of armed security teams aboard u.s. - flagged vessels carrying u.s. government cargo in high - risk areas .

the house version of h.r .

2647 would have required the secretary of defense to embark military personnel on board u.s. - flagged vessels carrying cargos owned by the u.s. government if a vessel is traveling in a high - risk area and is determined by the coast guard to be at risk of being boarded by pirates .

the senate version of the bill did not include these measures .

congress has stressed that the u.s. government and others must address the piracy problem both at sea and on land .

h.rept .

111-166 , accompanying h.r .

2647 , expressed concern with continuing safe havens for somali pirates , noting that "there does not appear to be a strategy for dealing with the organizations ashore in somalia. .

s.rept .

111-35 , accompanying the fy2010 ndaa , stressed the need for a "holistic approach," emphasizing the need for the commercial shipping industry to develop effective piracy countermeasures to protect its ships and crews .

two resolutions passed by the house and senate in april 2009 commended the crew of the maersk alabama , captain richard phillips , and the u.s. military for its efforts in rescuing captain phillips and serving in anti - piracy missions ( h.res .

339 and s.res .

108 ) .

the senate resolution called on president obama to "work with the international community and the transitional government of somalia to develop a comprehensive strategy to address both the burgeoning problem of piracy and its root causes. .

as the 112 th congress has commenced its deliberations , somali pirate attacks continue at an increased rate , and the capture of the quest and killing of four americans in early 2011 have contributed to a renewed debate on u.s. efforts to address the threat .

in march 2011 , the house transportation and infrastructure subcommittee on coast guard and maritime transportation held a hearing on the u.s .

response to maritime piracy .

among the issues raised by members for further exploration was that of tracking ransom payments in a manner similar to tracking terrorist financing .

according to the september 2010 study conducted by the gao , "officials at justice , state , and defense agree that information their agencies gather on pirate finances is not being systematically analyzed , and it is unclear if any agency is using it to identify and apprehend pirate leaders or financiers. .

the 112 th congress has not , to date , introduced legislation related to the issue of maritime piracy or the specific threat posed in the waters off somalia .

u.s. military engagement in the region is divided among two geographic combatant commands .

u.s. central command's area of responsibility ( aor ) includes the waters of the gulf of aden and those off the eastern somali coast , while the aor of u.s. africa command ( africom ) , which became fully operational in 2008 , encompasses the african continent .

to date , much of the u.s. military's anti - piracy response has been conducted at sea , by central command ( centcom ) .

on land , africom provides security assistance to several regional maritime security forces , few of which have "blue water capacity" ( the ability to operate far from shore ) .

centcom provides similar assistance to the yemeni coast guard .

oversight of u.s. navy anti - piracy operations focuses on forces associated with ctf - 151 and with nato's operation ocean shield .

several u.s. - homeported navy ships support the deployment of u.s. navy ships operating on a continuous basis in the areas where somali pirates are active .

as such , the commitment of a single additional u.s. navy ship to the area can affect the navy's ability to perform missions in other parts of the world .

u.s. military operations in the region are not limited to anti - piracy efforts .

the united states has conducted anti - terrorism activities in the horn of africa and in yemen for over a decade , including the naval combined task forces established as part of operation enduring freedom .

djibouti has hosted the u.s. - led combined joint task force – horn of africa ( cjtf - hoa ) at a semi - permanent forward operating site , known as camp lemonnier , since 2003 , with approximately 2,000 u.s. military personnel in residence .

the command authority for cjtf - hoa , formerly under centcom , has been transferred to africom .

its efforts initially focused primarily on countering violent extremism in the region , but the task force's activities have expanded in recent years to include a wide variety of activities aimed at building the capacity of regional militaries to respond to more general threats , such as natural disasters and armed conflict .

cjtf - hoa personnel provide training to the region's security forces on counter - terrorism , maritime security , disaster response , and peacekeeping .

as mentioned above , the united states conducts a variety of maritime security assistance programs in east africa and yemen .

in kenya , for example , the united states provides maritime security assistance to both the kenyan navy and an array of agencies , including the kenya wildlife service , revenue authority , and police , to address a range of threats , from smuggling and illegal fishing to terrorism .

the u.s. also began support for a regional maritime center of excellence in mombasa in 2009 ; courses at the center are attended by participants from throughout east africa .

several african countries , including djibouti , kenya , tanzania , and yemen , have received u.s. support for the installation of radar systems that provide enhanced maritime domain awareness .

congress expanded the department of defense's section 1206 "train and equip" authority in fy2009 to include assistance for civilian maritime security forces to conduct counterterrorism operations .

counter - piracy is not mentioned .

however , several fy2009 section 1206 programs support increased maritime capacity to address terrorist threats in the waters affected by somali piracy , including programs for djibouti , yemen , mozambique , mauritius , tanzania , and the seychelles .

in august 2009 , africom and the government of the seychelles announced an agreement governing operation ocean look , which allows the u.s. military to operate p - 3 orion aircraft and unmanned aerial vehicles from the seychelles in an effort to improve maritime surveillance in regional waters .

u.n. security council resolution 1851 "calls on member states to assist the tfg , at its request and with notification to the secretary - general , to strengthen its operational capacity to bring to justice those who are using somali territory to plan , facilitate or undertake criminal acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea. .

the obama administration may seek to expand current assistance programs for regional and somali actors subject to congressional appropriations and authorization and in accordance with u.n. security council resolutions .

as noted above , the obama administration has obligated peacekeeping operations ( pko ) funding to provide equipment , logistical support , and basing facilities for the african union mission to somalia and to support somali security sector reform .

while these funds have largely been directed toward improving somali capacity to counter threats from insurgents and terrorists , to the extent that assistance may improve the overall ability of government forces to operate effectively and assert security control , it could have positive implications for anti - piracy operations in the future .

the administration is requesting $51 million in fy2012 pko funding to continue these programs .

although some press reports in 2009 quoted unnamed u.s. officials as stating that the u.s. military may consider launching military attacks against pirate strongholds , u.s. defense officials testified before congress at that time that although the united states has supported the inclusion in security council resolution 1851 of authorization for anti - piracy operations on land , there were no u.s. military plans to do so .

various parts of the u.s. government continue to encourage somali figures in the transitional federal government and in the region of puntland to take action against pirate safe havens ashore .

overall , the administration has not signaled any major policy changes from the national security council partnership and action plan , which states that the united states "will work with concerned governments and international organizations to disrupt and dismantle pirate bases to the fullest extent permitted by national law. .

questions regarding legal jurisdiction , due process for detained pirate suspects , and the role of foreign military forces in anti - piracy law enforcement activities complicate current u.s. and international operations against pirates in the horn of africa region .

the most immediate legal concern associated with anti - piracy operations are jurisdictional questions that arise based on the location of pirate attacks and / or international naval interventions , the nationalities of crew members , and the countries of registry and / or ownership of any seized vessels .

multiple governments may be able to assert legal jurisdiction , depending on the specifics of the incident , but the exercise of universal jurisdiction established under unclos for acts of piracy is optional .

political will may be present in some countries , but many governments lack sufficient laws and judicial capacity to effectively prosecute suspected pirates .

the disposition of property and insurance claims for vessels involved in piracy also raises complex legal questions .

a developing legal issue concerns the prosecution of juveniles participating in acts of piracy .

reports suggest that some of the somali pirates are teenage minors , and therefore could have a defense of infancy in certain jurisdictions that may assert jurisdiction over the offense .

to date , some of these legal and law enforcement challenges have been addressed through the establishment of bilateral agreements by the united states , the united kingdom , the european union and others with governments in the horn of africa region , particularly with kenya , which was the first country in the region to exercise universal jurisdiction , in 2006 .

some agreements concluded to date define procedures for the detention , transfer , and prosecution of captured pirate suspects .

for example , suspected pirates captured by u.s. military forces may be transferred to kenyan custody for prosecution according to the terms of a bilateral memorandum of understanding signed in january 2009 .

the eu reached a similar agreement with kenya in march 2009 .

in 2009 and 2010 , kenyan courts sentenced 50 somalis captured by international navies to prison for piracy crimes .

in march 2010 , however , kenyan officials announced that they were suspending the acceptance of new pirate suspects for prosecution , pending further negotiation with the united states and other coalition parties .

in november 2010 , kenya's second highest court ruled that it did not have the jurisdiction to try pirates captured outside kenya's territorial waters ; the country's attorney general has appealed the decision .

according to the unodc , kenya was holding over 120 piracy suspects in early 2011 .

the seychelles has also reached agreements to accept the transfer of pirate suspects for prosecution , and tanzania has amended its laws to allow the prosecution of pirates captured outside its territorial waters .

the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) has conducted several piracy workshops for foreign prosecutors , police , and maritime security personnel .

for example , the united states has provided capacity building assistance to kenya's department of public prosecutions since 2005 , and a resident legal advisor from doj provides the kenyan government with assistance in piracy cases .

other international donors have become increasingly engaged , and unodc is currently implementing a substantial capacity building program funded by the european commission , as noted above .

efforts also are underway to establish mechanisms for regional law enforcement personnel to serve as shipriders on coalition vessels and to expand the anti - piracy law enforcement and judicial capacities of neighboring states .

ultimately , however , one of the greatest challenges to prosecuting somali pirates appears to be determining where to incarcerate them .

hundreds of suspected pirates have been apprehended by international navies in recent years .

many countries in the region lack the prison capacity to take on the additional burden .

additionally , some european countries have been unwilling to transfer suspected pirates for prosecution to countries in the region whose detention facilities may not meet international human rights standards .

the united nations and the international contact group are currently exploring new mechanisms to expand the options for incarceration , both in somalia and the broader region .

unodc efforts to expand and improve corrections facilities in puntland and somaliland may contribute to these discussions .

the u.s. department of transportation maritime administration ( marad ) issues detailed guidance to u.s. mariners transiting the waters off the horn of africa region to help ensure their safety and security .

current guidance includes instructions for u.s. - flagged vessels seeking escort support from the u.s. navy and combined maritime forces participating in coalition naval security operations in the region .

as noted above , international bodies such as the international maritime organization and the international maritime bureau also have revised their recommendations for actions that merchant ships and their crews can take to reduce their risk of being attacked and captured .

these include measures that can be taken before and during pirate attacks .

for example , rerouting ships , if possible , allows ships to avoid waters where somali pirates are known to operate .

this option can lengthen operating routes and increase shipping costs , but perhaps not as much as paying an occasional ransom .

in transit , effective watch procedures are recommended , since early detection of impending attacks increases the likelihood that avoidance and suppression measures will succeed .

higher ship operating speeds and evasive maneuvers have proven effective in many cases , as have denial systems such as barbed and razor wire and specialized electrical fences for ships .

crew preparation , training , and responses also are credited with reducing risks of successful pirate attacks .

arming merchant ships can be done by either giving arms to the ship's crew , or by hiring armed security teams to ride on the ships .

some observers and industry representatives have advocated for these options as a means of ensuring that there is an immediate security presence aboard vessels to serve as a deterrent or to respond to pirate attacks .

supporters argue that the large geographic distances and limited responsiveness of international naval assets to piracy attacks makes the provision of on - ship security necessary .

others contend that the training of crew members to safely handle weapons does not pose an undue financial or practical burden to shipping companies .

however , some merchant ship owners and operators are strongly averse to arming merchant ships , for practical and financial reasons .

u.s. government officials traditionally have expressed concern that merchant ships with armed crew members could pose security or terrorism risks visiting u.s. ports .

as noted above , private or military gun battles with pirates can raise the overall level of violence associated with piracy off somalia , which may increase risks to all merchant mariners on ships operating in that area .

since merchant ship crews are often not trained in the use of weapons , they might not be able to use them very effectively in fighting pirates .

if ship crews try to defend themselves with firearms and fail , the pirates might be more likely to kill some of the crew members .

even if used properly , lighter firearms might not be effective in countering pirates armed with heavier weapons , such as rocket - propelled grenades .

pirates with access to large amounts of money from prior ransom payments can acquire heavier weapons , so as to out - gun the merchant ships .

in all cases , fire is a major safety concern , particularly on tanker ships , and gunfire could ignite vapors from the ship's cargo , or the cargo itself .

financial concerns may discourage the arming of merchant ships .

some industry experts suggest that hiring armed security teams may be more expensive than taking the risk and paying the occasional ransom .

liability for fatal shootings aboard a ship could lead to expensive lawsuits .

since many ports restrict vessels from having weapons on board , commercial ships that make calls at multiple ports along their operating routes could find it difficult to operate along certain routes .

reports suggest that private companies providing armed guards and shipping companies using armed security teams are grappling with these and other related issues in an effort to avoid legal trouble .

hugh martin , general manager of security firm hart security uk , has stated that "the amount of effort we put in to ensure we are legal is colossal. .

in 2009 , the imo maritime safety committee released the following guidance: [f]lag states should strongly discourage the carrying and use of firearms by seafarers for personal protection or for the protection of a ship … the use of unarmed security personnel is a matter for individual shipowners , companies , and ship operators to decide .

the carriage of armed security personnel , or the use of military or law - enforcement officers ( duly authorized by the government of the flag state to carry firearms for the security of the ship ) , should be subject to flag state legislation and policies and is a matter for the flag state to authorize , in consultation with ship owners , companies and ship operators .

sec .

3506 of the national defense authorization act for fy2010 ( h.r .

2647 , p.l .

111-84 , october 28 , 2009 ) required the administration to report on its efforts to facilitate the embarkation of armed private security teams on u.s. flagged commercial vessels operating in high - risk areas .

items to be reported on include the elimination of restrictions under any regulation or provision of law on the use of armed security teams in high - risk areas , the negotiation of bilateral agreements with relevant coastal states , and the development of common training and qualification standards for armed security teams .

the report was delivered to congress in february 2010 and describes numerous advisories the administration has issued that offer guidance to u.s. flagged commercial vessels .

the report also provides detail on u.s. efforts to coordinate with and obtain information from relevant foreign port authorities on the issue of armed security teams .

the international traffic in arms regulations ( itar ) may be an area of concern for ship owners desiring to arm their vessels in self - defense against acts of piracy .

section 38 of the arms export control act ( acea ) authorizes the president to control the export and import of defense articles and defense services .

the president , through executive order 11958 , as amended , delegated the statutory authority to promulgate regulations with respect to exports of defense articles and defense services to the secretary of state .

the resulting regulations are known as the international traffic in arms regulations .

itar requires u.s. persons to obtain a license in order to export or import items identified on the united states munitions list .

as defined by regulation , the term "export" includes "sending or taking a defense article out of the united states in any manner. .

objects covered by the term "defense article" are found on the united states munitions list and are classified into 21 separate categories .

categories i and iii appear to be most relevant in a discussion regarding protection from acts of piracy because they include firearms ( category i ) and ammunition ( category iii ) that could be used in the defense of a vessel .

based on the definitions of export and defense articles , a ship owner would be required to obtain a license for the temporary export of firearms and ammunition , or other covered armaments , for use in the defense of a vessel .

there is an exception to the licensing requirement under itar for the temporary export of not more than three non - automatic firearms and not more than 1,000 cartridges .

to comply with this exception a u.s. person ( 1 ) must declare the temporary export of the firearms and submit to an inspection by a customs officer ; ( 2 ) must retain the firearms with the person ( i.e. , not mail the firearms to the destination ) ; and ( 3 ) maintain the firearms for that person's exclusive use and not for reexport or transfer of ownership .

the regulation makes a distinction between u.s. persons and crew members of vessels , but how the distinction would affect the status of the vessel as an entity is unclear .

this exception may be an option available to owners as a way to arm their vessels , without obtaining an export license since the term "u.s. person" is defined to include a corporation , business association , and partnerships , as well as other entities .

additionally , it would appear that individual crew members would be able to temporarily export firearms under the exception .

however , crew members using privately owned weapons to defend corporate property could raise significant legal liability issues for both the individuals and the corporation .

the itar licensing requirement exception does not supersede prohibitions against exports to certain countries , including , but not limited to countries identified by the united nations security council through a united nations arms embargo .

additionally , a license to export defense articles , or in the alternative obtaining an exemption from the licensing requirement , does not address or satisfy requirements of foreign countries that may exist with respect to operating a vessel in their territorial waters while carrying weapons .

the vessel's owner is responsible for knowing and respecting the laws of the foreign country .

some observers argue that u.s. and international naval vessels should provide convoy protection services to ships transiting the horn of africa region , particularly the gulf of aden .

supporters argue that the direct participation of coalition or other naval assets in merchant ship convoys would eliminate the risks posed by unescorted travel through the gulf of aden or areas along the eastern coast of somalia by cutting down the response times to attempted attacks .

however , merchant ship operators may be reluctant to use a convoy system because it can require merchant ships to wait in a certain location for the next scheduled convoy to begin .

the delays associated with this waiting can impose costs on ship operators that could be greater than the cost of paying an occasional ransom .

the establishment and maintenance of a convoy system over the long term , in the absence of broader efforts to address the root causes of the piracy problem , could pose unacceptable costs for international navies .

as of march 2010 , the current marad advisory indicates that u.s. - flagged vessels may contact u.s military headquarters in bahrain to request escort services .

navy or coast guard vessels could escort u.s. - flagged commercial ships traveling in the gulf of aden , just as u.s. navy vessels escorted u.s. - flagged ships ( including reflagged kuwaiti oil tankers ) in the persian gulf in 1987-1988 ( aka operation earnest will ) so as to protect them from potential iranian attack during the iran - iraq war .

if navy ships that are forward deployed to the indian ocean / persian gulf region were diverted from their current missions in that region to a mission of escorting u.s. - flagged commercial ships in the gulf of aden , the incremental financial cost ( i.e. , the additional dollar cost , above the costs that would be incurred if the ships continued performing their currently assigned missions in the indian ocean / persian gulf region ) might be small .

however , there would be an opportunity cost in terms of those ships not performing their currently assigned missions in the indian ocean / persian gulf region .

such missions can include engagement activities aimed at building or reinforcing u.s. partnerships with other countries in the region , humanitarian assistance and disaster - response ( hadr ) operations , intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance ( isr ) operations , counterterrorism operations , deterrence of regional aggression , and crisis response and containment .

policymakers might need to weigh the potential advantages of escorting u.s. - flagged commercial ships in the gulf aden against the potential disadvantages of reduced navy capacity for performing other missions in the indian ocean / persian gulf region .

if navy ships that are forward deployed to other regions , such as the mediterranean or the western pacific , were diverted from their current missions in those regions to a mission of escorting u.s. - flagged commercial ships in the gulf of aden , the incremental financial cost could be larger due to the need to expend additional fuel to transit to and from the gulf of aden region .

even so , the incremental financial cost might be relatively small as a fraction of annual navy costs for ship operations .

there would again be an opportunity cost in terms of those ships not performing their currently assigned missions in the regions from which they were diverted , which again can include things such as engagement activities , hadr operations , isr operations , counterterrorism operations , deterrence of regional aggression , and crisis response and containment .

policymakers might again need to weigh the potential advantages of escorting u.s. - flagged commercial ships in the gulf aden against the potential disadvantages of reduced navy capacity for performing missions in areas such as the mediterranean or western pacific .

an alternative to having u.s. navy ( or coast guard ) ships escort u.s. - flagged commercial ships would be to provide a small security detail of armed u.s. military personnel to each u.s. - flagged ship for the duration of its transit through the gulf of aden .

the detail would board each u.s. - flagged ship at the start of its transit through the high - risk zone and depart the ship at the end of its transit through the high - risk zone .

one person who has suggested this alternative — a retired u.s. navy vice admiral — asserted that "a few well - armed teams aboard a few ships could accomplish this mission" of protecting u.s. - flagged commercial ships traveling through the area .

according to 2009 news reports , france placed military personnel aboard tuna fishing boats in the indian ocean and belgium had offered eight - person military teams at a cost of $162,000 per week .

some u.s. corporate officers have argued that military teams should protect u.s. - flagged in order to avoid "regulatory shortfalls , liability concerns , and international reluctance to permit armed merchant vessels into their ports. .

section 3506 of the house - passed version of h.r .

2647 , the fy2010 defense authorization act , would have required the secretary of defense to embark u.s. military personnel on board u.s. - flagged vessels carrying cargos owned by the u.s. government if a vessel is traveling in a high - risk area and is determined by the coast guard to be at risk of being boarded by pirates .

the senate version of the bill did not include these measures .

standard hull and machinery insurance policies are not specifically designed to address security - related risks such as piracy .

war risk insurance provides this special coverage for ships exposed to piracy risks on a per transit basis .

federal law ( title xii of the merchant marine act of 1936 , as amended ) authorizes the federal government to administer a maritime war risk insurance program that insures or reinsures , as a last resort , ocean - going commerce in high - risk areas should private ocean marine insurance markets prove insufficient .

available statistics suggest that the insurance industry's financial resources are adequate , given policyholder surplus levels ( an insurance term that refers to the claims - paying capacity or capital available to the insurer ) , and there is ample supply of coverage for ocean - going vessels .

as a result , despite the dramatic increase in piracy off the coast of somalia and increased premiums for sending a cargo shipment through the gulf of aden , some may contend that congress does not need to amend the existing federal insurance statutory construct .

as discussed above , some have urged the arming of ship crews or bringing onboard armed security as a risk mitigation option .

despite the persistence of pirate attacks , though , many ship owners and their underwriters are reluctant to employ armed security onboard their vessels .

the use of armed security may create third - party liabilities if security officers harm innocent mariners or vessels .

in march 2010 , for the first time , private security guards aboard the almezaan killed a somali pirate attempting to attack a vessel .

the almezaan is a panamanian - flagged cargo ship under united arab emirates - ownership .

ocean marine insurers are divided on the "armed crew" issue .

some insurers believe that traditional negotiations after an act of piracy , which result in formula - based ransom payments and an understanding between ship owners and the pirates about not damaging the ship or cargo in exchange for expedited payments , are the best approach to containing the cost of ocean marine transportation in piracy zones .

these insurers contend that arming ship crews would encourage pirates to be more violent when taking a ship , increasing the risks to cargo , vessels , and crew .

still others would support expanded self - defense efforts in an effort to protect international commerce , particularly as many struggle to recover from the recent global economic downturn .

some members of congress have called on the administration to develop a comprehensive approach to somalia that responds to the threat of piracy in the context of a broader effort to stabilize the country and support transitional government institutions .

several u.s. officials have publicly supported such a holistic approach , arguing that a sustainable resolution to the threat of piracy off the horn of africa would require a combination of efforts to improve security , governance , the rule of law , and economic opportunity in somalia .

the obama administration has repeatedly expressed its intention to continue working with partners in the contact group on somalia and the contact group on piracy off the coast of somalia toward those goals .

in response to attacks on u.s. - flagged and - crewed vessels , a more robust anti - piracy policy has evolved , and official statements indicate that the administration intends to proceed on a multi - track basis by building regional capacity , supporting multilateral anti - piracy initiatives , and improving coordination among u.s. government agencies involved .

the administration's interagency counter - piracy steering group continues to lead the efforts of over 75 bureaus , offices , and embassies engaged in anti - piracy operations .

the state and defence departments lead the steering group and the departments of transportation ( u.s. maritime administration [marad] ) , justice , homeland security , treasury , and usaid are members .

enhanced u.s. assistance to the somali governing institutions and engagement with regional somali representatives also aims to strengthen the ability and willingness of somalis to secure regions where pirates currently enjoy safe havens .

in the short term , the international community has primarily responded to the threat of piracy in the waters off the horn of africa with multinational naval patrols , diplomatic coordination , and enhanced self - protection and private security efforts by members of the commercial shipping industry .

these efforts address two of the three lines of action identified in the u.s. government's action plan to address piracy , namely prevention and disruption of attacks .

the third line of action , the prosecution of pirates , is considered by many to be a critical step toward addressing a perception of impunity among would - be offenders and making piracy less attractive .

the challenge of locating and sustaining jurisdictions willing and able to prosecute piracy suspects and imprison those convicted , however , persists , despite some regional capacity building efforts .

in the long term , u.s. officials and international experts believe that addressing the threat of piracy will require the strengthening of regional security capabilities , improved intelligence gathering and sharing , more effective and capable law enforcement , and enhanced multilateral coordination , both at sea and on land .

by all accounts , pirates will likely continue to find sanctuary in somalia until basic governance and security conditions improve .

