coal fired power plants account for almost 45% of electric power generated in the united states .

the coal combustion process at those facilities generates a tremendous amount of waste .

in 2008 , industry estimates indicate that 136 million tons of coal combustion waste ( ccw ) was generated .

that would make ccw the second largest waste stream in the united states , second to municipal solid waste , or common household garbage .

how ccw is managed and how those management methods are regulated have come under increased scrutiny in the last year .

coal combustion waste is managed in two ways: it may be disposed of in landfills or surface impoundment ponds , or in mines as minefill , or it may be used in some capacity ( commonly referred to as "beneficial use" ) — for example , as a component in concrete , cement , or gypsum wallboard , or as structural or embankment fill .

these management methods are largely unregulated at the federal level .

instead , they are regulated according to state requirements that vary from state to state .

on december 22 , 2008 , national attention was turned to potential risks associated with ccw management when a breach in an impoundment pond at the tennessee valley authority's ( tva's ) kingston , tn , plant released 1.1 billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry .

the release covered more than 300 acres and damaged or destroyed homes and property .

the sludge discharged into the nearby emory and clinch rivers , filling large areas of the rivers and resulting in fish kills .

sampling at the site in january 2009 found arsenic levels that exceeded the environmental protection agency's ( epa's ) removal action level ( contaminant levels at which time - critical response actions may be required ) .

according to tva , the estimated cleanup cost will likely reach $1.2 billion .

tva recognized that this estimate could change significantly depending on the method of containment or the amount of ash ultimately disposed of as well as the impact of new coal ash laws and regulations that may be implemented at the state or federal level .

further , tva's estimate does not include the potential costs associated with future regulatory actions , litigation , fines or penalties that may be assessed , final remediation activities , or other settlements .

epa and tva have estimated that the cleanup may take two to three years .

in addition to the kingston release , other events related to ccw management have attracted national media attention , as well as the attention of various stakeholders and some members of congress .

for example , on december 30 , 2008 , a $54 million class action settlement was approved between constellation energy and maryland residents after ccw that had been disposed of in a gambrills , md , quarry contaminated the owners' drinking water .

wells were determined to be contaminated with arsenic , lead , cadmium , and sulphates at levels above epa drinking water standards .

concern for a potential accidental release or contamination associated with ccw management is not new .

however , the recent high - profile incidents have brought increased attention to the issue .

concerns about ccw management generally center around the following issues: the waste is generated in tremendous volumes and has been accumulating at some sites for decades .

individual power plants may generate thousands to hundreds of thousands of tons of the waste each year — the majority of which is disposed of onsite .

some plants have been in operation for decades ( the site of the kingston release has accumulated ash sludge since 1954 ) , resulting in the disposal of millions of tons of ccw at individual plants across the united states .

the waste likely contains certain hazardous constituents that epa has determined pose a risk to human health and the environment .

those constituents include heavy metals such as arsenic , beryllium , boron , cadmium , chromium , lead , and mercury , and certain toxic organic materials such as dioxins and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon ( pah ) compounds .

under certain conditions , hazardous constituents in ccw migrate and can contaminate groundwater or surface water , and hence living organisms .

for example , epa determined that the potential risk of human exposure to arsenic and other metals in ccw ( via the groundwater - to - drinking - water pathway ) increased significantly when ccw was disposed of in unlined landfills .

that risk criterion was slightly higher for unlined surface impoundments .

according to epa , the majority of new landfills and surface impoundments are constructed with liners and have groundwater monitoring systems .

however , it is difficult to determine how many older units that may be operational do not have liners or groundwater monitoring .

although ccw contains hazardous constituents , it has been specifically exempt from federal hazardous waste management regulations .

instead , it is regulated in accordance with requirements established by the states .

in 1999 , epa determined that national regulations regarding ccw disposal were needed , in part due to inconsistencies in state requirements .

since then , various surveys have been conducted and data gathered , but epa has not proposed regulations .

members of the public , particularly those near utility plants , have expressed concern that their health or property values may be affected by either a sudden release of waste , as in kingston , or the gradual release of contaminants .

industry organizations insist that the waste is generally safe and does not pose a significant risk that would warrant the increased cost of more stringent management — costs that would be ultimately borne by rate payers .

they also argue that being required to manage the waste according to hazardous waste regulations would limit its potential for use — thereby increasing the amount that must be disposed of .

environmental organizations argue that the kingston spill was a warning sign of spills to come and that there is currently inadequate oversight and monitoring of either existing or closed disposal sites .

some members of congress have also expressed concern over these issues , both before and after the kingston release .

like other stakeholders , their concerns have stretched across various areas including the role that coal mining plays in our economy , the role that coal - fired utilities play as a major source of domestic energy , the federal role in the regulation of ccw , as well as the potential risks posed to their constituents if ccw is managed improperly .

epa has been studying how best to regulate ccw since at least 1980 .

waste management is regulated under provisions of the resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra , 42 u.s.c .

§6901 et seq . ) .

in may 2000 , epa determined that ccw did not warrant regulation under subtitle c of rcra ( the federal hazardous waste requirements ) .

epa did , however , determine that national regulations under subtitle d of rcra ( the solid waste management requirements ) were warranted for ccw when it is disposed in landfills or surface impoundments .

epa also found that ccw used to fill surface or underground mines warranted regulation under rcra's solid waste requirements or possibly under modifications to existing regulations established under authority of the surface mining control and reclamation act ( smcra ) .

since then , various surveys have been conducted , reports issued , and data gathered , but no federal regulations have been proposed .

on march 9 , 2009 , in the wake of the kingston release , epa declared its intent to move forward with ccw regulations to address the management of coal combustion residuals .

epa stated that regulations would be proposed for public comment by the end of 2009 .

since epa's statement , industry and environmental groups , state government representatives , and some members of congress have expressed concerns regarding how the waste will ultimately be regulated .

generally those concerns center around whether ccw will be regulated as a solid or hazardous waste .

subsequently , representatives with epa have declared that , although they felt that regulating ccw under rcra's solid waste management requirements ( eg , subtitle d's landfill criteria and permitting requirements ) would provide sufficient protection , the agency had no authority to do so .

instead , their only existing authority was to regulate the waste under rcra's hazardous waste management requirements ( for more information , see " the current rulemaking " ) .

on december 17 , 2009 , epa issued a statement that its pending decision on regulating ccw would be delayed for a "short period due to the complexity of the analysis the agency is currently finishing. .

regardless of the ultimate choice of waste management , the amounts of ccw generated each year are tremendous .

as power plant emission standards become more stringent and air emission control devices capture more contaminants , both the total waste generated and the amount of toxins in the waste can be expected to increase .

to provide information and context on this issue , this report discusses the nature of the waste itself ; potential risks associated with its management ; the regulatory history of ccw management requirements , including why ccw is exempt from federal regulations and issues associated with the current rulemaking ; and ccw management options ( eg , landfill and surface impoundment disposal ) and the likely state and federal requirements associated with those management methods .

this report does not provide risk analysis regarding the disposal or use of ccw , or information regarding the potential fate and transport of hazardous constituents .

it also does not discuss details regarding the kingston release , such as determinations regarding the cause of the release or details of the cleanup .

numerous studies on those topics have been conducted , findings from which are cited or summarized where appropriate .

this report focuses primarily on the issues associated with ccw disposal in landfills and surface impoundments , but also provides summary information on issues associated with its disposal in mines and its "beneficial use. .

each step of the coal combustion process results in different types of waste .

the characteristics and potential risks associated with that waste vary according to many factors .

to minimize the potential negative impacts associated with ccw management , it is necessary to understand the characteristics of the specific type of ccw being handled as well as the physical environment in which it is placed .

generally , there are two potential risks associated with the disposal or use of ccw .

disposal or use that involves direct applications of the waste to the ground may allow hazardous constituents in the waste to leach from the material , migrate , and contaminate groundwater or surface water and , ultimately , living organisms .

also , the land disposal of high volumes of liquid waste could result in a sudden release , as occurred at kingston .

the resource conservation and recovery act ( rcra , 42 u.s.c .

§6901 et seq . ) .

provides the general guidelines under which all waste is managed .

it also includes a congressional mandate to epa to develop a comprehensive set of regulations to implement the law ( also commonly referred to as rcra ) .

enacted in 1976 , rcra was intended , in part , to protect human health and the environment from the potential hazards of waste disposal and to ensure that wastes are managed in an environmentally sound manner .

the evolution of ccw regulation involves a long and somewhat complicated history .

to understand issues associated with ccw disposal regulations and the current rulemaking process , it is useful to understand epa's current authority under rcra to regulate solid and hazardous waste ; the terms of the "bevill amendment," which excluded ccw from regulation under rcra's hazardous waste requirements ; epa's actions in response to bevill amendment directives ; and issues associated with the current rulemaking process — particularly questions regarding epa's potential to regulate ccw as solid or hazardous waste .

as discussed previously , ccw is managed in one of two ways — it is either disposed of in landfills , surface impoundments , or mines , or it is put to some beneficial use .

in 2008 , 136 million tons of ccw were generated .

industry estimates indicate that 8% was disposed of in mines as minefill and 37% was used in some capacity ( eg , as a component in concrete , cement , or gypsum wallboard , or as structural or embankment fill ) .

the remainder was disposed of in landfills or surface impoundments .

requirements applicable to each of these management methods are determined by individual states .

generally , the only federal role in their management may be that certain state permit programs ( eg , those related to wastewater discharges to surface water ) are implemented under the authority of federal law .

other than that , there is little federal role in ccw management .

it is difficult to make any broad statements about regulations applicable to ccw management methods .

regulations do not just vary from state to state , but from unit to unit .

for example , a given state likely regulates surface impoundments and landfills under different requirements associated with regulations applicable to solid waste and wastewater management , while mine disposal and beneficial uses may be largely unregulated .

regulatory requirements within a given state may also vary depending on when a disposal unit went into operation .

for example , requirements applicable to older landfills may be grandfathered in , under less stringent requirements than newer units , as new laws are enacted .

also , no industry or federal agency tracks the total number of disposal units or waste usage sites ( eg , locations where waste may have been used as structural fill ) .

that is not to say that the waste is necessarily unregulated or disposed of improperly — only that there are many unknown elements of both current disposal and use practices , and probably even less that is known about sites that have been closed .

since the regulation of ccw disposal and use is controlled by individual states , it is difficult to determine certain information about the waste .

for example , it is difficult to determine the entire amount of ccw that has been disposed of in the united states .

it can be estimated ( although not known definitively ) how many currently operational disposal units exist today , but is not likely possible to determine the total number that have ever been in operation — that is , unlined units that may have been closed without a cap or groundwater monitoring system .

also , it is difficult to determine the number of sites that have used unencapsulated ccw that have properly evaluated the site , as recommended by epa , to ensure adequate groundwater protection .

as power plant emission standards become more stringent , and air emission control devices capture more contaminants , both the total waste generated and the total amount of toxins in them can be expected to increase .

as regulations are formulated to address new or expanded landfills , there are still many questions unanswered regarding the controls in place to minimize the potential risks posed by existing facilities — both with regard to a sudden , catastrophic release ( as that in kingston ) or a gradual release and migration of contaminants .

congressional interest in the issue existed before the kingston release , but increased significantly afterward .

on january 14 , 2009 , the coal ash reclamation , environment , and safety act of 2009 ( h.r .

493 ) was introduced .

the bill was intended to establish new standards applicable to surface impoundments .

on february 12 , 2009 , the house committee on natural resources , subcommittee on energy and mineral resources , held a legislative hearing on the bill .

a scheduled markup was canceled when epa announced that it would soon propose new regulations applicable to landfills and surface impoundments .

the house transportation and infrastructure committee , subcommittee on water resources and environment , held several hearings that looked at different aspects of the kingston release , such as potential water quality impacts , causes of the release , and cleanup progress .

also , on december 10 , 2009 , the house committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on energy and the environment , held a hearing entitled "drinking water and public health impacts of coal combustion waste disposal. .

given its interest in this issue , it is unclear how congress may respond given the current debate regarding epa's existing authority to regulate ccw and its potential to regulate it as hazardous waste .

