according to the federal substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) , in 2007 about 11% of adults ( 23.7 million ) experienced serious psychological distress , such as anxiety and mood disorders , that resulted in functional impairment that impeded one or more major life activities .

it is estimated that less than half of these individuals received mental health care due to various social , financial , and systemic barriers .

even among those individuals who received mental health care , some did not receive the best possible care due to lack of trained mental health providers and other issues affecting quality of care .

the term "mental health care" has been used in various contexts to encompass a wide variety of services , ranging from commonly used services , such as family and marital counseling , to specific treatment options for severe mental conditions , such as bipolar illness .

in this report , "mental health care" includes care for all levels of severity of mental illness as well as treatment of mental conditions that are common in certain age groups — including alzheimer's and other dementias among older adults , post - partum depression and other mood disorders among middle - aged adults , and autism and attention - deficit disorders ( add ) among children .

it includes counseling , inpatient care , outpatient care , and prescription medications for problems with emotions or anxiety , and within this report , it does not include alcohol or drug treatment .

this report begins with a historical perspective on delivery of mental health care services .

next , it describes the health care delivery system within which mental health care is currently provided and presents the various mechanisms that finance the current system .

in describing the mental health system , this report considers three aspects: who provides care ? .

where is the care provided ? .

who pays for the care ? .

finally , this report analyzes the barriers to receiving mental health treatment and workforce training issues , and presents possible options for congress to address these barriers .

while it is recognized that mental health care is also provided within the department of veterans affairs ( va ) and the department of defense's ( dod's ) military health system , a detailed analysis of these systems is beyond the scope of this report .

instead , this report focuses on the civilian mental health care delivery system .

congress has been increasingly interested in transforming the mental health system in the aftermath of tragedies involving mentally ill individuals — such as the shootings at columbine and virginia tech , which led to heightened public interest in the adequacy of the mental health care system .

in the past decade , congress passed two far - reaching laws on mental health care .

the first law , the children's health act , reauthorized the samhsa in 2000 and called for greater focus on the measurement of mental health care outcomes .

the second law , the paul wellstone and pete domenici mental health parity and addiction equity act of 2008 , expands federal requirements for mental health coverage and requires health insurers who choose to cover mental illness to provide mental health benefits on par with that for physical health .

in the united states , mental health care is delivered by a range of providers in a range of settings .

the 1999 surgeon general's report provided an overview of the u.s. mental health care delivery system .

providers may be formally trained mental health specialists , general health care providers , human services providers , or volunteer support group leaders .

settings in which mental health care is provided also vary in their formality .

financial resources may determine the provider and setting for a patient's mental health care .

providers , types of setting , and financial resources have a bearing on the quality of mental health care a person receives and their health outcomes .

this section discusses several characteristics related to the mental health care delivery system , such as the types of providers of mental health care and their licensing and training requirements , the settings in which mental health care is provided , and the manner in which this system is financed .

finally , this section describes two federally funded efforts to measure quality of mental health care .

with numerous providers , treatment settings , and payment mechanisms , the mental health care delivery system in the united states is complex , and some policymakers and other stakeholders believe that the system has gaps that make it difficult for some populations to navigate .

in view of recent focus on the reform of the general health care system , congress may consider opportunities to transform the mental health care delivery system .

policy discussions may address the following findings and assertions: while great advances have been made in the discovery of evidence - based treatment practices , the practical application of these findings has been slow .

access to competent mental health providers is scarce in rural areas and even some urban areas .

health insurance coverage of mental illness is often less comprehensive than that of physical illnesses .

mental health care is often not coordinated with other care that an individual may be receiving or may need .

measurements of the quality of mental health care are inadequate to improve quality and transform the system .

in the 1990s , a number of federal reports on the state of the nation's mental health system have called for its reform: mental health: report of the surgeon general ( surgeon general's report ) ,1996 .

president's new freedom commission report ( freedom commission report ) , 2003 .

transforming mental health care in america report ( action agenda ) , 2005 .

improving the quality of health care for mental and substance - use conditions report ( iom report ) , 2005 .

these reports are consistent in their recommendations for reforming the mental health care system .

they recommend improving the evidence - base for treatment practices , overcoming stigma , improving quality of mental health care and its measurement , addressing workforce shortage issues , coordinating care , and addressing financial barriers to mental health care .

the reports differ in their area of primary focus and the extent to which they assign specific roles to the public and private entities in order to reform the mental health care system .

for example , the surgeon general's report and the freedom commission report provide general guidelines for reform , whereas the action agenda and the iom report attempt to translate the guidelines into action steps .

this section analyzes the issues facing the mental health care delivery system , including evidence - based practices , access to care , financing mental health care , coordination of care , and quality of care .

options that congress may consider are described in each area .

congress may , of course , also decide not to take any additional steps to address mental health care delivery , given other priorities .

a crosswalk of the recommendations of the four federal reports mentioned above in the context of the issues facing the mental health care delivery system is included in the appendix .

historically , mental illness has not been as well understood as other physical illness .

this has led to disparities in the treatment and financing of mental illness .

the mental health care system currently faces a number of structural and functional issues .

experts have called for its transformation and provide numerous recommendations .

transformation of the mental health care system , in this view , would require incorporating in a timely fashion evidence - based practices as part of routine practice , resolving workforce shortage issues , ensuring access to care by removing financial barriers , coordinating mental health care with general health care and social services , and developing a way to systematically measure and improve the quality of care delivered .

while each of these recommendations may result in some benefits , evidence suggests a comprehensive transformation of the mental health system could be necessary to ensure the availability and accessibility of quality mental health care to all individuals who need it .

