everyone eats .

as a result , everyone is affected to some degree by food price changes .

this makes understanding food price changes and their effects on consumers an important matter for congress .

this report provides information on the current status and outlook for u.s. food prices , measuring their changes and how such changes relate to u.s. consumers .

the first section of the report , " consumer demand ," briefly reviews the major economic concepts underlying consumer food behavior .

the second section , " the consumer price index ( cpi ) ," describes how u.s. food price inflation rates have evolved since 1915 , when federal price data collection for inflation - measuring purposes began .

the third section , " consumer income and expenditures ," provides information on recent history and projections for u.s. food expenditure shares relative to total household budget , with comparisons across income quintiles , as well as internationally .

the fourth section , " recent food price inflation ," examines retail food price inflation , including a review and discussion of the level of food price inflation registered by the consumer price index for all - food , at - home - food , and away - from - home - food purchases as well as for major food groups .

finally , a fifth section , entitled " effect of retail price changes ," briefly discusses the impact that rapid food price inflation can have on government food programs and the more vulnerable consumer groups .

each section may be read independently of the others .

thus , those readers that are concerned primarily with the current status of u.s. retail food price inflation may proceed directly to the sections entitled " historic price inflation patterns ," " recent food price inflation ," or " effect of retail price changes . .

consumer demand is influenced by economic factors — own - price , the price of close substitutes , the price of complementary items , and household income — as well as by several non - economic factors including tastes and preferences , family size , age of family members , geographic location , shopping behavior , and lifestyle choices .

economists attempt to study and measure the nature of consumer behavior in response to changes in prices , incomes , and household characteristics , with an eye for understanding the potential social welfare outcomes that may result from price and income changes across different socioeconomic groups .

policymakers , in turn , often attempt to use that information to design and implement policies that mitigate the more deleterious effects of price and income changes on consumers .

the cpi is perhaps the most widely reported measure of u.s. price inflation .

the cpi is used both as an economic indicator of retail price inflation and as a means of adjusting current - period values for inflation .

the "all - items" cpi is the index most often referred to ( i.e. , the headline cpi ) for representing consumer price inflation .

it is generally divided into eight major spending categories , including a "food and beverage" category comprising 15.3% of the overall index .

the cpi category of "food and beverages" is composed of two major subcategories: "all - food" ( which has a relative weight of 14.3% in the all - items cpi ) and "alcoholic beverages" ( 1.0% ) .

the all - food cpi is the principal indicator of consumer food price changes ( figure 1 ) .

the all - food cpi can be subdivided into the "food - at - home" ( 59.1% ) and "food - away - from - home" ( 40.9% ) categories .

the food - at - home cpi reflects changes in the prices of foods consumed at home .

as such it is the principal indicator of changes in retail food prices in the united states and includes prices of foods purchased at grocery stores , food marts , and big - box discounters ( eg , walmart , costco , etc. ) .

the food - away - from - home cpi reflects changes in the prices of foods purchased and consumed outside of the home , such as restaurants and other eating and drinking establishments .

however , it also includes price changes for ready - to - eat foods purchased at hotels and motels , recreational places and sporting events , vending machines , and school and work cafeterias .

a household allocates its available income across a range of expenditure , savings , and investment choices .

as mentioned earlier , food expenditures as a share of a household's total budget are an indicator of sensitivity ( or vulnerability ) to unexpected food price changes .

at the national level , food budget share ( via engel's law ) can be used as a general indicator of welfare among nations .

this section provides a discussion of recently observed food price inflation , first based on an annual aggregate perspective , then from a monthly disaggregate perspective that examines price inflation for both food - at - home versus food - away - from - home and major food groups .

as stated earlier in this report , lower - income consumers who spend a significant share of their household budget on food are likely to be impacted more severely by rising food prices , to be more responsive to price changes , and to be forced to make more difficult budgetary tradeoffs than high - income consumers with lower food budget shares .

the united states has several domestic programs that are designed to help consumers meet their household food and nutrition needs during periods of economic downturn when household purchasing power is diminished .

in addition , the united states has a history of providing significant international food aid during periods of famine or food shortages throughout the world .

both domestic and international u.s. food assistance programs are directly influenced by food price inflation .

many wages and salaries , as well as federal programs ( including several domestic food assistance programs ) , are linked to price inflation through escalation clauses in order to retain their purchasing power .

for households where income does not keep up with price inflation , declines in purchasing power are both real and immediate .

however , even for households with escalation clauses that adjust incomes or benefits for price inflation , there is a time lag between the time the price inflation is measured and the time when the wage or program benefit is adjusted upward to compensate .

as a result , for households with incomes or federal benefits linked to price inflation escalators , higher prices can cause a short - term decline in real purchasing power .

this is most meaningful when prices are accelerating .

when prices are falling , as during a deflationary period , consumers with fixed incomes realize gains in real income ( provided that they are not subject to wage cuts or layoffs ) .

the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) administers several domestic food and nutrition programs that provide a nutritional safety net for millions of low - income households , as well as schoolchildren and nutritionally vulnerable groups such as pregnant and / or lactating mothers .

the past decade has seen a tremendous expansion in use of usda's food and nutrition assistance programs — since fy2000 , expenditures for food and nutrition assistance have more than tripled ( figure 20 ) .

federal expenditures totaled $109.2 billion in fy2013 and marked the 13 th consecutive year in which food and nutrition assistance expenditures exceeded the previous historical record .

total outlays declined slightly to $103.6 billion in fy2014 .

usda's expenditures for food and nutrition assistance programs can be grouped into five main categories: ( 1 ) the supplemental nutrition assistance program ( snap ) ; ( 2 ) school food programs ( including the national school lunch program and the school breakfast program ) ; ( 3 ) the special supplemental nutrition program for women , infants , and children ( wic ) ; ( 4 ) the child and adult care food program ; and ( 5 ) food distribution programs including nutrition services incentive program ( nsip ) , food distribution on indian reservations ( fdpir ) , commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) , and the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) .

snap is the largest of these programs and accounted for 73% of federal food and nutrition assistance spending in fy2014 .

snap provides monthly benefits for eligible participants to purchase food items at authorized food stores .

a substantial portion of spending on food and nutrition assistance programs is in the form of entitlements ( i.e. , mandatory spending ) whereby eligibility and participation rates govern outlays .

for mandatory programs , food price inflation leads to more spending on domestic assistance efforts .

increasing prices encourage those who are eligible , but not participating , to enroll .

they also translate directly ( albeit with a time lag ) into higher benefit payments and per - meal subsidies for "entitlement" programs in which benefits are indexed to food - price inflation .

however , many of these programs also include discretionary components where outlays are determined through the annual appropriations process .

increasing prices place pressure on appropriators to provide more funding to support caseloads for "discretionary" programs like the wic program .

the 2008-2009 global economic crisis — with its higher unemployment , income loss , and lower effective household purchasing power — following on the heels of higher retail prices , brought on higher participation rates and greater costs for domestic food aid programs .

although the u.s. economy resumed growth during 2010 , unemployment ranks have been slow to follow .

this is reflected in high snap participation levels , which hit an all - time high of 47.8 million ( or 15.2% of the u.s. population ) in december 2012 .

snap monthly benefit costs have grown from $2.4 billion in may 2006 to a peak of $6.5 billion in november 2012 , with average per - person monthly benefit spending rising from $93 to $135.73 .

other domestic food assistance programs have seen similar increases in participation ( and costs ) .

the snap , with over $74.1 billion in outlays in fy2014 , is the largest of the federally supported domestic food assistance programs .

snap benefits normally are indexed annually ( each october ) for changes in the cost of usda's least costly food plan , the "thrifty food plan" ( tfp ) .

however , the increases are lagged by three months in reflecting rising food costs — they were ( by law ) based on prices from the immediately previous june .

thus , there is a three - month gap between the calculation of the price inflation index in june and its use to adjust snap benefits in october .

in recognition of the lag in the inflation index for snap benefits , increased food needs , and reduced income , the 2009 american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) provided additional support for domestic food assistance programs: an estimated $11.5 billion for fy2009-fy2010 and $20.8 billion through fy2019 .

snap was the primary recipient of this new money , most of which is being used to pay for added benefits , loosened eligibility standards , and administrative costs .

however , these increased snap benefits were reduced as part of p.l .

111-226 ( a law providing funding for education jobs and medicaid ) and were further reduced by child nutrition reauthorization legislation ( the healthy , hunger - free kids act of 2010 ; p.l .

111-296 ) .

as a result of these cuts , in november 2013 snap benefits will revert to what basic snap law directs ( i.e. , as calculated using annual food - price inflation ) .

federally supported child nutrition programs ( eg , the national school lunch program , the school breakfast program , the special milk program , child and adult care food program , and the summer food service program ) and initiatives reach over 30 million children annually .

in fy2014 , federal spending on these programs totaled nearly $20 billion , the second - largest federal commitment to domestic food assistance .

the basic goals of federal child nutrition programs are to improve children's nutrition , increase lower - income children's access to nutritious meals and snacks , and help support the agricultural economy .

federal payments for meals and snacks served to children are indexed every july to food - price changes reflected in the food - away - from - home component of the cpi over the 12-month period ending each may .

commodity support also is indexed annually based on the bureau of labor statistics' producer price index for five major food components ( cereal and bakery products , meats , poultry and fish , dairy products , processed fruits and vegetables , and fats and oils ) .

unlike the snap and child nutrition programs , which receive mandatory funding , the wic program is funded from discretionary sources .

spending depends on annual appropriations , based largely on estimates of participation and the cost of the food packages that are purchased with wic vouchers .

in fy2014 , $6.2 billion was spent on wic , including $4.3 billion in food costs and $1.9 billion in nutrition service and administrative costs .

the average monthly food cost per participant was $43.65 .

the value of benefits is not indexed to inflation , per se .

rather , wic vouchers are redeemable at whatever the participating retailer charges for the items covered by the vouchers , which differ according to the type of recipient ( eg , pregnant mother , infant , and child ) .

as a result , the cost of wic vouchers reflect food price changes without the time lag built into other inflation - indexed nutrition programs .

just as important , wic vouchers are highly specific as to the food items they cover and have a relatively heavy emphasis on certain types of food — for example , dairy items and infant formula are major components .

in recent years , the cost of wic food vouchers has varied a great deal , largely because of changes in dairy - related food prices .

the average per - participant monthly cost of vouchers has ranged from $33.06 in fy2000 to $46.69 in fy2011 .

however , the annual percentage increase has actually declined in some years ( fy2005 and fy2006 ) and increased substantially in other years .

given this significant volatility , it is difficult to produce specific estimates of the effect of food price inflation on wic program costs .

although wic spending is discretionary , congress has historically shown a willingness to appropriate whatever amounts are necessary to meet costs imposed by increased participation or food costs .

usda operates several additional food assistance programs targeting low - income or vulnerable populations .

the emergency food assistance program ( tefap ) and meal service programs under the older americans act ( eg , "meals - on - wheels" and meals served to seniors in congregate meal settings ) provide key food assistance support for vulnerable groups .

the commodity supplemental food program ( csfp ) provides foods purchased by usda to low - income infants and children up to age six , low - income pregnant and postpartum women , and to low - income senior citizens .

the senior farmers' market nutrition program ( sfmnp ) provides coupons to low - income seniors that can be exchanged for fresh , nutritious , unprepared , locally grown fruits , vegetables , and herbs at farmers' markets , roadside stands , and community - supported agriculture programs .

like wic , these programs are discretionary , and rising need and higher food prices have placed pressure on appropriators to add to federal funding .

usda's international food and nutritional assistance activities are funded by discretionary appropriations — primarily under the food for peace act ( p.l .

83-480 ) as amended by the 2014 farm bill ( agricultural act of 2014 ; p.l .

113-79 ) .

average annual spending on u.s. international food aid programs has average $2.6 billion since fy2006 .

food aid usually takes the form of basic food grains — such as wheat , sorghum , and corn — and vegetable oil , as well as blended and / or processed food products .

because foreign food aid is a budget value and not a food volume , its effective "purchase power" for acquiring u.s. agricultural commodities in domestic wholesale markets for delivery to foreign countries is diminished by food price hikes without additional appropriations .

also , higher energy costs increase the shipping costs to move food purchases and food aid to foreign countries further limiting the budgetary purchase power of food aid dollars .

unlike some domestic nutrition programs , foreign food aid does not have an escalation clause to adjust for changing costs .

u.s. food aid also has certain delivery requirements that add to the program's vulnerability to general price inflation .

ocean transport of government - generated shipments is governed by the cargo preference act , p.l .

83-644 ( august 26 , 1954 ) .

this act contains permanent legislation requiring that at least 50% of the volume of u.s. agricultural commodities financed under u.s. food aid programs ship on u.s. - flag vessels .

excess costs are usually incurred because freight rates on u.s. - flag vessels are generally higher than on foreign commercial ships .

there is growing interest from the administration and certain members of congress , but also from the international development community , for the united states to switch its food assistance program over to cash rather than kind .

such a switch would avoid the costly effects that domestic food price inflation has on the food aid budget , while sidestepping completely the obligation to ship food aid on more expensive u.s. - flagged vessels .

