a series of elections in lebanon , iran , afghanistan , and iraq may be critical in determining the future direction and success of u.s. policy toward the middle east .

in 2009 , as the obama administration and members of the 111 th congress face the challenges of withdrawing from iraq , stabilizing afghanistan , and containing iran's regional ambitions , election outcomes and new governments could lead to changing regional dynamics that may complicate or advance u.s. interests .

for several years , the united states and others have supported efforts to strengthen lebanese sovereignty by supporting its central government and military ; however , should hezbollah , a u.s. - designated foreign terrorist organization ( fto ) and its allies gain a majority of seats in the june parliamentary elections , many question whether current u.s. support to lebanon would continue at current levels .

most observers view the election in lebanon as both a test of democratic reform and an indicator of iran's strategic influence in the region .

on the other hand , in the iranian election , a victory for reformist candidate mir hossein musavi may bode well for u.s. efforts to engage with iran and lower u.s. - iranian tensions .

it may also increase the chances of success for a comprehensive middle east peace , as a more moderate iranian leadership could refrain from meddling in israeli - syrian and israeli - palestinian negotiations should they occur .

in iraq and afghanistan , the election process is seen as at least as important as the outcomes .

in fact , some analysts have argued that the absence of violence , fraud , and disputes over the elections or the elections results is more important for u.s. objectives than the winning or losing of any one candidate or party .

in afghanistan , most analysts agree that the selection by hamid karzai of muhammad fahim as his candidate for vice president improves the chances that karzai will win in august , which could result in the continuation of the status quo in afghanistan .

in iraq , where nuri al - maliki's success is less certain and where a series of elections and referenda on controversial issues including the status of kirkuk are yet to be scheduled , violent or delayed elections could cause a re - evaluation of the planned u.s. troop withdrawals or represent a setback for u.s. efforts to promote reconciliation among iraq's factions .

the outcome of the lebanese parliamentary elections , scheduled for june 7 , 2009 , may be critical in determining the future direction of u.s. policy toward lebanon .

the lebanese are to elect 128 deputies — from 26 districts and 11 politically recognized religious sects — to lebanon's unicameral legislature .

lebanon's electoral system is a mix of quotas based on religious confession ( religious denomination ) and pluralistic winner - take - all districts .

for the first time , polls are to be held on the same day in all electoral districts , a result of a new electoral law passed in late september 2008 .

lebanese government officials hope that this change will prevent the outcomes from one district from affecting voting patterns in the rest of the country .

the new election law is based on smaller electoral districts than in past elections , when districts were subject to gerrymandering under syrian occupation .

in 2005 , following syrian withdrawal , there were 17 large districts and 17 uncontested seats .

in 2009 , there is only one uncontested seat .

of the 26 smaller districts , there are 12 districts in which all candidates are affiliated with the same religious confession .

most analysts agree that the new election law will make the election both more competitive and more sectarian .

this election law is only stipulated to be used for the june 2009 elections .

the new parliament will be responsible for crafting a new election law for future elections .

on june 12 , 2009 , iran is to hold presidential elections .

the president is directly elected in a nationwide vote , but is subordinate to a "supreme leader," who is selected by an elected "assembly of experts" that decides on succession and major constitutional revisions .

presidential candidate eligibility is determined by the 12-person "council of guardians," an appointed body that also ensures that legislation adheres to islamic principles .

candidates completed their registration from may 5 – 10 , 2009 , and council of guardians is scheduled to decide on the final candidate field by may 20 .

in past elections , several hundred persons offered themselves as candidates , including some women .

this year , 450 registered .

however , the council's screening process has tended to narrow the field to about 8 to 10 candidates , all men , although most presidential elections have offered voters a relatively wide choice of candidates in terms of views and experience .

if no candidate achieves at least 50% of the vote on june 12 , a runoff between the top two vote - getters would be held about three weeks later .

there has not been a history of election - related violence in iran , either on election day or at other times .

on august 20 , 2009 , afghanistan is scheduled to hold presidential and provincial elections .

almost every decision about the upcoming election has been contested , leading some observers to forecast a possible "failed election," in which the outcome is not universally accepted .

the election comes within a backdrop of deteriorating security in many parts of afghanistan and growing disillusionment within and outside afghanistan with incumbent president hamid karzai , particularly over the issue of official corruption and governmental inability to deliver basic services .

the president , who runs on a ticket with two vice presidents , serves a five year term .

afghanistan has 34 provinces , and the elected provincial councils provide an advisory and consultative counterweight to the governors of each province , who are appointed by the president .

each provincial council will also select two representatives each to the 102-seat upper house of the national assembly .

the remaining 34 seats in the upper house are appointed by the president .

the election date has been a particularly controversial issue that encapsulates karzai's differences with political rivals , particularly those among non - pashtun ethnic minorities .

on february 3 , 2009 , afghanistan's independent election commission ( iec ) set august 20 , 2009 as the election date — a change from the april 21 date mandated by one section of the constitution ( article 61 ) .

the change was intended to allow at least 30 days before president hamid karzai's term expires on may 22 , 2009 .

the iec decision on the latter date cited another article of the constitution ( article 33 ) mandating universal accessibility to the voting — and saying that the april 21 date was precluded by difficulties in registering voters , printing ballots , training staff , making the public aware of the elections , and the dependence on international donations to fund the elections , in addition to security questions .

this decision caused the ethnic minority - dominated "united front" faction — which has substantial strength in the elected lower house of the national assembly and has blamed karzai for trying to monopolize pashtun control of the government — to say it would not "recognize" karzai's presidency after may 22 .

in response to the uf criticism , karzai said in late february 2009 that he would run for re - election no matter when the iec sets the election — even if the body moved the election to the april 21 , 2009 date .

to reinforce that assertion , on february 28 , 2009 , karzai issued a presidential decree directing the iec to set the elections in accordance with all provisions of the constitution .

however , observers say karzai's decree was largely political because it was widely recognized that authorities would not be ready to hold elections by the earlier date .

as expected , the iec reaffirmed on march 4 , 2009 that the election must be held on august 20 , 2009 .

karzai's maneuvers and the official decision did not stop the uf from insisting that karzai step down on may 22 and allow the elections to be run by a caretaker government .

karzai argued that the constitution does not provide for any transfer of power other than in case of election or death of a president .

the afghan supreme court backed that decision on march 28 , 2009 .

the obama administration publicly backed both the iec and the supreme court rulings .

despite the dispute between karzai and his opponents , enthusiasm among the public appears to be high , and there was much pre - election maneuvering in advance of the deadline for candidates registration ( may 8 , 2009 ) .

voter registration ( updating of 2005 voter rolls ) began in october 2008 and was completed by march 2009 .

however , there were reports of some registration fraud , with some voters registering on behalf of women who do not , by custom , show up at registration sites .

women are legally permitted to register and vote , but they must do so in person .

security was also a concern during the registration process .

u.s. / nato military operations in some areas , including in helmand in january 2009 , were conducted to secure registration centers .

still , registration percentages in restive areas were lower than in more secure areas .

the elections are expected to cost about $200 million ; on march 31 , 2009 , at a u.n. - led conference in the netherlands , the united states committed $40 million of that amount .

iraq is scheduled to hold national elections on january 30 , 2010 , upon the expiration of the term of the existing council of representatives .

while the specifics of the contest are not yet clear , the results of the provincial elections , held on january 31 , 2009 , might be instructive when looking ahead to the national elections .

the national elections will determine the next four - year government to follow the current government headed by prime minister nuri al - maliki .

some primary features of the provincial elections appear to be tied to the results for the two main shiite parties , whose fates differed dramatically .

in the mostly shiite southern provinces , the islamic supreme council of iraq ( isci , shahid mihrab list ) and maliki's da'wa "state of law coalition" offered competing lists .

maliki's post - election political position apparently was enhanced by the strong showing of his list .

with 28 out of 57 seats , the maliki slate is in effective control , by itself , of the baghdad provincial council ( displacing isci ) .

da'wa also emerged very strong in most of the shiite provinces of the south , including basra , where it won an outright majority ( 20 out of 35 seats ) .

the fadhila ( islamic virtue ) party previously dominated the basra provincial council and administration , a platform from which it launched a move by filing a petition , under the 2006 regions law , to form a new region consisting only of basra province .

this effort did not attract the needed 10% of provincial residents' signatures to trigger a referendum by the time of the provincial elections .

it is likely that fadhila's relatively poor showing and the broader trend of support for strong central government will derail the basra region movement for the near future .

the apparent big loser in the provincial elections was isci , which had been favored because it is well organized and well - funded .

isci favors more power for the provinces and less for the central government ; centralization is maliki's preferred power structure .

isci did not win in najaf province , which it previously dominated and which , because of najaf's revered status in shiism , is considered a center of political gravity in southern iraq .

it won seven seats there , the same number won by the maliki slate .

isci won only 3 seats on the baghdad province council , down from the 28 it held previously , and only five in basra .

some observers believe that the poor showing for isci was a product not only of its call for devolving power out of baghdad , but also because of its perceived close ties to iran , which some iraqis believe is exercising undue influence on iraqi politics .

the provincial elections did , to a large extent , further u.s. goals to bring sunni muslims ever further into the political structure .

sunnis boycotted the january 2005 provincial elections and had been poorly represented in some mixed provinces , such as diyala and nineveh .

it was also hoped that the elections would help incorporate the tribal leaders ( "awakening councils" ) who recruited the sons of iraq fighters into the political structure .

these sunni tribalists offered election slates and showed strength at the expense of the established sunni parties , particularly the iraqi islamic party ( iip ) .

the main "iraq awakening" tribal slate came in first in anbar province .

the established , mostly urban sunni parties , led by the iip , had been struggling in 2008 as the broader accord front ( tawafuq ) fragmented .

in the provincial elections , one of the accord front's component parties — the national dialogue council — ran on slates that competed with the iip in several provinces .

u.s. officials saw the elections as a key opportunity to move moqtada al - sadr's faction firmly away from armed conflict against the mainstream shiite parties .

sadr announced in october 2008 that he would not field a separate list in the provincial elections but support sadrists on other lists .

sadr's faction , represented mainly in the "independent liberals trend" list , filed candidates in several provinces , mostly in the south .

the slate fared well enough in several southern provinces to be a potential coalition partner , and , through deal making , has gained senior positions in a few southern provinces .

the failure of sadrists to win control of any councils could reflect voter disillusionment with parties that continue to field militias — which many iraqis blame for much of the violence that has plagued iraq since the fall of saddam hussein .

despite these relatively positive results , other concerns about the prospects for reconciliation in iraq linger .

in particular , the status of iraqi kurds is still unresolved , and there are potential upcoming elections for the kurdistan regional government ( krg ) that may call attention to concerns about the future status of the kurdish regions .

the post - election efforts to form provincial administrations demonstrated that maliki still needs to strike bargains with rival factions , including sadr , isci , and even the sunni list of saleh al - mutlaq ( national dialogue front ) that contains many ex - baathists .

these concessions indicate that while maliki and his allies may be frontrunners , the outcome of the national election , scheduled for january 30 , 2010 , is uncertain .

some view maliki as somewhat weaker than expected because he was unable to block the selection of ayad al - samarrai , a sunni critic of maliki , as new assembly speaker on april 20 , 2009 .

some sunnis may try to become iraq's president in the next government , sensing that the kurds are now a weakening part of the central government .

president jalal talabani , a kurd , said in march 2009 that he will not continue as president , in part because of widely publicized health problems that have required occasional treatment outside iraq .

other less sweeping elections also are planned for 2009 .

set for july 25 , 2009 , are elections for the kurdistan national assembly , which are to elect a president of the krg .

there is also a planned referendum by june 30 , 2009 on the u.s. - iraq status of forces agreement , although some believe it might not be held if there is no popular agitation to do so .

by july 31 , 2009 , district and sub - district elections are to take place .

several other possible elections in iraq are as yet unscheduled .

for example , there are to be provincial elections in the three kurdish - controlled provinces and the disputed province of kirkuk , subsequent to a settlement of the kirkuk dispute .

under the election law that set the provincial elections , a parliamentary committee was to make recommendations on resolving this dispute by march 31 , 2009 .

that deadline was not met .

the u.n. assistance mission — iraq ( unami ) also is continuing its efforts to forge a grand settlement of kirkuk and other disputed territories , and unami submitted a report to iraqi leaders in late april .

depending on political outcomes , there could be further elections .

among them would be a referendum on any agreed settlement on kirkuk and a vote on amendments to iraq's 2005 constitution .

more so than who prevails in the upcoming elections in iraq , most say , the u.s. interest is that they are held peacefully , with maximal participation from the diverse spectrum of iraqi factions .

political competition through the ballot box could be one factor that could insure that the planned draw - down of u.s. troops from iraq — now set to be completed by the end of 2011 — continues without major interruption .

