the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) is the major federal statute for the education of children with disabilities .

idea both authorizes federal funding for special education and related services and , for states that accept these funds , sets out principles under which special education and related services are to be provided .

the requirements are detailed , especially when the regulatory interpretations are considered .

the major principles include the following requirements: states and school districts make available a free appropriate public education ( fape ) to all children with disabilities , generally between the ages of 3 and 21 .

states and school districts identify , locate , and evaluate all children with disabilities , regardless of the severity of their disability , to determine which children are eligible for special education and related services .

each child receiving services has an individual education program ( iep ) spelling out the specific special education and related services to be provided to meet his or her needs .

the parent must be a partner in planning and overseeing the child's special education and related services as a member of the iep team .

"to the maximum extent appropriate," children with disabilities must be educated with children who are not disabled ; and states and school districts provide procedural safeguards to children with disabilities and their parents , including a right to a due process hearing , the right to appeal to federal district court , and , in some cases , the right to receive attorneys' fees .

idea was originally enacted in 1975 in response to judicial decisions holding that when states provide an education for children without disabilities , they must also provide an education for children with disabilities .

idea has been the subject of numerous reauthorizations ; the most recent reauthorization was p.l .

108-446 in 2004 .

p.l .

108-446 included specific authorizations for appropriations through 2011 .

congress is currently beginning the process of identifying potential issues for the next reauthorization .

this report examines the supreme court decisions , and selected lower court decisions since july 1 , 2005 , the effective date of p.l .

108-446 .

a key component of idea is the definition of a child with a disability .

unlike the definitions of disability in the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) and section 504 of the rehabilitation act , the idea definition is categorical , not functional , and contains a requirement that the child needs special education and related services .

the idea definition states the following: child with a disability. — '' ( a ) in general. — the term 'child with a disability' means a child — '' ( i ) with mental retardation , hearing impairments ( including deafness ) , speech or language impairments , visual impairments ( including blindness ) , serious emotional disturbance ( referred to in this title as 'emotional disturbance' ) , orthopedic impairments , autism , traumatic brain injury , other health impairments , or specific learning disabilities ; and '' ( ii ) who , by reason thereof , needs special education and related services .

in hansen v. republic r - iii school district , the court examined whether a child who had been diagnosed with conduct disorder , bipolar disorder , and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( adhd ) was a child with a disability under idea .

finding that the child met the idea definitional categories of serious emotional disturbance and other health impairments , the court noted that the child was not "merely socially maladjusted" but struggled to pass his classes and standardized tests .

similarly , the child was found to have a diagnosis of adhd and his educational performance was affected by the condition .

the need for special education and related services was key in other court decisions .

several courts of appeal decisions have examined whether a child who falls within one of the categories of disabilities but whose disability may have a minimal effect on education is a child with a disability and thus covered by idea .

in l.i .

v. maine school administrative district no .

55 , the first circuit court of appeals found that a child with asperger's syndrome and an adjustment disorder with depressed mood was a child with a disability under idea even though she had high grades , generally non - disruptive behavior , and "undisputed intellectual ability. .

the court rejected the argument that idea is limited to children whose disabilities "significantly impact educational performance," noting that neither the statute nor its regulations contain this limiting language .

similarly , in board of education of montgomery county v. s.g. the school argued that a child with schizophrenia was not a child with a disability because the disability did not adversely affect her school performance .

the fourth circuit court of appeals rejected this argument after finding that the child had missed a substantial amount of school due to hospitalizations , failed to complete many of her assignments , and , if returned to the public school environment , would most likely be hearing voices again .

on the other hand , the ninth circuit in r.b .

v. napa valley unified school district held that a child with adhd , depression , reactive attachment disorder , and post traumatic stress disorder who exhibited violent tendencies was not eligible for idea services since her inappropriate behavior did not adversely affect her educational performance .

the fact that the child received a section 504 plan and behavioral supports did not make her eligible under idea .

in alvin independent school district v. ad , the fifth circuit also found no adverse educational effect from the child's adhd .

mr. and mrs. n.c. v. bedford central school district examined whether a child with dysthymic disorder met the requirements of the idea regulations for seriously emotionally disturbed and found that the child's behavior fell short of the requirements for seriously emotionally disturbed .

the second circuit also noted that even if the child qualified as seriously emotionally disturbed , there was insufficient evidence that his educational performance was adversely affected .

idea requires that in order to receive funds under the statute , a state must submit a plan to the secretary of education indicating that a state has certain policies and procedures in effect .

among these is the requirement that all children with disabilities and who are in need of special education , are identified , located , and evaluated .

this requirement is referred to as child find .

although this requirement has not been heavily litigated , the ninth circuit held in compton unified school district v. addison that a school district who failed to evaluate a ninth grader who failed all her classes , colored with crayons and played with dolls in class failed to meet idea's child find requirement and that such a failure could be the subject of a due process complaint .

although the supreme court has not yet made a determination regarding whether the case will be heard , the court did ask the department of justice for its views on the issue .

the issue as presented to the court is whether the parent of a child with a disability has a right to a due process hearing alleging negligence because of school officials' failure to arrange an educational program for the child , or if due process suits are only allowed when the school district makes an intentional decision .

as noted above , idea's requirement of a free appropriate public education is the cornerstone of the act .

fape is defined in part as requiring "special education and related services. .

related services are defined as meaning transportation , and such developmental , corrective , and other supportive services ( including speech - language pathology and audiology services , interpreting services , psychological services , physical and occupational therapy , recreation , including therapeutic recreation , social work services , school nurse services designed to enable a child with a disability to receive a free appropriate public education as described in the individualized education program of the child , counseling services , including rehabilitation counseling , orientation and mobility services , and medical services , except that such medical services shall be for diagnostic and evaluation purposed only ) as may be required to assist a child with a disability to benefit from special education , and includes the early identification and assessment of disabling conditions in children .

two supreme court decisions under idea have involved the concept of related services , and both have involved the issue of what is a medical service .

in irving independent school district v. tatro , the court examined the case of an eight - year - old girl with spina bifida who required clean intermittent catheterization ( cic ) , and held that the school must provide the service .

the court held that services affecting both the medical and educational needs of a child must be provided under idea if ( 1 ) the child has a disability so as to require special education ; ( 2 ) the service is necessary to help a child with a disability benefit from special education ; and ( 3 ) a nurse or other qualified person who is not a physician can provide the service .

services that could be provided outside the school day would not need to be provided .

tatro drew a bright line between services that had to be provided by a doctor and those that could be provided by a person who was not a physician .

however , after tatro , some courts of appeal did not apply this bright line but used other factors , such as the nature and extent of services .

this set the stage for another supreme court decision in 1999 , cedar rapids community school district v. garret f .

garret f. involved a child who was paralyzed from the neck down as a result of a motorcycle accident when he was four years old .

since the child was ventilator dependent , he required substantial services including providing suction on his tracheotomy tube and manually pumping air through an air bag when suction is being provided .

the school denied the parents' request for services , and proposed a test for related services in which the outcome would depend on a series of factors , such as whether the care was continuous and the cost of the services .

the court rejected this proposed test and used the same reasoning it had used in tatro , finding that the medical services exclusion from the definition was limited to the services of physician or a hospital .

this holding , the court stated , was in keeping with the overarching purpose of idea "to open the door of public education to all qualified children. .

the 2004 reauthorization dealt with this issue by establishing risk pools for high - need children with disabilities .

states are permitted to reserve 10% of the funds reserved for other state activities ( or 1% to 1.05% of the overall state grant ) to establish and maintain a risk pool to assist leas serving high - need children with disabilities .

related services have not given rise to a large number of recent idea cases .

generally , the cases have emphasized the broad discretion of a federal court to define what services are required to enable a child with a disability to benefit from special education , and have applied the tatro analysis .

idea requires that children with disabilities , to the maximum extent appropriate , be educated with children who are not disabled and that separate schooling or special classes occur only when the nature or severity of the disability is such that "education in regular classes with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot be achieved satisfactorily. .

several recent courts of appeal decisions have followed a two - pronged approach , first enunciated in daniel r.r .

v. state board of education , to determine whether an iep places a student in the least restrictive environment .

first , a court must consider whether education in the regular classroom with the use of supplementary services can be achieved satisfactorily .

second , if such placement cannot be achieved satisfactorily , the court must consider whether the school has mainstreamed the child to the maximum extent appropriate .

the first prong includes several factors: whether the school district has made reasonable efforts to accommodate the child in the regular classroom ; the educational benefits available to the child in the regular classroom as compared to those in a special education classroom ; and the possible negative effects of the inclusion of the child on other students in the regular classroom .

in a.g. v. durtan , the third circuit examined the effect of the child with a disability on other students , noting the student's frequent , loud vocalizations , combined with removal of shoes and socks , inappropriately clapping and grinding her teeth , having difficulty toileting , and inappropriately touching other students .

although these disruptions were not considered dispositive , the court considered them notable and upheld the district court decision that the student could not be satisfactorily educated full time in a regular classroom .

in enacting p.l .

94-142 , the original version of idea , congress provided grants to the states to help pay for education for children with disabilities , and also delineated specific requirements the states must follow to receive these federal funds .

this public law contained a requirement that if there is a dispute between the school and the parents of a child with a disability , the child "stays put" in his or her current educational placement until the dispute is resolved using the due process procedures set forth in the statute .

the concept of "stay put" was placed in the statute to help eliminate the then common discriminatory practice of expelling children with disabilities from school .

a revised "stay put" provision remains as law in the current version of idea .

in 1988 , the question of whether there was an implied exception to the "stay put" rule was presented to the supreme court in honig v. doe .

honig involved emotionally disturbed children , one of whom had choked another student with sufficient force to leave abrasions on the child's neck and who had kicked out a window while he was being escorted to the principal's office .

the other child in the honig case had been involved in stealing , extorting money , and making lewd comments .

the school had sought expulsion , but the supreme court disagreed finding that "congress very much meant to strip schools of the unilateral authority they had traditionally employed to exclude disabled students , particularly emotionally disturbed students , from school. .

however , the court observed that this holding did "not leave educators hamstrung.... where a student poses an immediate threat to the safety of others , officials may temporarily suspend him or her for up to 10 school days.... and in those cases in which the parents of a truly dangerous child adamantly refuse to permit any change in placement , the 10-day respite gives school officials an opportunity to invoke the aid of the courts under section 1415 ( e ) ( 2 ) , which empowers courts to grant any appropriate relief. .

this statement about the school's right to seek judicial relief has come to be know as a honig injunction .

the supreme court's interpretation of idea in honig did not quell all concerns about discipline and children with disabilities .

in 1994 , congress amended idea's "stay put" provision to give schools the unilateral authority to remove a child with a disability to an interim alternative educational setting if the child was determined to have brought a firearm to school .

this provision was expanded in the idea amendments of 1997 to include weapons ( not just firearms ) and drugs , and was further expanded in the 2004 reauthorization to include situations where a student has inflicted serious bodily injury upon another person while at school .

not all issues regarding the stay put provisions have involved disciplinary actions .

several courts have addressed the issue of whether the stay put requirement applies when a child is transitioning from part c of idea to part b .

part b of idea applies to school - aged children and requires the provision of fape as delineated in an iep ; part c of idea applies to infants and toddlers and requires the provision of appropriate early intervention services as set forth in an individualized family service plan ( ifsp ) .

rejecting an opinion by the office of special education programs ( osep ) of the department of education , the third circuit in pardini v. allegheny intermediate unit held that the stay put provision requires the child "to continue to receive conductive education until the dispute over its appropriateness for inclusion in her iep was resolved. .

however , the eleventh circuit in d.p .

v. school board of broward county disagreed , finding that the children in that case were applying for initial admission to a public school program and that they were not entitled to continue to receive services pursuant to their ifsps .

other issues regarding the stay put provision have involved mediation , private school placement , a move from a resource room to a classroom , and the appeals process in the courts .

sammons v. polk c ounty school board raised the issue of whether a request for mediation invokes the stay put provision .

the eleventh circuit held that the idea regulations limited the application of the stay put provision to the pendency of administrative or judicial proceedings and , therefore , it was not applicable to a request for mediation .

in l.m .

v. capistrano unified school district , the ninth circuit held that a child who had not had an implemented iep , and had never been placed in a public school , but was unilaterally placed in a private school by his parents , could not use the stay put provision to continue private school placement .

similarly , although the iep team recommended that a child be placed in a private school in the fall , when the district contested the iep teams recommendation , the court in e.y .

v. elysian charter school of hoboken held that the placement where the child was to "stay put" was the placement for the preceding school year .

a child's relocation from a resource room to an inclusion classroom was not found to constitute a change in placement within the meaning of the stay put provision .

in joshua a. v. rocklin unified school district , the ninth circuit held that the stay put provision applied throughout the appeals process in the courts .

an attempt to apply a novel application of the stay put provision failed in n.d. v. state of hawaii .

due to major fiscal concerns , the state of hawaii decided to furlough teachers and shut down the public schools for 17 fridays in the 2009-2010 school year .

since this meant an approximate reduction of 10% in instruction days , plaintiffs filed suit , alleging that this reduction violated the stay put provision of idea .

the ninth circuit found no violation , holding that the stay put provision was not intended to cover system - wide changes in public schools that affect children with and without disabilities .

the use of seclusion and restraints has been the subject of increased congressional interest , and on march 3 , 2010 , the house passed h.r .

4247 , the "keeping all students safe act. .

a similar bill , s. 2860 , was introduced in the senate .

idea provides that when the behavior of a child with a disability impedes the child's learning or the learning of others , the iep team must consider "the use of positive behavioral interventions and supports , and other strategies , to address that behavior. .

nothing in idea specifically addresses the use of seclusion and restraints , and the department of education has stated that "[w]hile idea emphasizes the use of positive behavioral interventions and supports to address behavior that impedes learning , idea does not flatly prohibit the use of mechanical restraints or other aversive behavioral techniques for children with disabilities. .

the department also noted that state law may address whether restraints may be used and , if restraints are allowed , the "critical inquiry is whether the use of such restraints or techniques can be implemented consistent with the child's iep and the requirement that iep teams consider the use of positive behavioral interventions and supports when the child's behavior impedes the child's learning or that of others. .

the supreme court has not specifically addressed the use of seclusion or restraints under idea ; however , in honig v. doe , the court examined idea's requirements for children who exhibited violent or inappropriate behavior , and held that a suspension longer than ten days violated idea's "stay - put" provision .

in honig , the court observed that this decision "does not leave educators hamstrung" and that educators may utilize "normal procedures" which "may include the use of study carrels , timeouts , detention , or the restriction of privileges" as well as a ten - day suspension .

despite the lack of specific language in idea regarding the use of restraints and seclusion , cases have been brought alleging that their use violates a child's right to a free appropriate public education .

generally , courts have not found violations of idea where the seclusion or restraint was deemed necessary to keep the child from hurting himself or others , or where the child was progressing academically and the school had tailored the child's iep to address behavioral issues .

courts have examined whether the administrative exhaustion requirements of idea apply in situations involving the use of seclusion and restraint .

in c.n .

v. willmar public schools , the child's iep and behavior intervention plan allowed for the use of seclusion and restraint procedures when the child was a danger to herself or others ; however , the parents alleged that these procedures were used improperly and excessively .

the parents withdrew their daughter from the school and placed her in another school .

after her withdrawal , the parents requested a due process hearing , challenging the adequacy of the educational services .

the eighth circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal of the case , finding that if the parent was dissatisfied with the child's education , she must follow the idea due process procedures and file for a due process hearing while the child was still in the school district against which the complaint was made .

in contrast , idea has been used by parents in an attempt to enjoin enforcement of a new york state regulation that banned the use of "aversive interventions. .

parents argued in part that "some students' iep's were being revised without parental consent or simply not revised for the new school year , the effect of which was to deprive those students of aversive therapies. .

the second circuit vacated the district court's injunction against the regulation and remanded for further findings .

on remand , the district court upheld the regulations finding that "the regulations represent an informed , rational choice between two opposing schools of thought on the use of aversives… .

[t]he regulations are neither arbitrary nor capricious , and are consistent with the purposes of the idea. .

although harassment is not explicitly prohibited in idea , the department of education has stated that disability harassment may result in a denial of fape .

several courts have held that harassment may be so severe that the child with a disability is denied access to educational benefits and that , therefore , idea is violated .

however , at least one court has found that the claim of harassment must be tied to idea and should clearly state that the harassment has denied the child fape .

in addition , another court held that claims regarding retaliation are subject to idea's requirements for exhaustion of administrative remedies .

the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) and section 504 of the rehabilitation act may also give rise to actions alleging retaliation for advocacy alleging violations of idea .

several circuits have held that "attempting to protect the rights of special education students constitutes protected activity under the rehabilitation act. .

idea is not the only federal statute to address the education of children with disabilities , although it is the most detailed in its provisions .

section 504 of the rehabilitation act and the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) address the rights of individuals with disabilities to education .

although there is overlap , particularly with section 504 and the ada , each statute plays a significant part in the education of individuals with disabilities .

idea , enacted in 1975 , is both a grants statute and civil rights statute and requires programs for children with disabilities that are in addition to those available to children without disabilities .

section 504 , enacted in 1973 , and the ada , enacted in 1990 , are civil rights statutes that prohibit discrimination against individuals with disabilities .

their coverage is similar , and the ada was modeled on section 504 and its regulations ; however , section 504 only applies to entities that receive federal financial assistance , while the ada has broader coverage , not tied to the receipt of federal funds .

as noted in d.a .

v. houston independent school district , "[e]xactly what remedies remain under 504 and the ada for children whose parents are dissatisfied with the school's determinations under idea are unclear. .

although a detailed analysis of the educational coverage of these statutes is beyond the scope of this report , it should be noted that several courts have examined issues presented by the interaction of the statutes , noting differences in coverage .

idea contains detailed due process requirements to ensure the provision of fape .

these include the opportunity for an impartial due process hearing .

however , the statute contains no specific provision relating to which party has the burden of proof in a due process hearing , and the courts of appeal , prior to the supreme court's decision in schaffer v. weast , were split in their interpretations of who bore the burden of proof .

the supreme court in the 2005 case of schaffer v. weast held that the burden of proof regarding an allegedly inadequate iep in an idea due process hearing rests with the party seeking the relief .

the supreme court , in an opinion by justice o'connor , first observed that "absent some reason to believe that congress intended otherwise , ... we will conclude that the burden of persuasion lies where it usually falls , upon the party seeking relief. .

justice o'connor then examined , and rejected , various reasons advanced to support the argument that the burden of proof should be on the school system .

the supreme court noted that the most plausible argument advanced by the parents was that , in the interest of fairness , the burden of proof should not be placed on a party when the facts are "peculiarly within the knowledge of his adversary. .

school districts were seen as having a "natural advantage" regarding the information , but justice o'connor did not find this to be determinative because "congress addressed this when it obliged schools to safeguard the procedural rights of parents and to share information with them. .

the court noted that idea provides parents with the right to review records ; to have an independent educational evaluation ; to have details about options considered by the school district as well as disclosure of evaluations and recommendations ; and to receive attorneys' fees in the discretion of a court if they prevail .

justice o'connor concluded that "[t]hese protections ensure that the school bears no unique informational advantage. .

although there is no specific provision allowing a court to award to expert witness fees to prevailing parents , the language regarding attorneys' fees has been interpreted by some lower courts to allow such an award .

idea's statutory language states in relevant part: "in any action or proceeding brought under this section , the court , in its discretion , may award reasonable attorneys' fees as part of the costs — ( i ) to a prevailing party who is the parent of a child with a disability. .

the parents in arlington central school district v. murphy argued that the language on costs encompassed the payment of expert witness fees .

to support this argument , they pointed to the legislative history of the handicapped children's protection act , which stated that "[t]he conferees intend that the term 'attorneys' fees as part of the costs' include reasonable expenses and fees of expert witnesses. .

the supreme court , in a decision written by justice alito , held that idea does not authorize prevailing parents to recover fees they have paid to experts .

the majority opinion first observed that the holding was "guided by the fact that congress enacted the idea pursuant to the spending clause. .

this was seen as significant because if congress attaches conditions to a state's acceptance of funds , the conditions must be unambiguous and provide clear notice .

the majority concluded that idea's statutory language did not provide this clear notice and that the legislative history was unconvincing and "simply not enough" under these circumstances .

h.r .

1208 and s. 613 were introduced in the 112 th congress to amend idea to include the fees of expert witnesses .

they specifically provided that "the term 'attorneys' fees' shall include the fees of expert witnesses , including the reasonable costs of any test or evaluation necessary for the preparation of the parent or guardian's case in the action or proceeding. .

idea has two separate means of resolving disputes: ( 1 ) the impartial due process procedures and ( 2 ) the state complaint resolution system , and the state complaint regulations specifically allow complaints by "any organization or individual. .

in addition , the department of education is responsible for monitoring implementation of idea .

at least one court of appeals decision has addressed a systemic complaint under idea's due process procedures .

in addition , the ninth circuit in lake washington school district no .

414 v. washington state office of administrative hearings , rejected an lea's suit against the sea finding that it had no private right of action to challenge a state's "systematic violation of the idea. .

in 1975 , congress established a protection and advocacy system ( p & a's ) to advocate and protect the rights of individuals with developmental disabilities .

many of the court cases filed by p & a's are class action lawsuits aimed at systemic violations of the rights of an individual and a number of these cases have involved special education students .

these cases have often involved issues concerning the p & a's access to student records .

