the term "procurement" describes the process whereby government agencies acquire supplies or services for their own "direct benefit or use. .

competition in government procurement means that the government determines from whom to buy supplies or services — and thus with whom to contract — by "solicit[ing] or entertain[ing] offers from two or more competitors , compar[ing] them , and accept[ing] one based on its relative value. .

competition in federal procurement contracting has long been of interest to congress and the executive branch , in part because of the belief that increased competition among potential vendors results in lower prices for the government .

president obama issued a memorandum calling for increased competition in federal contracting on march 4 , 2009 , shortly after taking office , and his administration has sought to reduce the number of "noncompetitive" contracts by various means , including by issuing guidance on "increasing competition and structuring contracts for best results" in october 2009 .

subsequently , in 2012 , the department of defense ( dod ) , which accounts for 60% to 70% of federal procurement spending per year , amended its regulations to require that contracting officers re - solicit agency requirements if a solicitation allowed fewer than 30 days for the receipt of proposals and resulted in only one bid or offer .

most recently , in 2014 , dod issued guidance that calls for contracting officers to take additional steps , including issuing requests for information ( rfis ) prior to soliciting sole - source acquisitions .

recent congresses have also sought to promote competition in federal contracting by enacting legislation that limits the use of appropriated funds to procure certain items until the procuring agency certifies to congress that its acquisition strategy meets certain requirements pertaining to competition ; requires agencies to establish goals for competition for certain contracts , plans for competing certain acquisitions , processes for measuring competition for certain contracts , and / or annual reviews of certain contracts ; precludes defense agencies from awarding noncompetitive contracts based on unsolicited research proposals ; requires dod to take further steps to foster competition in the procurement of "major defense acquisition programs" ; and requires that certain recipients of federal grants or financial assistance obtain competition when awarding contracts .

this report describes the competition requirements currently governing the procurement activities of federal agencies .

specifically , it addresses ( 1 ) what contracts are subject to competition requirements ; ( 2 ) what constitutes full and open competition for government contracts ; ( 3 ) what is meant by "full and open competition after exclusion of sources" ; ( 4 ) the circumstances permitting agencies to award contracts on the basis of other than full and open competition ; ( 5 ) the "special simplified procedures for small purchases" ; and ( 6 ) the competition requirements for task order and delivery order ( to / do ) contracts .

the report does not address so - called "public - private competitions" or "competitive sourcing targets" under the federal activities inventory reform ( fair ) act or office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 76 .

public - private competitions are conducted to determine whether government employees or private contractors will perform functions formerly performed by the government that have been identified as commercial and suitable for contracting out .

the federal government has promoted competition between offerors seeking to meet its needs since at least 1781 , when the superintendent of finance advertised in a local newspaper for proposals from potential suppliers of food for federal employees in philadelphia .

then , as now , the government encouraged competition because of its reported benefits to the government and the general public .

among other things , an argument can be made that , when multiple offerors compete for the government's business , the government can acquire higher quality goods and services at lower prices than it would acquire if it awarded contracts without competition .

an argument can also be made that competition helps to curb fraud because it allows for periodic changes in the vendors from which the government acquires goods and services , thereby limiting opportunities for government employees to enter into collusive agreements with their regular suppliers .

competition can similarly be said to promote accountability by ensuring that contracts are entered into on their merits and not upon any other basis ( eg , familial or other relationships between contracting officers and contractors ) .

further , because the government is said to acquire the highest quality goods and services at the lowest prices , competition can be said to help government officials reassure citizens that their tax dollars are not spent wastefully .

finally , an argument can be made that citizens are less likely to perceive contracts as being awarded because of favoritism when there is competition .

competition is not considered an unmitigated good by all , however , as is noted by those who suggest that not all procurements need to be competed to the maximum extent possible .

an argument can be made that agency operations can be delayed by the time it takes to solicit and evaluate offers from eligible suppliers .

these delays are reportedly especially harmful when agencies are contracting for goods or services for disaster responses or military operations .

moreover , because there are costs involved in agencies' soliciting and evaluating offers , an argument can also be made that there comes a point when the government's costs in competing contracts are greater than the savings it realizes from the lower price , higher quality goods it may obtain through competition .

it was , in part , for this reason that the drafters of the competition in contracting act ( cica ) of 1984 opted to require full and open competition rather than maximum competition .

they reportedly considered language calling for "maximum competition," but rejected it , in part , because "there is a point of diminishing return" with competition .

competition could also be said to increase the risk that government contractors will be unable to perform by allowing new contractors — who may not have experience meeting agencies' needs or complying with the accounting and paperwork requirements imposed on federal contractors — to win government contracts .

agencies reportedly would prefer to deal with their incumbent contractors , assuming these contractors are competent , because they represent "known quantities" for the agencies .

as the accompanying chronology illustrates , the federal government's requirements for competition in contracting have periodically shifted as the government has variously sought to realize the benefits of competition or further other goals — such as the protection of national security in times of war or efficiency in agency operations — in its procurement activities .

armed conflicts , in particular , typically lead to relaxation of competition requirements , but often result in alleged abuses ( eg , "war profiteering" by contractors and waste of money on overpriced goods and services ) .

these abuses , in turn , can lead to the enactment of competition requirements .

the current interest in competition in contracting is perhaps to be expected given developments in the 25 years since the enactment of cica .

cica itself requires that agencies "obtain full and open competition through the use of competitive procedures" in all procurements not involving the use of procedures expressly authorized by a particular statute .

cica remains the foundation for the current competition requirements , but has been amended or supplemented by later laws that place efficiency in agency operations or other public benefits on par with competition , or expand agencies' ability to use "special simplified methods" for contracting for commercial items .

the federal acquisition streamlining act ( fasa ) of 1994 , for example , establishes a "preference" for the procurement of commercial items , which generally may be acquired using simplified methods , as opposed to full and open competition .

fasa was followed by the federal acquisition reform act ( fara ) of 1996 , which placed increasing emphasis on efficiency in agency operations by requiring that the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) be amended to "ensure that the requirement to obtain full and open competition is implemented in a manner that is consistent with the need to efficiently fulfill the government's requirements. .

fara and the services acquisition reform act ( sara ) of 2003 also relaxed the rules governing agencies' acquisition of commercial items .

more recently , the emergency economic stabilization act ( eesa ) of 2008 authorized the secretary of the treasury to use other than full and open competition upon determining "that urgent and compelling circumstances make compliance with [the competition] provisions contrary to the public interest. .

this provision was designed to ensure that competition requirements , among other things , did not slow the treasury department's contracting for services that would help stabilize u.s. financial markets and the banking system .

not all contracts — or even all procurement contracts — that agencies lawfully enter into are the result of full and open competition under cica or an "exception" to it .

non - procurement contracts , such as those resulting from agencies' use of other transaction authority ( ota ) or similar authorities , are not subject to cica because they are not procurement contracts , and cica only applies to "procurement procedures. .

ota refers to agencies' authority to enter into an "other transaction," or "a form of contract ... that is not a procurement contract , grant , or cooperative agreement. .

only certain agencies , most notably the departments of defense , transportation , homeland security , health and human services , and energy have , at various times , been granted ota so that they can contract for research and development ( r&d ) or prototypes of promising new technologies without being subject to the requirements as to full and open competition .

contracting for r&d or prototypes can be difficult because the uncertainties inherent in the development of new technologies make it hard to establish contract prices .

additionally , the companies best able to perform such contracts are often not regular government vendors and may be unwilling or unable to comply with the government's procurement regulations .

ota helps to avoid these difficulties .

also not subject to the requirement for full and open competition under cica are those procurement contracts entered into through the "use of procurement procedures ... expressly authorized by statute. .

there are numerous statutory provisions that allow agencies to use specific procurement procedures in certain circumstances , or otherwise allow them to limit competition for procurement contracts .

one provision of the consolidated appropriations act for fy2005 , for example , allowed the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to place task orders with small businesses or small disadvantaged businesses ( sdbs ) in lieu of providing a "fair opportunity" for all eligible firms to compete .

other provisions of this law allowed agencies to limit competition to certain groups or entities , notwithstanding cica , or to enter into contracts without competition .

for example , the bureau of land management is expressly authorized to limit competition for contracts for hazardous fuel reduction activities to specified groups or entities , while the national gallery of art may contract for restoration and repair without competition .

any procurement contract not entered into through the use of procedures expressly authorized by a particular statute , such as those described above , is subject to cica .

cica requires that these contracts be entered into after "full and open competition through the use of competitive procedures" unless certain circumstances exist that would permit agencies to use noncompetitive procedures .

fasa supplemented cica by , among other things , articulating competition requirements for task order and delivery order ( to / do ) contracts .

to / do contracts are contracts for services or goods , respectively , that do not "procure or specify a firm quantity of supplies ( other than a minimum or maximum quantity ) ," but rather "provide[] for the issuance of orders for the delivery of supplies during the period of the contract. .

because the time of delivery and the quantity of goods or services to be delivered are not specified ( outside of stated maximums or minimums ) in to / do contracts , such contracts are sometimes referred to as indefinite delivery / indefinite quantity ( id / iq ) contracts .

to / do contracts can also be described as "single - award" or "multiple - award" contracts , depending upon the number of firms — one or more than one , respectively — able to compete for task or delivery orders under the contract .

some commentators further refer to single - award to / do contracts as "monopoly contracts," but such usage could obscure the fact that single - award to / do contracts are themselves awarded competitively , even if task or delivery orders under them are not , and are of limited duration .

under fasa , agencies are effectively subject to cica when awarding to / do contracts and can use other than competitive procedures only when one of the seven exceptions to full and open competition applies and there are the requisite justifications and approvals .

fasa also establishes "a preference" for multiple - award contracts by requiring agencies to use them , as opposed to single - award contracts , "to the maximum extent practicable. .

moreover , fasa requires agencies using multiple - award contracts to provide contractors "a fair opportunity to be considered" when issuing task or delivery orders in excess of $3,000 unless ( 1 ) the agency's need for the services or property is of such unusual urgency that providing such opportunity to all such contractors would result in unacceptable delays in fulfilling that need ; ( 2 ) only one such contractor is capable of providing the services or property required at the level of quality required because the services or property ordered are unique or highly specialized ; ( 3 ) the task or delivery order should be issued on a sole - source basis in the interest of economy and efficiency because it is a logical follow - on to a task or delivery order already issued on a competitive basis ; or ( 4 ) it is necessary to place the order with a particular contractor in order to satisfy a minimum guarantee .

fasa did not , however , subject the issuance of task or delivery orders under to / do contracts to cica , and , even today , such orders remain outside the cica framework .

fasa further requires each agency issuing to / do contracts to designate a "task and delivery order ombudsman" to review contractors' complaints regarding to / do contracts and ensure that all contractors holding a multiple - award to / do contract have a "fair opportunity to be considered" for orders .

finally , fasa grants the government accountability office ( gao ) jurisdiction over protests alleging that the orders increase the scope , period , or maximum value of the contract .

the national defense authorization act for fy2008 ( ndaa '08 ) further strengthened the competition requirements for to / do contracts established by fasa .

see figure 2 .

the ndaa '08 limits agencies' ability to use single - award to / do contracts by requiring that agency heads make the following determinations , in writing , before awarding a single - award to / do contract whose expected value would exceed $103 million , including options: ( i ) the task or delivery orders expected under the contract are so integrally related that only a single source can reasonably perform the work ; ( ii ) the contract provides only for firm , fixed - price task or delivery orders for ( i ) products for which unit prices are established in the contract or ( ii ) services for which prices are established in the contract for the specific tasks to be performed ; ( iii ) only one source is qualified and capable of performing the work at a reasonable price to the government ; or ( iv ) because of exceptional circumstances , it is necessary in the public interest to award the contract to a single source .

the ndaa '08 also specifies what constitutes a "fair opportunity to be considered" in competitions for orders in excess of $5.5 million under multiple - award to / do contracts .

under the ndaa , for contractors to have a fair opportunity , agencies must provide them with ( 1 ) a notice of the task or delivery order that includes a clear statement of the agency's requirements ; ( 2 ) a reasonable period of time to provide a proposal in response to the notice ; ( 3 ) disclosure of the significant factors and subfactors ( including cost or price ) that the agency expects to consider in evaluating proposals and their relative importance ; ( 4 ) a written statement documenting the basis for the award and the relative importance of quality and price or cost factors , if the award is to be made on a best - value basis ; and ( 5 ) an opportunity for post - award debriefing .

finally , the ndaa '08 granted gao exclusive authority to hear protests alleging improprieties in agencies' award of task and delivery orders valued in excess of $10 million that do not increase the scope , period , or maximum value of the underlying contract .

when granting such authority , congress initially included a "sunset" provision , stating that the "subsection" granting this authority would be "in effect for three years , beginning on the date that is 120 days after [its] date of enactment" ( i.e. , may 27 , 2011 ) .

however , the 112th congress subsequently granted gao permanent jurisdiction over the protests of "large" orders issued under defense contracts .

it also extended gao's jurisdiction over similar orders issued under civilian contracts through september 30 , 2016 .

