the general services administration ( gsa ) manages the government's charge card program , known as smartpay2 .

through smartpay2 , agencies are able to select charge card products from contracts that gsa has negotiated with major banks .

the contracts allow agencies to select different types of charge cards , depending on their needs .

smartpay2 charge card options include travel cards ( for airline , hotel , and related expenses ) , purchase cards ( for supplies and services ) , and fleet cards ( for fuel and supplies for government vehicles ) .

this report deals only with travel cards .

the first government travel cards were introduced in the 1980s , but federal employees were not required to use them until passage of the travel and transportation reform act ( ttra ) of 1998 ( p.l .

105-264 ) .

the ttra mandated the use of travel cards in an effort to reduce travel costs and streamline the process of administering agency travel programs .

all federal employees must now use travel cards for official business travel , unless they travel fewer than five times a year .

since enactment of the ttra , the dollar volume of travel card transactions has increased 103% , growing from $4.39 billion in fy1999 to $8.93 billion in fy2009 .

the number of travel card transactions has risen 43% in the same time period , growing from 31.6 million in fy1999 to 45.3 million in fy2009 .

audits conducted in the decade subsequent to the ttra's enactment have found evidence of waste , fraud , and abuse in travel card programs at a number of agencies .

according to auditors , many agencies have failed to implement adequate safeguards against card misuse .

in response to these findings , congress has held hearings and introduced legislation that would enhance travel card management and oversight .

in addition , the office of management and budget ( omb ) has issued government - wide guidance that requires agencies to implement internal controls that are designed to minimize the risk of travel card misuse .

this report begins by discussing the structure of agency travel card programs , and then discusses weaknesses in agency controls that have contributed to waste , fraud , and abuse .

it then examines travel card legislation introduced or enacted in the 111 th congress , and concludes with a discussion of potential oversight issues for the 112 th congress .

the federal travel card program is implemented by individual agencies , with the involvement of gsa and omb .

in broad terms , agencies establish and maintain their own programs , but they choose travel card services from contracts that gsa negotiates with selected banks , and their programs must conform to the government - wide guidance issued by omb .

gao and ig audits of agency travel card programs have attracted congressional attention with their revelations of waste , fraud , and abuse .

audits have revealed that employees in a wide range of agencies have used their travel cards to purchase items or services for their personal use , and travel in premium - class accommodations without authorization .

audits have also found that agencies have failed to ensure that they claim reimbursement for unused airline tickets , or that their travel card invoices are paid in a timely manner .

these findings indicate systemic weaknesses in agency travel card management policies and practices that cost the government millions of dollars annually .

the following paragraphs discuss some of the weaknesses identified in audit reports published between fy2003 and fy2009 .

while these reports are the best available source of information about problems with agency travel card programs , most of them examine individual agencies , so the extent to which these weaknesses are shared with other agencies is not known .

in addition , without follow - up audits , it is not known how many of these weaknesses have been partially or wholly resolved .

as noted previously , omb guidance requires agencies to monitor employee travel card activity for improper or unauthorized transactions .

audits of agency travel card programs , however , have identified egregious examples of fraudulent and abusive purchases at many agencies .

among the many examples of travel card misuse cited by auditors are a federal aviation administration employee who charged $3,700 for laser eye surgery to his travel card , a dod employee who requested and received reimbursements for 13 airline tickets totaling almost $10,000 that he did not purchase , and a department of state employee who took an unauthorized trip to hawaii on a first - class ticket .

one of the primary reasons these types of fraudulent and abusive transactions occur is ineffective monitoring of cardholder transactions .

each cardholder is assigned to an approving official who is supposed to review their monthly statements and identify questionable or unauthorized transactions .

this supervisory review is considered the first line of defense against card misuse , and when it is not done consistently or thoroughly , the likelihood that fraud or abuse might occur undetected increases .

an audit of the department of housing and urban development's travel program , for example , found that 6.3% of all travel card purchases were improper — a consequence "largely due" to inconsistent transaction monitoring by approving officials .

approving officials , some note , have other workload requirements that compete with travel card review duties and limit the amount of time spent examining cardholder statements .

software to identify potentially fraudulent charges is available and could reduce the time administrating officers spend reviewing cardholder statements .

another tool for preventing card misuse is to block charges from certain merchant categories .

it is possible for card vendors to block charges made at certain businesses , such as massage parlors , pawn shops , and escort services .

while some agencies have declared merchant blocks to be a best - practice and utilized it extensively , other agencies have not .

an audit of the department of transportation found that it had requested blocks on 46 merchant categories , as compared to dod and education , which had both requested blocks on over 200 merchant categories .

federal civilian and military travelers are required to purchase airline tickets from air carriers with which gsa has negotiated contracts , with limited exceptions .

tickets purchased under these contracts are fully refundable , and agencies are authorized to recover payments made to contract carriers for tickets they purchased but did not use .

because airline tickets are purchased through a centrally billed account rather than by individual cardholders , the agency is responsible for submitting the refund request .

agencies are therefore expected to have in place adequate policies for identifying unused tickets and initiating the refund process .

audits conducted within the past five years have found that some agencies have not independently determined whether tickets have been used ; rather , they have relied on travelers to notify the travel office when tickets were unused .

this means that if a traveler fails to provide notification of an unused or partially used ticket , then the agency would not know to claim a refund .

this has proved to be a costly weakness .

a gao audit of the travel program at the department of defense found that over a period of seven years , dod may have purchased more than $100 million in airline tickets that were not used and had not been processed for refunds , largely due to the want of traveler notification .

similarly , a gao audit of the department of state's centrally billed travel account concluded that over an 18-month period , the department had failed to request reimbursement for $6 million in unused airline tickets , also due to a breakdown in traveler notification .

it is not known how many other agencies lack an independent method for identifying unused tickets , or the total cost to the government of lost refunds .

under the terms of their travel card contracts , agencies receive rebates from card vendors based on the dollar volume of their charge card transactions and their payment performance .

generally , the higher the net dollar volume of transactions , and the quicker the agencies and individual cardholders make their payments , the greater the rebates earned by the agencies .

when centrally or individually billed accounts are delinquent — outstanding for more than 60 days — agency rebates are reduced .

when payments on individual accounts are more than 180 days late , the charges are usually written off as bad debt by the card vendors , which also reduces agency rebates .

according to gsa , federal agencies received approximately $255 million in rebates in fy2009 for purchases made with all types of government credit cards , including travel cards .

delinquencies , however , prevent the government from earning the maximum potential rebates .

the most recent data available from the office of management and budget at the time this report was published showed that in september 2010 , the government - wide delinquency rates for centrally billed accounts stood at 3.10% , up from 2.06% in january 2010 .

the september 2010 rate is a marked improvement from january 2009 , however , when the government - wide delinquency rate for centrally billed accounts stood at 19.23% , with four agencies reporting delinquency rates above 10.0% — dod ( 19.92% ) , the national aeronautic and space administration ( nasa , 15.77% ) , the agency for international development ( aid , 14.02% ) , the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda , 10.09% ) .

the september 2010 data include only one agency with a delinquency rate close to 10.0% , the department of labor ( dol ) at 9.80% .

indeed , the highest reported delinquency rate after dol was 1.82% ( the department of justice ) , and 17 agencies reported rates of 0.00% , including usda and nasa .

the government - wide individually billed account delinquency rate increased from september 2009 ( 1.97% ) to september 2010 ( 2.37% ) .

this was not a steady increase: the government - wide rate more than doubled between july 2009 and february 2010 , before being cut in half again by july 2010 .

this fluctuation reflects in part the instability of individually billed delinquency rates at four agencies that have historically had some of the highest rates in the government — hud , dod , va , and usda .

it is not clear , however , why their rates are fluctuating .

table 1 shows the travel card delinquency rates for individually billed accounts , from september 2009 through september 2010 , for hud , dod , va , and usda , and the government - wide rate for that same period .

auditors have identified some of the causes of travel card account delinquency .

centrally billed accounts may become delinquent when an agency deducts potentially fraudulent charges from its payments without following the dispute process established in their travel card contracts .

when an agency fails to properly dispute the charges it deducts , then the card vendor considers the payment incomplete , and the agency's rebate amount is reduced .

however , when an agency notifies the card vendor that it is disputing part of its invoice , the agency is granted time to investigate the potentially fraudulent charges without causing the account to be considered delinquent .

payments to individually billed accounts are the responsibility of cardholders , and audits have found that workforce demographics influence delinquency rates: employees with higher pay and more years of work experience are more likely to pay their bills on time , while younger employees and those at lower pay rates are more likely to be delinquent .

there also appears to be a link between travel card abuse and delinquency: agency employees who misuse their cards are more likely to have delinquent accounts .

there are no publicly available data on the dollar value of potential rebates the government has lost due to account delinquencies , although it is estimated that delinquent accounts have cost individual agencies millions of dollars in lost rebates .

the ftr mandates use of coach - class accommodations for both domestic and international travel , with a limited number of exceptions for the use of premium - class accommodations .

the ftr identifies two types of premium class accommodations: first - class , which is generally the highest class of accommodation offered by airlines , in both cost and amenities , and business - class , which is above coach - class but below first - class .

first - class accommodations may be used only when no coach or business - class accommodations are available , it is necessary to accommodate a disability , or when "exceptional" security circumstances require it .

business - class may be used under the same circumstances as first - class , but also when coach - class accommodations are available but unsanitary , the use of business - class accommodations results in overall cost - savings , when a non - federal source is paying for the ticket , when "required because of agency mission," or when the scheduled flight time , including stopovers and change of planes , is more than 14 hours , and the destination is outside of the continental united states .

some agencies failed to ensure that premium - class accommodations were used only when justified by the ftr , which may have increased the government's travel costs by tens of millions to hundreds of millions of dollars .

an audit of the department of state's centrally billed travel accounts , which are used to purchase transportation services for state department employees and for employees of other foreign affairs agencies , found that nearly half of all airline tickets purchased were for premium - class travel .

moreover , auditors estimated that two - thirds of those premium - class tickets were either not justified by the circumstances , not authorized by the department , or both .

poor oversight resulted in numerous violations of the ftr and departmental travel regulations .

the audit found , for example , that travelers signed their own upgrades , approved their own travel , or had a subordinate authorize premium - class accommodations .

in addition , auditors determined that many executives used premium - class repeatedly on trips that were less than 14 hours , and diplomatic couriers used premium - class accommodations even when they were not transporting classified materials ( which could have justified first - class or business - class travel on security grounds ) .

the cumulative cost of these abuses may run into the millions of dollars , given that the department of state spent nearly $140 million on premium - class travel during the audit period , and the cost of a premium - class ticket can be two to three times that of a coach - class ticket .

a 2003 audit preformed by gao identified similar weaknesses at dod , where 72% of premium - class ticket purchases over a two - year period were found to be unauthorized and 73% were not justified .

thus , roughly $90 million of the $123 million in premium - class tickets purchased by dod during those two years were not authorized , not justified , or both .

one of the key internal control weaknesses identified by gao was oversight: dod "performed little or no monitoring" of premium - class travel .

the 111 th congress addressed charge cards generally , and travel cards specifically , through legislation .

section 738 of the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) required agencies to evaluate the credit worthiness of an individual before issuing the individual a government travel card , and agencies were not permitted issue a government travel card if the individual either lacks a credit history or has an "unsatisfactory" credit history .

it further required agencies to establish guidelines and procedures for disciplinary actions to be taken against agency personnel for improper , fraudulent , or abusive use of government charge cards .

both of these requirements were enacted in previous appropriations legislation , but had to be enacted for fy2010 because appropriations language is generally considered in effect only for the fiscal year of the appropriations act , unless language in the act specifies otherwise .

the government charge card abuse prevention act of 2009 was introduced by representative joe horn ( h.r .

2189 ) and senator charles grassley ( s. 942 ) on april 30 , 2009 .

the legislation included provisions applicable to purchase cards and travel cards .

section 3 would have required agencies to implement a series of internal controls over their individually billed accounts , including policies that ensured they maintain records of cardholder names and credit limits ; periodically review each cardholder's need for a travel card ; monitor and record rebates and refunds ; provide adequate training on travel card policies and procedures ; evaluate the creditworthiness of travel card applicants and use that information to determine whether a card should be issued ; utilize effective systems , techniques , and technologies to prevent and identify card misuse ; and close travel card accounts of employees that have left their agencies .

section 3 would also have required agencies to have policies in place that identify the penalties that could be applied to employees who misuse their travel cards , and to report semiannually to omb on violations of travel card policies that have occurred and the actions taken by the agency in response to those violations .

section 3 also would have placed requirements on agency inspectors general ( igs ) .

it would have required agency igs to periodically assess agency travel card controls to identify the risk of illegal , improper , or erroneous travel charges and payments ; periodically audit travel card transactions to identify potentially illegal , improper , or erroneous uses of travel cards ; report audit findings to the agency head ; and report to omb , who would in turn report to congress and the comptroller general , about agency implementation of audit recommendations .

section 4 would have required agencies to ( 1 ) review travel vouchers to ensure they do not reimburse employees for purchases made through the centrally billed account ; ( 2 ) dispute unallowable and erroneous charges and track disputed charges until they are resolved ; and ( 3 ) submit requests for refunds for unused tickets and track refund requests until they are resolved .

if enacted , the act would have addressed some of the weaknesses that auditors have identified in agency travel card programs .

in particular , the required internal controls for centrally billed accounts were designed to improve the capacity of agencies to obtain refunds for unused tickets , dispute improper charges , and avoid reimbursing employees for charges which they did not incur .

proponents argue that these requirements would save the government tens of millions of dollars annually .

in addition , the act would likely have expanded the role of igs in travel card oversight by requiring them to audit agency travel card programs .

this could have resulted in a significant increase in audit activity for programs which have been audited relatively infrequently , if at all .

as a consequence of increased audit activity , agency managers , omb , and congress would arguably have had more information available for assessing the adequacy of agency travel card controls and determining the scope and nature of program weaknesses .

the language of the bill , however , would have left it to the discretion of agency igs to determine how often to conduct the audits , only requiring that audits be performed "periodically. .

the availability of information may therefore have varied widely among agencies , if , for example , some igs audited their programs annually , while others did so only once every five years .

while the act would have required agencies to implement a number of internal controls , transaction monitoring by approving officials was not specifically identified as one of them .

strengthening agency internal controls over transaction monitoring may be one of the most effective ways to reduce the risk of fraud , because , as noted earlier , auditors have found travel card misuse is often linked to poor transaction monitoring by approving officials .

congressional oversight of agency travel card programs might be hindered by the lack of current , comprehensive information on program weaknesses .

auditors have identified tens of millions of dollars of wasteful , fraudulent , and abusive travel card transactions ; but these audit reports have examined a limited number of agencies and many are several years old .

in addition , omb does not report certain information that might be useful in assessing the costs of travel card waste , fraud , and abuse , such as the amounts of potential rebates agencies fail to earn .

without access to more timely and comprehensive information , congress may not know the extent of the problems discussed in this report , or their causes .

key questions that cannot be fully answered without additional information include the following: why do some agencies have such high delinquency rates ? .

how many millions of dollars in rebates are lost each year due to delinquent payments ? .

how widespread is the abuse of premium travel ? .

how often do agencies fail to detect fraudulent travel card transactions , and at what cost to the government ? .

one option for improving the travel card program information available to congress might be to require gao , agency igs , or a combination of both , to conduct additional audits of agency travel card programs .

audits might be requested for every agency , as the government charge card abuse prevention act proposes , or only for agencies with higher - risk travel card programs — those with the highest dollar volume ; the highest delinquency rates ; or previous audit findings that indicate significant levels of waste , fraud , or abuse .

audits of the 10 largest travel card programs , for example , would encompass approximately 90% of federal travel card dollars spent annually .

congress might also require gao and agency igs to perform follow - up audits to determine the extent to which agencies had implemented the recommendations from the initial audit .

another option would be to require omb to collect certain travel card data and report them to congress .

information on potential and actual rebates earned , broken down by agency and by card type ( travel , purchase , fleet , or integrated ) is not currently available , for example , but might be useful in identifying agencies that are failing to maximize rebate opportunities .

