this report was originally published in may 2009 , and the majority of the text reflects the authors' analysis of epa's potential regulation of stationary sources under the clean air act at that time .

that analysis has not changed substantially , but s ince that time , epa has given several further indications of its intentions with regard to the regulation o f stationary sources of greenhouse gases , in congressional testimony , proposed regulations , and proposed guidance .

t he agency has formally proposed greenhouse gas emission standards for new motor vehicles , and stated that it intends to promulgate such standards by march 31 , 2010 .

an "endangerment finding,," which is a prerequisite for the motor vehicle and other greenhouse gas standards , was finalized december 7 , 2009 .

the agency has stated in several venues that promulgation of motor vehicle ghg standards would make ghgs "subject to regulation" for the purposes of triggering permitting requirements for new and modified stationary sources under the prevention of significant deterioration requirements of section 165 of the clean air act , and also for the purposes of the operating permit requirements of title v. and it has p r oposed a greenhouse gas tailoring rule to limit the applicability of the psd and title v permitting requirements to sources that emit more than 25,000 tons per year of carbon dioxide equivalents .

new legislation to address greenhouse gases is a leading priority of the president and many members of congress , but the ability to limit these emissions already exists under various clean air act ( caa ) authorities that congress has enacted , a point underlined by the supreme court in an april 2007 decision ( discussed below ) .

indeed , the u.s. environmental protection agency ( epa ) has already begun the process that could lead to greenhouse gas regulations for new mobile sources in response to court decisions .

when epa finalizes the regulation of greenhouse gases from new mobile sources , legal and policy drivers will be activated that will lead to regulation of stationary sources as well .

the legal drivers are beyond the scope of this report , which is focused on the policy options and control alternatives available to epa as it uses existing authorities to regulate greenhouse gases from stationary sources .

stationary sources are the major sources of the country's greenhouse gas emissions .

overall , 72% of u.s. emissions of greenhouse gas come from stationary sources ( the remainder come from mobile sources ) .

as indicated in table 1 , relatively large sources of fossil - fuel combustion and other industrial processes are responsible for about one - half the country's total emissions .

if epa were to embark on a serious effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , stationary sources , and in particular large stationary sources , would have to be included .

this concentration of greenhouse gas emissions is even more important from a policy standpoint: reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from these sectors are likely to be more timely and cost - effective than attempts to reduce emissions from the transport sector .

this report discusses three major paths and two alternate paths of statutory authorities that have been identified by epa and others as possible avenues the agency might take in addressing greenhouse gas emissions under existing caa provisions .

after discussing the approaches , we identify categories of control options epa could consider , including an epa - coordinated cap - and - trade program .

then we discuss the administrative difficulties in using the clean air act for greenhouse gas control , particularly new source review – prevention of significant deterioration and title v permitting requirements .

finally , we conclude by putting the issue into the context of previous environmental challenges the caa has faced .

a regulatory approach using existing clean air act authorities has been under consideration at epa for more than a decade .

in 1998 , epa's general counsel , jonathan cannon , concluded in a memorandum to the epa administrator that greenhouse gases were air pollutants within the clean air act's definition of the term , and therefore could be regulated under the act .

relying on the cannon memorandum as well as the statute itself , on october 20 , 1999 , a group of 19 organizations petitioned epa to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from new motor vehicles under section 202 of the act .

section 202 gives the epa administrator broad authority to set "standards applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of new motor vehicles" if in her judgment they contribute to air pollution which "may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. .

epa denied the petition in 2003 on the basis of a new general counsel memorandum issued the same day in which the general counsel concluded that the caa does not grant epa authority to regulate co 2 and other ghg emissions based on their climate change impacts .

the denial was challenged by massachusetts , eleven other states , and various other petitioners in a case that ultimately reached the supreme court .

in an april 2 , 2007 decision ( massachusetts v. epa ) , the court found by 5-4 that epa does have authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions , since the emissions are clearly "air pollutants" under the clean air act's definition of that term .

the court's majority concluded that epa must , therefore , decide whether emissions of these pollutants from new motor vehicles contribute to air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare .

if it makes this finding of endangerment , the act requires the agency to establish standards for emissions of the pollutants .

when looking at the caa from the point of view of reducing ghgs from stationary sources , three existing paths are available .

as indicated in table 2 , the three paths are ( 1 ) to regulate ghgs as criteria air pollutants , ( 2 ) to regulate ghgs as hazardous air pollutants , or ( 3 ) to regulate ghgs as designated air pollutants .

each of these paths are discussed below , along with two lesser explored trails: section 115 and title vi .

in its technical support document for its anpr , epa took a narrow view of the alternatives available to it in imposing greenhouse gas performance standards .

for existing electric generating sources , the epa focused on incremental improvements in the heat rates of existing units through options that "are well known in the industry" with an overall improvement in efficiency likely to be less than 5% .

for new electric generating sources , epa noted the availability of more efficient supercritical coal units , the future availability of ultra - supercritical units , and the possibility of limited biomass co - firing .

continuing along this line of reasoning , epa also suggested that it could develop regulations that anticipate future technology .

for example , a phase - in approach to applying co 2 standards to powerplants would be to mandate that "carbon - ready" generating technology be required for new construction .

the objective would be to anticipate the widespread need for some form of carbon capture technology in the future by preparing for it with compatible fossil - fuel combustion technology now .

the technology most discussed is integrated - gasification , combined - cycle ( igcc ) .

as noted earlier , epa is considering this option with respect to the desert rock psd - nsr permit reconsideration .

with respect to some of the carbon capture technology under development , igcc has certain advantages over pulverized coal technology .

however , just how much igcc is "carbon ready" is subject to debate .

epa states in its anpr that it believes such a staged approach is available to it under section 111: epa believes that section 111 may be used to set both single - phase performance standards based upon current technology and to set two - phased or multi - phased standards with more stringent limits in future years .

future - year limits may permissibly be based on technologies that , at the time of the rulemaking , we find adequately demonstrated to be available for use at some specified future date .

the technical support document does not mention some more aggressive options .

these include a fuel - neutral standard or a technology - based standard .

for example , for carbon dioxide emissions from a newly - constructed powerplant , a fuel - neutral standard could follow the example set by the 1997 and 2005 nox nsps and the 2005 nox nsps for modified existing sources .

under those regulations , the nox emissions standard is the same , regardless of the fuel burned — solid , liquid , or gaseous .

this standard is much more expensive for coal - fired facilities to comply with than for natural - gas - fired facilities , thus encouraging the lower - carbon gas - fired technologies .

likewise , epa could choose to set a newly - constructed powerplant standard based on the performance of natural gas burned in a combined - cycle configuration – the fuel and technology of choice for construction of new powerplants for the last two decades .

if epa wanted to encourage the rollover of the existing coal - fired powerplant fleet to natural gas , nuclear , or renewable sources , it could apply a fuel - neutral standard to modified sources as well .

for example , a co 2 emission standard of 0.8 lb .

per kilowatt - hour output could be met by a new natural gas - fired , combined - cycle facility , as well as any non - emitting generating technology , such as nuclear power or renewables .

in contrast , the standard would require a 60% reduction in emissions from a new coal - fired facility – forcing the development of a carbon control technology , such as carbon capture and storage ( ccs ) , in order for a new coal - fired facility to be built or modified .

the viability of these options , or even more aggressive technology - forcing standards , would depend on how epa determined whether a technology had been "adequately - demonstrated" and the seriousness of its costs and energy requirements .

as discussed below , epa has used the nsps to encourage the installation of pollution control equipment on powerplants , even while the equipment's development status was still being debated .

the current debate on the appropriateness of using the clean air act to regulate greenhouse gas emissions is not the first such debate that has occurred when a new environmental challenge has been directed at the act .

during the 1980s , suggestions were made that acid rain and / or stratospheric ozone depletion could be addressed via then - existing provisions , rather than by new amendments .

for example , in 1985 , the crs stated the following with respect to addressing acid rain through the existing clean air act: various clean air act provisions could be used to address acid precipitation , including issuing more stringent secondary ambient air quality standards , setting a sulfate standard , and enforcing so2 reductions more vigorously .

 ( a ) typically , however , such actions require a demonstration of cause - effect relationship that has not been obtained , at least in the view of many policymakers ; and / or they require actions under peripherally related provisions such as visibility protection — which are already subject to controversy on their own right .

 ( b ) any such actions would likely be expensive , both in resources and in political / administrative capital .

 ( c ) program administrators have therefore said they will not use the clean air act aggressively and innovatively to combat acid precipitation without an explicit congressional mandate and / or compelling new evidence linking specific damages to specific pollutants [emphasis in original] .

in both cases , the congress moved to add new titles to the act ( title iv to address acid rain , and title vi to address stratospheric ozone depletion ) .

in the case of title iv , a new market - based approach to reducing pollutants was introduced to implement a statutory reduction requirement ( i.e. , the so 2 emissions cap ) in hope that the cost would be optimized .

the result was so successful that it was used by states and epa to begin addressing interstate transport of smog ( i.e. , the nox sip call ) and has been suggested by some as the optimal approach to controlling greenhouse gases .

however , controlling greenhouse gases is a substantially more complex environmental , technical , economic , and social issue than either acid rain or stratospheric ozone depletion are .

it is possible that one size does not fit all in this debate .

some sources may not respond significantly to a market - based approach because they are not particularly price - sensitive .

others may be too small or dispersed to include .

for example , the european union's market - based approach covers only about 40% of the eu's emissions .

other instruments are used to address difficult sectors , such as transportation .

thus , initiatives to use the current clean air act could be designed as a substitute for what is perceived by some as a protracted congressional debate , or as a complementary effort to address sources or gases that a future market - based system may choose to exclude from its provisions .

as summarized in 2008 by lisa heinzerling in testimony to the subcommittee on energy and air quality of the house energy and commerce committee: the clean air act contains numerous provisions that might be used to regulate greenhouse gases .

the advantages of using these provisions include: they can be deployed now ; they use regulatory strategies that are familiar to , indeed are the bread and butter work of , the environmental protection agency ; they call for regulation of numerous and diverse sources and thus , taken as a group , they have an inherent fairness to them ; they do not pose unusual enforcement difficulties or untoward administrative burdens .

there are also disadvantages to using existing clean air act provisions to address climate change .

most of the provisions do not have statutory deadlines.... to the extent one favors cap - and - trade as a regulatory mechanism for addressing climate change , one might worry about the lack of clear authority for such a scheme under the existing statute .

the naaqs program is an ungainly framework for regulating globally harmful pollutants .

psd requirements are triggered for sources that are "large" when it comes to conventional pollution but "small" from the perspective of global pollutants .

a final endangerment finding presents epa with many options .

however , the ultimate decision on what the nation's greenhouse gas policy should be rests with the congress .

if it disagrees with any approach undertaken by epa , it can override the agency's decision , or respond as it did with acid rain and stratospheric ozone depletion — with new statutory authorities .

