the number of foreign - born people residing in the united states is at the highest level in u.s. history and has reached a proportion of the u.s. population — 12.6% — not seen since the early 20 th century .

of the 38 million foreign - born residents in the united states , approximately 16.4 million are naturalized citizens .

according to the latest estimates by the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , about 10.8 million unauthorized aliens were living in the united states in january 2009 .

the pew hispanic center recently reported an estimate of 11.1 million unauthorized aliens in march 2009 , down from a peak of 12 million in march 2007 .

some observers and policy experts maintain that the presence of an estimated 11 million unauthorized residents is evidence of flaws in the legal immigration system as well as failures of immigration control policies and practices .

there is , indeed , a broad - based consensus that the u.s. immigration system is broken .

this consensus erodes , however , as soon as the options to reform the u.s. immigration system are debated .

substantial efforts to reform immigration law have failed in the recent past , prompting some to characterize the issue as a "zero - sum game" or a "third rail. .

the thorniest of these immigration issues centers on policies directed toward unauthorized aliens in the united states .

although the economy appears to be recovering from the recession and some economic indicators suggest that growth has resumed , unemployment remains high and is projected to remain so for some time .

historically , international migration ebbs during economic crises ( eg , immigration to the united states was at its lowest levels during the great depression ) .

while preliminary statistical trends suggest a slowing of migration pressures , it remains unclear how the current economic climate will affect immigration to the united states .

whether the congress will act to alter immigration policies — either in the form of comprehensive immigration reform or in the form of incremental revisions aimed at strategic changes — is at the crux of the debate .

addressing these contentious policy reforms against the backdrop of economic turbulence sharpens the social and business cleavages and may narrow the range of options .

this report synthesizes the following components of the reform debate: legal immigration ; legalization ; immigration control ; refugees , asylees , and humanitarian migrants ; and alien rights , benefits , and responsibilities ; and offers a roadmap to other congressional research service reports that more fully analyze the policy options .

the challenge inherent in this policy issue is balancing employers' hopes to have access to a supply of legally present foreign workers , families' longing to reunite and live together , and a widely - shared wish among the stakeholders to improve the policies governing legal immigration into the country .

the scope of this issue includes temporary admissions ( eg , guest workers , foreign students ) and permanent admissions ( e.g .

employment - based , family - based immigrants ) .

the debate over legal immigration reform is complicated by proposals to enable unauthorized aliens residing in the united states to become lprs , ( commonly termed amnesty" by opponents and earned legalization by supporters ) .

there are a range of options being offered , and these alternatives generally require unauthorized aliens to meet specified conditions and terms as well as pay penalty fees to legalize their status .

examples would include documenting physical presence in the united states over a specified period ; demonstrating employment for specified periods ; showing payment of income taxes ; or leaving the united states to obtain the legal status .

using a point system that credits aliens with equities in the united states ( eg , work history , tax records , and family ties ) would be another possible option .

other avenues for legalization would be guest worker visas tailored for unauthorized aliens in the united states or a legalization program that would replace guest worker visas .

there are also options ( commonly referred to as the dream act ) that would enable some unauthorized alien students to become lprs through an immigration procedure known as cancellation of removal .

advocates for these legalization avenues maintain that unauthorized residents are working , paying taxes , and contributing to the community .

some also point out that legalization would provide employers with a substantially increased legal workforce without importing additional foreign workers .

opponents maintain that legalization rewards illegal actions at the expense of potential immigrants who are waiting to come legally .

they further argue that it would serve as a magnet for future flows of unauthorized migrants .

reassessing immigration control policies and agencies and considering options for more effective enforcement of the ina are integral to immigration reform .

immigration control encompasses an array of enforcement tools , policies , and practices to prevent and investigate violations of immigration laws .

the spectrum of enforcement issues ranges from visa policy at consular posts abroad and border security along the country's perimeter , to the apprehension , detention , and removal of unauthorized aliens in the interior of the country .

if the flow of unauthorized migrants is abating during the economic recession , some may seek to divert resources from immigration control activities to other areas .

illustrative among these issues that might arise in the 111 th congress are border security , worksite enforcement , document fraud , criminal aliens and the grounds for inadmissibility .

while refugee , asylee and humanitarian concerns have traditionally been treated as distinct from immigration reform , comprehensive reform legislation may include provisions that impact these issue areas .

as precedent , asylum reforms were included in the 1990 and the 1996 overhauls of the ina .

additionally , the foreign nationals who have been denied asylum or who have had temporary protected status ( tps ) in the united states for many years may often be covered by legalization or status adjustment provisions .

those who would revise refugee and asylum provisions in the ina have divergent perspectives .

some express concern that potential terrorists could use refugee status or asylum as an avenue for entry into the united states , especially aliens from trouble spots in the mideast , northern africa and south asia .

some assert that the non - governmental organizations and contractors for the united nations that assist displaced people are expanding the definition of "refugee" to cover people never before considered refugees .

others argue that — given the religious , ethnic , and political violence in various countries around the world — it is becoming more difficult to differentiate the persecuted from the persecutors .

others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations and gender - based abuses that occur around the world , or that it is time to re - think u.s. refugee policy .

as a signatory to the united nations protocol relating to the status of refugees , the united states agrees that it will not return an alien to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened .

a refugee is a person fleeing his or her country because of persecution or a well - founded fear of persecution on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

asylum - seekers are individuals who apply for refugee protections after they have arrived in the united states .

those granted asylum as well as those who are determined to be refugees are eligible to become lprs after one year in the united states .

not all humanitarian migrants , however , are eligible for asylum or refugee status .

when civil unrest , violence , or natural disasters erupt in spots around the world , the united states may offer tps or relief from removal , for example .

how to establish an appropriate balance among the goals of protecting vulnerable and displaced people , maintaining homeland security , and minimizing the abuse of humanitarian policies is the crux of this issue .

specific topics include refugee resettlement , asylum policy , temporary protected status , unaccompanied alien children , and victims of trafficking and torture .

war , violence , civil unrest , economic destablization , or food crisis , for example , would trigger the urgency of these issues in the 111 th congress .

the devastation caused by the january 12 , 2010 , earthquake in haiti has led dhs secretary janet napolitano to grant tps to haitians in the united states at the time of the earthquake and has raised a series of policy concerns on haitian migration .

the degree to which foreign nationals should be accorded certain rights and privileges as a result of their presence in the united states , along with the duties owed by such aliens given their legal status , sparks debate .

any immigration legislation , whether it expands , alters , or retracts migration levels , will likely prompt a debate over potential trade - offs and impacts on alien rights and responsibilities .

all persons in the united states , whether u.s. nationals or foreign nationals , are accorded certain rights under the u.s. constitution .

however , foreign nationals do not enjoy the same degree of constitutional protections as u.s. citizens .

aliens who legally reside in the united states , moreover , possess greater constitutional protections than those aliens who do not .

federal laws , for example , place comprehensive restrictions on noncitizens' access to means - tested public assistance , with exceptions for lprs with a substantial u.s. work history .

aliens in the united states without authorization ( i.e. , illegally present ) are ineligible for federal public benefits , except for specified emergency services .

nonetheless , controversies and confusion abound , particularly regarding the eligibility of families comprised of people with a mix of immigration and citizenship status , such as an lpr married to an unauthorized alien with u.s. citizen children .

a corollary issue is foreign nationals who have temporary employment authorizations and social security numbers , but who are not lprs .

although it does not address the legality of the alien's immigration status , the internal revenue code makes clear that "resident aliens" are generally taxed in the same manner as u.s. citizens .

those who are temporary legal residents or "quasi - legal" migrants pose a particular dilemma to some because they are permitted to work and have likely paid into the system that finances a particular benefit , such as social security or a tax refund , for which they may not be eligible .

unintended consequences , most notably when tightening up the identification requirements to stymie false claims of citizenship results in denying benefits to u.s. citizens , add complexity to the debate .

these issues are arising in the context of specific legislation on due process rights , access to health care , tax liabilities and refunds , educational opportunities , and means - tested federal assistance .

in the 110 th congress , senate action on comprehensive immigration reform legislation stalled at the end of june 2007 after several weeks of intensive floor debate .

at the same time , the house judiciary subcommittee on immigration , citizenship , refugees , border security , and international law held multiple hearings weekly in april , may and june of 2007 on various aspects of immigration reform .

the house , however , did not act on comprehensive legislation in the 110 th congress .

during the 109 th congress , both chambers passed major overhauls of immigration law , but did not reach agreement on a comprehensive reform package .

during his time in the senate , president barack obama supported comprehensive immigration reform legislation that included increased enforcement as well as a pathway to legal residence for certain unauthorized residents .

similar views have been expressed by the secretary of homeland security janet napolitano .

the obama administration has outlined its principles for comprehensive immigration reform as follows: create secure borders: protect the integrity of our borders .

support additional personnel , infrastructure and technology on the border and at our ports of entry .

improve our immigration system: fix the dysfunctional immigration bureaucracy and increase the number of legal immigrants to keep families together and meet the demand for jobs that employers cannot fill .

remove incentives to enter illegally: remove incentives to enter the country illegally by cracking down on employers who hire undocumented immigrants .

bring people out of the shadows: support a system that allows undocumented immigrants who are in good standing to pay a fine , learn english , and go to the back of the line for the opportunity to become citizens .

work with mexico: promote economic development in mexico to decrease illegal immigration .

the obama administration has stated that comprehensive immigration reform will be a top priority , along with other competing priorities in the areas of domestic and foreign policy .

in february 2009 , president obama said , "we're going to be convening leadership on this issue so that we can start getting that legislation drawn up over the next several months. .

president obama and officials in his administration met with members of congress from both parties at a june 25 , 2009 , meeting on comprehensive immigration reform at the white house .

in his 2010 state of the union address , the president pledged to "continue the work of fixing our broken immigration system. .

it is precedented and usual , however , for congress to take the lead on immigration legislation .

senate judiciary subcommittee on immigration , refugees and border security chairman charles schumer has stated that comprehensive immigration reform legislation could be taken up as soon as later in 2009 , but only if the first priority is a crackdown on illegal immigration .

senator schumer has stated his principles for reform , summarized as follows: dramatically curtail future illegal immigration ; significant additional increases in infrastructure , technology , and border personnel ; illegal aliens must register their presence and submit to a rigorous process of converting to legal status and earning a path to citizenship , or face imminent deportation ; biometric - based employer verification system ; more room for both family immigration and employment - based immigration ; encourage the world's best and brightest individuals to immigrate , but discourage businesses from using our immigration laws as a means to obtain temporary and less - expensive foreign labor ; and convert the current flow of unskilled illegal immigrants into the united states into a more manageable and controlled flow of legal immigrants .

the ranking republican on the senate judiciary subcommittee on immigration , refugees and border security , senator john cornyn , has stated his willingness to continue working on immigration reform: "comprehensive , common - sense immigration reform remains a top priority for me .

any legislation must protect our borders , promote economic prosperity in texas and throughout the united states , and be consistent with our american values of compassion , family , and opportunity. .

senator cornyn's articulated his principles for immigration reform , summarized as follows: strengthen border security first ; strengthen interior security ; create tamper - proof identification and deliver a reliable employer verification system ; streamline the temporary worker programs and offer visas to more highly - skilled workers ; and deliver a fair but firm solution to the millions of men , women , and children who are here in violation of our laws .

despite the similar sounds across these three sets of principles , achieving these consensus likely will be daunting .

the ranking republican on the house judiciary committee , representative lamar smith , offers a counter perspective: "to achieve immigration reform , the choices are not just amnesty or mass deportation .

a strategy of 'attrition through enforcement' would dramatically reduce the number of illegal immigrants over time. .

the difficulties in accomplishing immigration reform were underscored by vice president joseph biden when he was asked about the chances of extending temporary migrant protection programs: "we believe , the president and i , that this problem can only be solved in the context of an overall immigration reform. .

biden further stated , "we need some forbearance as we try to put together a comprehensive approach to deal with this. .

as the 111 th congress nears its end , some observers are speculating that specific immigration reform measures that have a tradition of bipartisan support , such as legislation that would enable some unauthorized alien students to become lprs ( dream act ) , revise the h - 1b visas process , or amend provisions pertaining to victims of trafficking , might be handled independent of comprehensive immigration reform .

