recent congressional discussion of patent system reform has included consideration of provisions that would restrict the sorts of inventions for which patents may be obtained .

legislation introduced in the 111 th congress would have prevented the patenting of tax planning methods , while one hearing regarding patent reform focused in part upon the propriety of patenting business methods .

legislation introduced in previous sessions of congress would have banned patents relating to genetic materials as well .

none of this legislation has been enacted .

under current law , one of the requirements to obtain a patent is that the invention must consist of a "process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter. .

the courts and the u.s. patent and trademark office ( uspto ) have understood this language to allow an expansive range of patentable subject matter .

patents have therefore been obtained upon diverse inventions , including living organisms , genetic materials , tax avoidance strategies , insurance methods , and marketing techniques .

some observers believe that recent judicial opinions have narrowed the extent of patentable subject matter , however .

the proper scope of patentable subject matter has been the subject of an often impassioned debate .

among other concerns , critics believe that business method patents are unnecessary to promote innovation , that tax strategy patents conflict with public policy , and that patents on generic materials raise ethical concerns .

however , other observers believe that the patent system has served as a fair and effective mechanism for promoting advances in a broad range of disciplines .

in their view , arbitrary restrictions upon the patent incentive are inappropriate .

this report introduces the current debate concerning the appropriate range of patentable subject matter .

it begins by providing an introduction to the patent system .

it then reviews the ongoing discussion concerning the merits of business method and tax planning method patents .

the current controversy concerning patents on genetic materials is then reviewed .

the report then provides a broader discussion of innovation policy concerns that arise as policy makers consider the appropriate range of patentable subject matter .

a summary of congressional issues and options concludes the report .

the u.s. constitution confers upon congress the power "to promote the progress of ... useful arts , by securing for limited times to .. .

inventors the exclusive right to their .. .

discoveries. .

in accordance with the patent act of 1952 , an inventor may seek the grant of a patent by preparing and submitting an application to the uspto .

uspto officials known as examiners then determine whether the invention disclosed in the application merits the award of a patent .

uspto procedures require examiners to determine whether the invention fulfills certain substantive standards set by the patent statute .

to be patentable , the invention must be novel , or different , from subject matter disclosed by an earlier patent , publication , or other state - of - the - art knowledge .

in addition , an invention is not patentable if "the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains. .

this requirement of "nonobviousness" prevents the issuance of patents claiming subject matter that a skilled artisan would have been able to implement in view of the knowledge of the state of the art .

the invention must also be useful , a requirement that is satisfied if the invention is operable and provides a tangible benefit .

even if these requirements of novelty , nonobviousness , and utility are met , an invention is not patentable unless it falls within at least one category of patentable subject matter .

according to section 101 of the patent act of 1952 , an invention which is a "process , machine , manufacture , or composition of matter" may be patented .

the range of patentable subject matter under this statute has been characterized as "extremely broad. .

the courts and uspto have nonetheless concluded that certain subject matter , including abstract ideas and laws of nature , is not patentable under section 101 .

this report further discusses this legal standard below .

in addition to these substantive requirements , the uspto examiner will consider whether the submitted application fully discloses and distinctly claims the invention .

in particular , the application must enable persons skilled in the art to make and use the invention without undue experimentation .

in addition , the application must disclose the "best mode," or preferred way , that the applicant knows to practice the invention .

if the uspto allows the patent to issue , its owner obtains the right to exclude others from making , using , selling , offering to sell , or importing into the united states the patented invention .

those who engage in those acts without the permission of the patentee during the term of the patent can be held liable for infringement .

adjudicated infringers may be enjoined from further infringing acts .

the patent statute also provides for an award of damages "adequate to compensate for the infringement , but in no event less than a reasonable royalty for the use made of the invention by the infringer. .

the maximum term of patent protection is ordinarily set at 20 years from the date the application is filed .

at the end of that period , others may employ that invention without regard to the expired patent .

patent rights do not enforce themselves .

patent owners who wish to compel others to respect their rights must commence enforcement proceedings , which most commonly consist of litigation in the federal courts .

although issued patents enjoy a presumption of validity , accused infringers may assert that a patent is invalid or unenforceable on a number of grounds .

the court of appeals for the federal circuit ( federal circuit ) possesses nationwide jurisdiction over most patent appeals from the district courts .

the supreme court enjoys discretionary authority to review cases decided by the federal circuit .

the patent act of 1952 allows a patent to issue upon a "process," which the statute defines to mean a "process , art , or method. .

process patents claim a series of steps that may be performed to achieve a specific result .

process patents typically relate to methods of manufacture or use .

a process patent may claim a method of making a product , for example , or a method of using a chemical compound to treat a disease .

although the statutory term "process" is broad , courts and the uspto have nonetheless established certain limits upon the sorts of processes that may be patented .

in particular , abstract ideas , mathematical algorithms , mental processes , and scientific principles have been judged not to be patentable .

the supreme court has described these sorts of inventions as the "basic tools of scientific and technological work" that should be "free to all men and reserved exclusively to none. .

as explained by supreme court justice stephen breyer , this rule "reflects a basic judgment that protection in such cases , despite its potentially positive incentive effects , would too severely interfere with , or discourage , development and the further spread of future knowledge itself. .

in recent years , two controversial categories of process patents have been identified .

the first of these , business method patents , have been defined to include "a method of administering , managing , or otherwise operating a business or organization , including a technique used in doing or conducting business. .

the second , tax strategy patents , have been defined as "a plan , strategy , technique , or scheme that is designed to reduce , minimize , or defer , or has , when implemented , the effect of reducing , minimizing , or deferring , a taxpayer's tax liability. .

this report discusses these two sorts of process patents in turn .

controversy concerning patentable subject matter has not been confined to methods of doing business and tax planning methods .

patents claiming the products of biotechnology , and in particular genetic materials , have also led to considerable debate .

in recent years , advances in biotechnology have resulted in a growing body of knowledge concerning the genetic material of living organisms .

in turn , thousands of patents have been granted that assert rights in specific sequences of deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) — the nucleic acid that contains the genetic instructions that all known living organisms use in order to develop and function .

other patents claim related technologies , including individual mutations known to cause disease , testing kits for detecting genetic mutations , amino acid sequences ( proteins ) , and the use of these proteins as medicines .

the availability of patents pertaining to genetic technologies may be traced to the well - known decision of the u.s. supreme court in diamond v. chakrabarty .

that 1980 opinion held that a genetically engineered microorganism constituted patentable subject matter , qualifying as both a "composition of matter" or "manufacture" within the meaning of §101 of the patent act .

in so doing , the supreme court confirmed the traditional rule that "laws of nature , physical phenomenon , and abstract ideas have been held not patentable .

thus , a new mineral discovered in the earth or a new plant found in the wild is not patentable subject matter. .

the court reasoned that the traditional rule denying patents to "products of nature" was inapplicable to the invention before it , however .

chief justice burger explained: [t]he patentee has produced a new bacterium with markedly different characteristics from any found in nature and one having the potential for significant utility .

his discovery is not nature's handiwork , but his own ; accordingly it is patentable subject matter under § 101 .

as applied to genetic materials , the reasoning of diamond v. chakrabarty may be read to allow patents to issue where scientists have isolated these materials from their natural environment or produced through artificial techniques .

as a result , patent claims directed towards dna typically employ such terms as "isolated" or "recombinant" in order to reflect these conditions .

notably , this claim language restricts the scope of patent to isolated or artificially produced substances .

as a result , the genes naturally possessed by humans and other living organisms are not included within the scope of proprietary rights .

the march 29 , 2010 , decision of the district court for the southern district of new york in association for molecular pathology v. uspto cast serious doubt upon this reasoning , however .

judge sweet's lengthy opinion struck down several patents owned by myriad genetics claiming isolated dna and various analytical methods: the claims - in - suit directed to "isolated dna" containing human brca1 / 2 gene sequences reflect the uspto's practice of granting patents on dna sequences so long as those sequences are claimed in the form of "isolated dna. .

this practice is premised on the view that dna should be treated no differently from any other chemical compound , and that its purification from the body , using well - known techniques , renders it patentable by transforming it into something distinctly different in character .

many , however , including scientists in the field of molecular biology and genomics , have considered this practice a "lawyer's trick" that circumvents the prohibitions on the direct patenting of dna in our bodies but which , in practice , reaches the same result .

the resolution of these motions is based upon long recognized principles of molecular biology and genetics: dna represents the physical embodiment of biological information , distinct in its essential characteristics from any other chemical found in nature .

it is concluded that dna's existence in an "isolated" form alters neither this fundamental quality of dna as it exists in the body nor the information it encodes .

therefore , the patents at issue directed to "isolated dna" containing sequences found in nature are unsustainable as a matter of law and are deemed unpatentable subject matter under 35 usc 101 .

similarly , because the claimed comparisons of dna sequences are abstract mental processes , they also constitute unpatentable subjct matter under section 101 .

some observers believe that the broad language employed by judge sweet implies that virtually all gene patents are invalid under §101 as claiming unpatentable subject matter .

at the time this report goes to press , this litigation is the subject of an appeal to the federal circuit .

as with patents claiming business methods and tax strategies , patents pertaining to genetic materials are controversial .

critics have asserted that genetic materials should remain accessible to all , rather than subject to intellectual property rights , and that such patents may depress research efforts and have a deleterious impact upon public health .

other experts believe these critiques are overstated or misplaced , however .

in their view , patent rights in dna are no more expansive or worthy of concern than for other sorts of inventions .

this report reviews this debate below .

congress has previously considered restricting patents relating to genetic materials .

in the 110 th congress , representative becerra introduced the genetic research and accessibility act , h.r .

977 .

that bill would have provided: notwithstanding any other provision of law , no patent may be obtained for a nucleotide sequence , or its functions or correlations , or the naturally occurring products it specifies .

the proposed amendment would not have applied to a patent issued prior to the date of enactment of the genetic research and accessibility act .

this legislation was not enacted .

as well , the genomic research and diagnostic disability act of 2002 was introduced , but not enacted , in the 107 th congress .

that legislation would have created a research exemption from infringement for research on genetic sequence information and an infringement exemption for genetic diagnostic testing .

the patenting of business methods , tax strategies , genetic materials , and other sorts of post - industrial technologies has raised controversy .

some observers have expressed concerns that these sorts of inventions should not be patented , no matter how innovative they might be .

they believe that section 101 of the patent act , the provision governing patentable subject matter , should be interpreted , and if necessary amended , to exclude these sorts of inventions from patenting .

others believe that these concerns are overstated .

they further assert that the patenting of inventions of the information age , as well as biotechnologies , will be beneficial for innovation and competition .

this report reviews some of the primary arguments that have been raised in this debate .

proponents of a broad notion of patentable subject matter assert that the patent system has traditionally offered a powerful incentive for innovation across many industries .

for example , the chemical , electronics , manufacturing , telecommunications , and pharmaceutical industries are among those that have long sought and enforced patents .

in the view of these commentators , the patent system will readily adapt to new fields of endeavor as well .

further , many inventions of the 21 st century — including business methods and genetic inventions — are as subject to costly research and development efforts as more traditional technologies .

observers question why the patent incentive exists in one field of costly research and development and not in another .

the patent system also provides the benefit of public disclosure .

in order to obtain patent rights , inventors must fully disclose their inventions such that a skilled artisan could practice them without undue experimentation .

a patent system that denies protection to entire categories of inventions may cause inventors to conceal them as trade secrets .

in contrast to patenting , trade secret protection does not result in the disclosure of publicly available information .

taking the steps necessary to maintain secrecy , such as implementing physical security measures , also imposes costs that may ultimately be unproductive for society .

another argument in favor of a broad notion of patentable subject matter is that distinguishing patentable and unpatentable inventions may at times prove difficult .

for example , assessing whether a particular invention is sufficiently technologically embedded to constitute patentable subject matter may not constitute a straightforward , routine inquiry .

aware of the legal requirements to obtain a patent , lawyers may draft patent instruments in such as a way as to make software inventions appear to be hard - wired machines .

such artful claims drafting may ultimately make patents more difficult to read and interpret .

supporters of an expansive patent system also observe that patents have been identified as facilitators of markets .

if inventors lack patent rights , they may have scant tangible assets to sell or license .

in addition , an inventor might otherwise be unable to police the conduct of a contracting party .

any technology or know - how that has been disclosed to a prospective licensee might be appropriated without compensation to the inventor .

the availability of patent protection decreases the ability of contracting parties to engage in opportunistic behavior .

by lowering such transaction costs , the patent system may make transactions concerning information goods more feasible .

categorical exclusion of certain sorts of inventions from the patent system may deny entire industries this potential benefit .

studies have also indicated that entrepreneurs and small , innovative firms rely more heavily upon the patent system than larger enterprises .

large firms often possess a number of alternative means for achieving a proprietary interest in a particular technology .

for example , trade secrecy , ready access to markets , trademark rights , speed of development , and consumer goodwill may to some degree act as substitutes for the patent system .

however , individual inventors and small firms often do not have these mechanisms at their disposal .

as a result , the patent system may enjoy heightened importance with respect to these enterprises .

legal experts also assert that patents do not provide the affirmative right to use the patented invention , but rather the right to exclude others from doing so .

this perspective implies that the grant of patent neither implies government approval of an invention , nor allows meaningful control of a technology .

as a result , the grant of a patent on , for example , a particular tax strategy , should not be deemed as an indication that the strategy is legally sound .

similarly , disallowing patents on genetic materials would not necessarily suppress the technology as a general matter .

although these and other assertions weigh in favor of an ambitious scope of patentable subject matter , other observers are less optimistic .

some commentators believe that innovation in areas such as business methods , tax planning methods , and genetic materials has flourished even though the availability of patent rights has been uncertain .

for example , the american institute of certified public accountants [aicpa] asserts that "[p]eople already have substantial incentives to comply with tax law and lower their taxes. .

under this line of reasoning , the patent incentive is unnecessary to promote a socially optimal level of innovation within these disciplines .

other observers go further , believing that patents in these areas may not merely be unnecessary , but also socially detrimental .

with respect to business methods , some commentators believe that these patents are commonly of such broad scope as to "effectively appropriate all possible solutions to a particular problem. .

this extent of proprietary rights may limit the ability of others to design around the patented invention and ultimately discourage competition .

with respect to tax strategy patents , some believe that an incentive to develop methods of lowering one's taxes is not socially desirable .

william a. drennan , a member of the law faculty at southern illinois university , contrasts the grant of tax strategy patents with recent treasury department regulations that , in his view , "reduce the economic incentive to create tax loopholes. .

mr. drennan thus explains: [o]ne government agency — the treasury department — is taking action to discourage loopholes .

in contrast , the patent office ( at the direction of the federal circuit ) is providing a new incentive to create loopholes .

since the treasury department is in charge of the sound administration of the u.s. tax system , the treasury department's views on sound tax policy should be given greater weight than the view of the patent office on this subject .

other experts believe that tax strategy patents are inappropriate because they are said to inject private control over a system of public laws .

under this view , a patent may potentially grant one individual the ability to prevent others from using a new tax provision .

in turn , private actors may affect the ability of federal , state , and local governments to raise revenue , influence taxpayer behavior , and otherwise achieve the intended purposes of the tax laws .

these concerns were voiced by the aicpa in the following way: tax strategy patents also preempt congress's prerogative to have full legislative control over tax policy .

congress enacts tax law provisions applicable to various taxpayers and intends that taxpayers will be able to use them .

tax strategy patents thwart this congressional intent by giving tax strategy patent holders the power to decide how select tax law provisions can be used and who can use them .

tax professionals have also expressed concerns over the impact of tax strategy patents upon their own practices , as well as taxpayers in general .

some observers believe that the burdens of investigating whether a taxpayer's planned course of action is covered by a tax strategy patent , determining whether the patent was providently granted by the uspto , and potentially negotiating with the patent proprietor in order to employ the strategy , will be costly and impractical for many taxpayers .

further , because compliance with the tax laws and its self - assessment system is obligatory for all citizens of the united states , the scope of this burden could be considerable .

several additional objections have arisen to patenting the inventions of genetic materials .

some individuals believe that patenting genetic materials devalues the worth and dignity of living beings .

these commentators believe that such patents would allow individuals to obtain an ownership right in another sentient being .

from this perspective , such a patent right is akin to slavery and morally wrong .

human genetic materials in particular are instead deemed to be the common heritage of humanity and therefore should be the subject of shared public ownership , rather than proprietary rights .

patents on genetic materials have also been said to lead to possible deleterious effects on healthcare and research related to healthcare .

for example , some patents claim human genes that indicate susceptibility to a particular disease and diagnostic tests for detecting that gene .

observers question whether having only one proprietary diagnostic test for a particular disease lies in the public interest .

they also suggest that patent rights over a gene that is linked to a particular disease might inhibit further research concerning that disease .

professors heller and eisenberg have also expressed the concern that the "tragedy of the anticommons" may lead to the underuse of patented genetic resources .

in their view , too many overlapping intellectual property rights with respect to genetic materials may hinder research and development , and ultimately the exploitation of potential future products .

for example , one enterprise might own a patent on a genomic dna fragment , another on the corresponding protein , and yet another on a diagnostic test for a genetic disease .

in this circumstance , multiple owners each have the right to exclude others and no one has an effective privilege of use .

development of a commercial product in this situation may prove difficult or impossible .

additional assertions have been made both in support of a broad scope of patentable subject matter , as well as in favor of restricting the scope of patenting .

unfortunately , no rigorous analytical method allows for study of the role the patent system plays in promoting innovation , investment , and competition .

as a result , arguments for and against a broad scope of patentable subject matter are difficult to quantify .

determining the precise scope of patentable subject matter therefore remains a matter of legal reasoning , as informed by concerns over innovation and competition policy .

if congress decides that the current rules with respect to patent eligibility are satisfactory , then no action need be taken .

should congress choose to take action , however , a number of options exist .

one possibility is an amendment to section 101 of the patent act stipulating that certain subject matter is not patentable .

legislation introduced in the 111 th congress would take this step with respect to tax shelters , while legislation in the 110 th congress would have done so with respect to nucleotide sequences .

another option is to allow patents on particular inventions to issue , but to limit the remedies available to proprietors of such patents .

the patent act currently stipulates that damages and injunctions are not available for patent infringement caused by "a medical practitioner's performance of a medical activity" under certain circumstances .

this provision could potentially be amended to include other categories of inventions .

other legislative responses are also possible .

congress could choose to track uspto practices with respect to patents on business methods , tax strategies , or genetic materials .

in this respect , commentators have proposed several reforms , including the hiring of uspto examiners with expertise in taxation or other sensitive areas .

congress could also encourage continued cooperation between the uspto and other federal agencies , such as the irs , with expertise in particular disciplines .

if legislation is contemplated , one international agreement that deserves consideration is the world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights , commonly known as the trips agreement .

as a wto member , the united states has committed to "give effect to the provisions of [the trips] agreement. .

the trips agreement provides that "patents shall be available for any inventions , whether products or processes , in all fields of technology. .

it further states that "patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without discrimination as to ... the field of technology. .

the trips agreement additionally stipulates that wto member states may exclude from patentability certain inventions , in particular "diagnostic , therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans and animals" and "plants and animals other than micro - organisms , and essentially biological processes for the production of plants and animals other than non - biological and microbiological processes. .

compliance with the trips agreement may place some limits on the ability of wto member states to legislate with respect to patentable subject matter .

the topic of patentable subject matter has raised a surprisingly heated debate in many contexts , including business methods , tax strategies , and genetic materials .

many knowledgeable observers have voiced strong objections to patents in these fields on a number of grounds .

however , other experts point to the lack of direct evidence that granting patents within these fields has persistently led to deleterious consequences , and instead believe that they potentially benefit society .

although the patenting of business methods , tax strategies , and genetic materials has generally been viewed on an individual basis , the policy issues raised in these debates share many common themes .

collectively , these debates may promote further inquiry into the sorts of inventions that may be appropriately patented .

