several hundred informal member organizations exist within the house of representatives , senate , or between both the chambers ; these organizations typically reflect members' shared legislative objectives or representational interests .

these groups may commonly be described as congressional caucuses , working groups , or task forces , but in this report , will be identified , collectively , as informal member organizations , to avoid confusion with official party caucuses .

an additional distinction between informal member organizations may be drawn .

in the house of representatives , some groups may register with the committee on house administration to form a congressional member organization ( cmo ) .

cmos registered with the committee on house administration can include groups exclusively for house members or bicameral groups that include house members and senators .

informal member organizations that are not registered with the committee on house administration are called informal member groups ; these include groups exclusive to the senate , which does not have any formal registration process for informal member organizations .

these distinctions are described in greater detail in the sections below .

the appendix provides some considerations for house members seeking to form a cmo .

some of these considerations that are not exclusive to the house process , such as determining a group's objective and possible membership , may also be of interest to senators or house members seeking to form an informal member group .

there are two types of informal member organizations: congressional member organizations ( cmos ) and informal member groups .

the number of identified informal member organizations since the 92 nd congress ( 1971-1972 ) is provided in table 1 , which shows how an increase began in the 1970s and has increased more markedly since the 1990s .

the committee on house administration lists 518 registered cmos for the 115 th congress , which includes house - only organizations and some bicameral organizations .

it is more challenging to tally the number of informal member groups because they are not officially tracked by the house or senate .

self - reported information from house members' offices in the congressional yellow book identifies an additional 158 groups , some of which may be house - only and some of which may be bicameral groups .

self - reported information from senators' offices in the congressional yellow book identifies 178 groups , some of which may be senate - only and some of which may be bicameral groups .

informal member organizations typically exist as forums to discuss ideas and potential activities related to public policy or representational considerations .

groups may engage in direct legislative advocacy for a particular issue or concern , provide opportunities to educate members and staff on policy matters , or generate broader public awareness on these topics .

groups often hold regular member or staff meetings to exchange information and develop legislative strategy .

many informal member organizations also invite outside speakers and groups to make presentations to their members .

some informal member organizations may have a relatively narrow legislative interest or objective .

other groups may have a broader focus and address multiple issues of concern for a particular geographic region , economic sector , or generalized policy area .

many members view their participation in informal group or cmo activities as a means to realize both electoral and policy objectives .

an informal member organization can be readily established as circumstances and issues warrant without first enacting legislation or changing house , senate , or party rules ; open or limit its membership as it deems necessary to accomplish its goals ; expand members' opportunities to specialize on issues because there is no limit on the number of groups that can exist or on the number of groups that a member can join ; serve as a vehicle for the resolution of issue and policy differences between committees , parties , or the two houses ; provide an opportunity for a comprehensive and coordinated approach to issues over which committee jurisdiction is unclear or fragmented ; conduct briefings and use other means to provide members information and analysis on issues of interest ; attract attention to issues that the group members believe need to be addressed ; and enhance members' relations and standing with particular constituencies .

in addition to the benefits that informal member organizations may provide , some observers have noted certain limitations or disadvantages to these groups .

specifically , they have argued that informal member organizations have become so numerous that their significance has been diminished , as nearly every cause or issue has a member organization ; compete with the formal leadership and committee structure and functions ; undermine or even impede the legislative process by further fragmenting the congressional policymaking process ; may facilitate certain special interests in attaining undue attention in the legislative process ; create a perception of conflict of interest for members who may have formal legislative responsibilities within the same subject areas covered by the informal member organization ( i.e. , by appearing to be an advocate and adjudicator of an issue at the same time ) ; and present the possibility of congress being viewed negatively by the public as overly influenced by special interests .

ethical considerations have arisen related to the nature and extent of member participation on governing bodies of outside , nonprofit , tax - exempt organizations with informal ties to cmos , particularly with regard to members' participation in fundraising for these outside foundations .

under the current house ethics rules , house members are permitted to serve on the boards of certain outside groups , including nonprofit foundations and institutes , so long as they do not serve for compensation and their service does not conflict with a member's general obligation to the public .

house members are also permitted to raise funds for certain nonprofit organizations , but they are prohibited from raising money for any organization that is "established or controlled by members ( or staff ) " without receiving permission from the house committee on ethics .

questions as to whether a nonprofit organization's activities are related to a member's official duties can be directed to the house committee on ethics .

in addition to the distinction between cmos and informal member groups , informal member organizations may be broadly categorized by the purpose of the group .

in general , six categories can serve as a classification system for informal member organizations , although some informal member organizations may be difficult to fit into any category or may fit into multiple categories .

the six categories of informal member organizations are 1. intraparty ( promoting the policy views of like - minded members within a political party ) ; 2. personal interest ( typically focused on a broad , single concern , such as the environment or children , that is often under the jurisdiction of more than one committee ) ; 3. industry ( advocating the interests of a particular industry ) ; 4. regional ( championing the interests of a particular region ) ; 5. state / district ( advocating the interests of a particular state or district ) ; and 6. national constituency ( advocating the interests of particular groups of constituents , such as women , minorities , and veterans ) .

members who join intraparty member organizations , such as the blue dog coalition and the republican study committee , tend to use their membership as a forum to exchange information and develop legislative strategy with party colleagues who share their political ideology .

they tend to work on a wide range of issues and "have been important factors in agenda setting" by attracting attention to issues .

personal interest member organizations , such as the congressional diabetes caucus and the congressional sportsmen's caucus , tend to focus on increasing public and congressional awareness of issues , offer new solutions for addressing them , and attempt to influence the congressional agenda .

cmos that focus on issues of interest to particular industries , such as the congressional automotive caucus , congressional shipbuilding caucus , and congressional steel caucus , tend to attract members who are strongly committed to promoting that industry's interests .

members often view their membership as a means to increase congressional awareness of the industry's concerns , develop legislative strategy , and signal to constituents that they are actively promoting their interests .

regional cmos , such as the northeast - midwest congressional coalition and congressional western caucus , and state / district cmos , such as the california democratic congressional delegation , tend to focus on promoting legislative provisions that they believe will assist their region or state / district .

national constituency cmos , such as the congressional black caucus , congressional hispanic caucus , and congressional hispanic conference , tend to have broad concerns that often fall under the jurisdiction of more than one committee .

in addition to engaging in a wide range of agenda - setting activities , such as testifying before congressional committees and drafting bills and amendments , national constituency cmos are more likely than other cmos to attempt to place issues on the legislative agenda .

members tend to join national constituency cmos to raise public and congressional awareness of their issues , exchange information , and develop legislative strategy .

since the earliest congresses , members have gathered to promote their mutual interests in ad hoc , informal settings , outside of the formal committee and political party systems .

this section provides examples of some of these early groups , followed by the developments that shaped the modern system of informal member organizations .

two key changes for informal member organizations in the house are also discussed: the development of legislative service organizations ( lsos ) , which operated from 1979 to 1994 , and the creation of congressional member organizations in 1995 .

informal member organizations have become an enduring part of modern congresses , and they have grown in number markedly since the 1970s .

house or senate regulations broadly pertaining to individual members' activities generally apply to their participation with informal member organizations , and certain additional house regulations from the committee on house administration affect a subset of informal member organizations known as cmos .

the independence of these groups from more formal institutions within the house and senate can provide certain advantages , such as facilitating collaboration among members and providing leadership opportunities outside of one's party or committee assignments .

at times , this relative independence has also led to concerns about oversight for informal member organizations , as well as concerns over the fractionalization of the legislative process and competition with formal leadership and committee functions .

some groups may share legislative or representational interests with the house or senate at large , certain party leaders , or particular committees ; yet member organizations can also create forums for differing viewpoints , new policy ideas , or more particularized constituent concerns .

informal member organizations can facilitate deliberation and policy development in congress by providing opportunities for members to exchange information and can contribute to public awareness on a variety of topics .

this appendix covers some considerations that may be of interest to house members seeking to form a cmo .

current requirements from the committee on house administration are noted , where applicable .

define the objective first , clearly state the group's objective ( s ) .

what is its purpose ? .

determine the level of interest the founding member ( s ) determines whether there is sufficient interest to warrant organizing the group .

a number of methods may be used in making this determination .

these include informal discussions with colleagues ; communications with constituents ( individuals and organizations ) ; and the member's personal judgment and interest .

the extent to which an issue or interest is fragmented within the committee system may also be a factor .

in an effort to bring the various aspects of an issue under one entity , a number of groups have been organized around issues that were widely dispersed among several committees and subcommittees .

consult prospective "core" members sometimes , the organizing member ( s ) selects a few colleagues with an interest in the issue , consults with them about the group , and enlists their support in organizing it .

in many instances , these members serve as the group's executive officers , coordinators , or sponsors , and are the activists who lay the group's foundation and shape its policy .

this informal gathering of "core" members may occur before the group is actually established or shortly thereafter .

consider internal institutional concerns in an effort to avoid the appearance of rivalry or duplication with party or committee positions and policy , group organizers may wish to consult with party and committee leadership , or inform them of the intent to form the organization .

similar consideration may also be given to any existing groups that handle relevant aspects of the issue ( s ) or policy .

organizers will likely want to give careful consideration to the group's name in order to avoid confusion with other existing entities ( whether formal or informal ) .

identify likely membership cmo membership is voluntary .

eligibility criteria for membership are determined by the group itself .

membership may be open to all members who are willing to join , or it may be limited to invitees only .

membership may be open to one party only or both parties ; the house only or both the house and the senate ; regions that share specific economic concerns ; districts or states ; members who share personal characteristics ; members whose constituents share personal or occupational characteristics ; or members who share issue interests .

membership may also be based upon committee and subcommittee assignments .

similarly , the membership lists of the committees and subcommittees with primary jurisdiction over the relevant issue ( s ) can be used to identify prospective cmo members .

this procedure can provide an indication of whether , how , and by whom the issue is handled .

it may also identify some members who would either support or oppose the group .

seek necessary guidance and information the committee on house administration has issued specific regulations governing groups that register as cmos .

the regulations appear in the members' congressional handbook , which is available online at http: / / cha.house.gov / handbooks / members - congressional - handbook#members - handbook - organizations .

after reviewing these regulations , house members may wish to contact the committee on house administration , the house commission on congressional mailing standards ( also known as the franking commission ) , the committee on standards of official conduct's office of advice and education , and any other authorities , as appropriate , for guidance .

notify or announce the cmo's formation there are instances where formation of a cmo has been announced on the house floor , in the congressional record , by the media ( through press releases , news articles , newsletters , television interviews , etc .

 ) , and internally , through circulation of "dear colleague" letters to members .

the "dear colleague" letter and announcement usually invite members to join the group and explain its goals , anticipated activities , and reason ( s ) for being formed .

sometimes , notification of a group's formation also includes language aimed at assuring that the group is not being established to supplant the structure or operations of any committee or party organizations .

register with the committee on house administration as mentioned previously , any informal group of house members that wishes to use personal staff to work on behalf of an informal member group , discuss their membership in the group in official communications , or mention their membership on their official house website must register the group with the committee on house administration as a cmo .

the registration form is available at https: / / cha.house.gov / member - services / congressional - memberstaff - organizations / cmocso - registration - form#cmo .

cmo organizational structure each cmo determines its own organizational structure .

all cmos are required to have at least one identifiable leader who is designated as the group's sponsor when it is registered with the committee on house administration .

that member , or members if there is more than one sponsor , is listed as the cmo's chair , or co - chairs , on the committee's web page .

beyond that , many cmos have little or no formal organizational structure .

often , the founding member or members serve as the group's officers or coordinators , without formal election or designation .

leadership responsibilities ( eg , coordinating the group's activities , scheduling meetings , distributing information on group issues and actions , etc. ) .

are undertaken by members who volunteer , and group business usually is handled by staff in an individual member's office as part of their regular office duties .

several groups have a structure that includes any combination of the following elements: officers ( eg , chair , co - chair , vice chair , secretary ) ; an executive committee ( alternatively called an executive board , steering committee , or advisory panel ) ; and subunits ( usually called task forces or working groups ) .

the chair usually is a member who is highly interested in the issue ( s ) surrounding the group's organization .

more often than not , he or she "steps forth" to serve in that role or agrees to accept the position when recruited .

usually , he or she also designates staff to serve as ( the ) key contact person ( s ) for the group and to provide assistance on group business .

most bipartisan or bicameral cmos have had more than one chair ( i.e. , co - chairmen ) to emphasize the bipartisan or bicameral aspect of the organization .

for example , a cmo might have two co - chairs , one from each party .

or , the cmo might have a chair , who may be a member of either party in either house , as well as a senate co - chair and a house co - chair , while prescribing that all three officers cannot be members of the same party .

several cmos have a chair , vice chair , and secretary .

a few have opted for an even more stratified structure , one that might include whips and an executive committee .

class groups ( i.e. , freshmen in a particular congress ) usually have a structure that includes a president , vice president , and secretary .

most of the bicameral groups are also bipartisan , and their organizational structure usually reflects these characteristics .

thus , many bicameral cmos require that the group's leadership be composed of members from both parties and both houses .

current cmo regulations provide that "members of both the house and senate may participate in cmo , but at least one of the officers of the cmo must be a member of the house. .

executive committee / steering committee / advisory board for most cmos , the officers or executive committee administer the group's activities and set its agenda .

often , the executive committee also serves as the cmo's source of expertise , and it advises the group on certain issues .

an executive committee serving in this advisory capacity sometimes comprises members who serve on the committees and subcommittees with primary jurisdiction over the issue ( s ) of concern to the group .

other bases for advisory or executive committee membership might be the member's state or region , common characteristic ( s ) of members' constituents or congressional districts , or shared characteristics among the members themselves , including their "class" group , knowledge , or interest .

some cmos have separated the administrative and advisory roles of the executive committee by creating an advisory committee , apart from the executive committee .

how are the chairs and other officers selected ? .

like other internal operational matters , the manner by which the cmo's chair ( s ) is selected is left to the discretion of each cmo .

a cmo may use an informal method of selection , whereby members volunteer to serve as chair .

if more than one member expresses such interest , a co - chair arrangement may be used .

or , the interested members themselves may work out an agreement as to who will serve , perhaps so that some members serve during the first session and others during the second session .

alternatively , a group may choose a more formal process whereby interested members must be nominated and then stand for election by the total membership or the executive committee .

in many instances , the initial chair ( s ) is the cmo's founder .

often , he or she continues to serve until no longer a member or until he or she relinquishes the position .

however , in some instances , tenure as cmo chair is limited , either by custom or by rule ( in the cmo's bylaws ) .

staff currently , cmos cannot employ staff .

it is the individual members and not the cmo who are the employing entities .

thus , cmo business is handled by staff of individual members ( often the group's chair ( s ) ) as part of their regular duties .

frequently , the staff member works in an area related to the group's issue ( s ) .

beginning in the 114 th congress , the house amended its rules to allow certain cmos ( eligible congressional member organizations , or ecmos ) to enter into agreements with individual members to contribute employment slots and a portion of the members' representational allowance to a dedicated account of the ecmo .

members interested in registering a cmo as an ecmo can consult with the committee on house administration regarding the eligibility requirements and registration process .

