in the wake of the deepwater horizon explosion and oil spill in the gulf of mexico on april 20 , 2010 , congress continues to debate how much of the outer continental shelf ( ocs ) should be available for oil and gas development .

having all of the ocs available is seen by some as a way to increase domestic supply and improve u.s. energy security ; others contend that ocs development has risks for the coastal environment and coastal communities , and that other options are available for energy security .

the issue remains contentious , as industry would prefer that the entire ocs remain available without any area exclusions such as buffer zones ( eg , 25 or 50 miles from the coastline ) or withdrawals .

industry might be reluctant to invest in any new resource assessments unless they are confident that the ocs will remain open for long - term leasing and development .

environmental groups have argued to retain the ocs moratoria as previously specified and that industry already has access to areas in the gulf of mexico with large oil and gas reserves as well as several thousand leases not yet developed .

following the deepwater horizon oil spill the obama administration saw an immediate need to review and upgrade drilling and safety rules for offshore oil and gas development .

the 2010 oil spill changed the landscape for offshore oil and gas development .

it has led to the reorganization of the minerals management service ( mms ) ( discussed below ) , rewriting safety rules for drilling offshore , a suspension of permitting and drilling operations for some , review of the role of the national environmental policy act ( nepa ) and use of categorical exclusions , and a revised leasing program ( announced december 1 , 2010 ) .

many in the oil and gas industry asserted that the six - month suspension that was announced on may 28 , 2010 ( called a "de - facto" moratoria ) caused significant disruption of development activities and will lead to a reduction of oil and gas production and other economic losses at least in the short term .

however , according to the eia reference case , crude oil production from the lower 48 offshore region is estimated to increase from 1.71 million barrels per day ( mb / d ) in 2009 to 1.81 mb / d in 2015 .

new deepwater drilling permits were not issued until february 28 , 2011 .

although reinstatement of a blanket moratorium on the ocs is unlikely in the 112 th congress , some members of congress have argued for open but restricted access .

the president has the administrative authority to place areas of the ocs under a leasing and development moratoria , whereas legislated moratoria must be signed by the president .

to open the eastern gulf of mexico , gomesa would need to be amended or repealed .

congress and the administration are likely to give careful consideration to which parts of the ocs to keep open and which to protect through leasing moratoria .

the revised program confirms plans to conduct a programmatic environmental impact statement to determine if seismic studies should be conducted in the mid and south atlantic planning areas .

would this additional information on the ocs prior to lease sales generate more interest in those areas and possibly generate more revenue in higher bonus bids and high royalty rates ( 16.7% or 18.75% ) as part of the lease terms ? .

a related controversial legislative issue is whether coastal producing states should receive a greater share of those revenues .

revenue sharing is discussed in more detail below .

generally , proponents and opponents alike would argue that some sense of certainty is desirable .

industry proponents , for example , want to know , if the industry invests in exploration and development and finds oil and natural gas , whether it could then move forward with production .

and conversely , if certain areas are placed off limits or restricted , would those limitations remain in place for the long term ? .

the balance of this report provides information to inform this debate .

there are numerous house and senate bills that would restructure the way the ocs is managed , improve safety standards , make permitting more efficient , prevent or enforce lease sales , and address oil spill and deepwater production issues .

most recently , legislation introduced in the house — the energy security and transportation jobs act ( h.r .

3410 ) on november 14 , 2011 — combines some of the language from bills passed earlier by the house ( h.r .

1230 and h.r .

1231 , discussed below ) and incorporates this proposal into h.r .

7 , the american energy and infrastructure jobs act of 2012 , as title xvii – subtitle b. subtitle b of this act would require boem to offer lease sales in the most prospective areas in each of the ocs planning areas for the 2012-2017 5-year leasing program specifically , areas that contain more than 2.5 billion barrels of oil or more than 7.5 trillion cubic feet of natural gas .

increased production goals would be established at 3 million barrels per day ( mb / d ) of oil and 10 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) of natural gas per day by 2027 .

the bill would also require boem to offer lease sales 216 , 220 , and 222 all within a year of enactment .

the bill would require a lease sale in southern california under section 8 of outer continental shelf lands act ( ocsla ) , using onshore - based drilling technology by july 2014 and a lease sale in the north aleutian basin ( lease sale 214 , which was cancelled by the obama administration ) .

there is a provision that would amend section 18 of ocsla allowing the secretary of the interior to hold lease sales in areas identified by the secretary to have the greatest potential for oil and gas .

the current moratorium in the eastern gulf of mexico ( egom ) would be repealed , the boundaries in the egom shifted , extending the moratorium until 2025 , but allowing limited leasing in years 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 in certain areas that would be considered exempt and with the most oil and gas potential .

provisions for revenue sharing with the coastal states would be phased in for new leasing revenue ( 12.5% in the first leasing program 2012-2017 and 25% in the second leasing program ) defined in the bill , following enactment .

the application of ocsla would apply the u.s .

territories .

title xv of h.r .

7 ( also h.r .

3864 ) would appropriate the net increase in federal revenues from offshore and onshore energy revenue from leasing and production based on enactment of title xvii of h.r .

7 ( subtitle b explained above ) to the highway trust fund .

other earlier legislation ( h.r .

1230 — restarting american offshore leasing now act ) before congress would require the secretary of the interior to conduct four lease sales ( lease sales 216 , 218 , 220 , and 222 ) within about a year of the bill's enactment .

the administration's revised program is scheduled to hold three more lease sales ( sales 216 , 218 , and 222 ) in the central or western gulf of mexico as part of the 2007-2012 leasing program .

h.r .

1230 , which would reinstate lease sale 220 , passed the house on may 5 , 2011 , by a vote of 266-149 .

another bill ( h.r .

1229 — putting the gulf of mexico back to work act ) , would provide a new safety review and seek to expedite the drill permitting process by providing a new timeline for the secretary to make a final decision on the permit application .

the bill includes language on judicial reviews that would provide timelines , an exclusive venue for civil actions , and limits on relief and attorney fees .

the house passed h.r .

1229 on may 11 , 2011 , by a vote of 263-163 .

a third bill ( h.r .

1231 — reversing presidents obama's offshore moratorium act ) , which passed the house on may 12 , 2011 ( 243-179 ) , would require boem to offer lease sales in the most prospective areas in each of the ocs planning areas for the 2012-2017 5-year leasing program , specifically , areas that contain more than 2.5 billion barrels of oil or more than 7.5 trillion cubic feet of natural gas .

increased production goals would be established at 3 million barrels per day ( mb / d ) of oil and 10 billion cubic feet ( bcf ) of natural gas per day by 2027 .

meaningful projections or forecasts of the impact of offshore oil and gas production from areas previously under moratorium must rely on technical estimates of the oil and gas resources in those areas .

the quality of those assessments depends on the methodology used and the data available .

this section provides an overview of the quality of current assessments of the unexplored offshore areas and the uncertainties associated with those estimates .

the outer continental shelf lands act of 1953 ( ocsla ) , as amended , provides for the leasing of ocs lands in a manner that protects the environment and returns revenues to the federal government .

revenues come in three ways: bonus bids , rents , and royalties .

lease sales are conducted through a competitive , sealed , bidding process , and leases are awarded to the highest bidder .

a minimum bid is determined for each tract offered .

successful bidders make an up - front cash payment , called a bonus bid , to secure a lease .

during the past 17 years , annual bonus revenues have ranged from $85 million in 1992 to $1.4 billion in 1997 .

bidding on deepwater tracts in the mid - 1990s led to a surge in annual bonus revenue .

offshore bonus bids totaled $374 million in fy2007 .

but as a result of high oil and natural gas prices and the significant possible resources in the central gulf of mexico , record - setting bonus bids of $3.7 billion were accepted by boem / onrr at a lease sale in march 2008 .

in addition to the cash bonus bid , a royalty rate of 12.5% or 16.7% is imposed on the value of production , depending on location factors , which can be cash or "in - kind. .

the rate could be higher than 16.7% depending on the lease sale .

for instance , lease sales 224 ( march 2008 ) and 213 ( march 2010 ) will require a royalty rate of 18.75% in all water depths .

according to boem congressional affairs representatives , this higher rate ( 18.75% ) is likely to remain in place for future lease sales .

the secretary of the interior may reduce or eliminate the royalty established by the lease to promote increased recovery .

annual rents are $5-$9.50 per acre ( depending on water depth ) , with lease sizes generally ranging from 2,500-5,760 acres .

however , annual rental rates for the march 2009 sale in the central gulf of mexico began at $11 per acre for leases in water depths over 200 meters .

bonding requirements are $50,000 per lease and as much as $3 million for an entire area .

ocsla requires the secretary of the interior to submit five - year leasing programs that specify the time , location , and size of the areas to be offered .

each five - year leasing program entails a lengthy multistep process that includes an environmental impact statement .

after a public comment period , a final proposed program is submitted to the president and congress , which may be approved by the secretary after 60 days if there is no objection by congress .

under current law , the primary offshore lease terms are 5 , 8 , or 10 years depending on water depth .

however , new lease terms , for blocks between 400 meters and 1,599 meters water depth , were imposed beginning with the march 2010 sale .

leases continue as long as commercial quantities of hydrocarbons are being produced .

if the lease is not producing oil or gas in commercial quantities by the end of its primary term , the lease reverts to the government for a possible future lease sale — unless the lessee is granted an extension .

extensions can be granted for offshore leases under 30 cfr 250.180 .

the regulation for offshore extensions does not specify the length of the extension nor the conditions or requirements for an extension .

also , it is not clear how often the boem grant extensions .

many leases expire before exploration or production occurs .

data from boem on the development status for existing leases has not been made available ; thus , it is difficult to classify the amount of acreage that has had no activity , is in the permitting stage , or is under exploration but not producing .

nineteen lease sales were scheduled for the 2007-2012 leasing program .

nine lease sales have occurred to date .

two lease sales were held in 2007 ( sales 204 and 205 ) , lease sale 193 in february 2008 , and lease sales 206 and 224 in march 2008 .

lease sale 207 was held in august 2008 , lease sale 208 occurred in march 2009 and lease sale 210 in august 2009 .

the most recent sale ( lease sale 213 ) took place in march 2010 .

the august 2011 lease sale 215 was cancelled .

there are three lease sales remaining in the revised program .

revenues from lease sale 224 will be shared with coastal states ( mississippi , alabama , texas , and louisiana ) as required by the gulf of mexico energy security act ( gomesa ) .

thirteen of the 348 tracts ( leases ) bid on in lease sale 207 ( located in sale area "181 south" ) also fall under the revenue sharing agreement in gomesa ( see revenue - sharing section of this report ) .

the obama administration had generally expressed support for boem efforts to facilitate development of deepwater and ultra deepwater oil and gas in the gulf of mexico and in the alaskan ocs .

with the moratoria lifted , leasing can occur in the newly opened areas .

if the ocs remains open , it could be as much as five years or longer for lease sales to be held in the newly opened areas .

production might begin 5-10 years from the lease sale if commercial quantities are found .

new infrastructure requirements ( eg , pipelines , roads , and onshore facilities ) are likely to be needed , particularly along the east coast where there has been no leasing activity in decades .

generally , a number of concerns arise in the oil and gas leasing process that delay or prevent oil and gas development from taking place , or might account for the large number of leases held in non - producing status .

there could be a lack of drilling rigs or other equipment availability , and financing and / or skilled labor shortages .

legal challenges might delay or prevent development .

there are typically also many leases in the development cycle ( eg , conducting environmental reviews , permitting , or exploring ) but not producing commercial quantities .

the environmental risks of offshore oil and gas development are being vividly displayed in the gulf of mexico as a result of the recent and ongoing oil spell there .

in addition , historical events associated with offshore oil production , such as the large oil spill off the coast of santa barbara , ca , in 1969 , cause both opponents and proponents of offshore development to consider the risks and to weigh those risks against the economic and social benefits of the development .

despite the use of more sophisticated drilling and monitoring tools by oil companies , the recent offshore oil spill resulting from the explosion and subsequent sinking of the deepwater horizon mobile drilling rig has demonstrated that catastrophic accidents may still occur , particularly associated with the more complex process of drilling in deep water .

 ( for a full description of that event and related issues , see crs report r41262 , deepwater horizon oil spill: selected issues for congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r41407 , deepwater horizon oil spill: highlighted actions and issues , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ; crs report r41684 , oil spill legislation in the 112 th congress , by [author name scrubbed] ; crs report rl33705 , oil spills in u.s. coastal waters: background and governance , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r41311 , the deepwater horizon oil spill: coastal wetland and wildlife impacts and response , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

this section describes some of the general environmental risks associated with offshore oil and gas development , and considers how those risks have changed over time .

a more detailed discussion of offshore environmental issues is included in ocs report mms 2009-015 ( see footnote 11 ) , which describes potential impact of offshore oil and gas development on seafloor habitats , coastal habitats , marine fish resources , marine mammals , sea turtles , and marine and coastal birds .

in addition to limited areas in shipping lanes and military reserves , certain portions of offshore u.s. waters remain off limits to development even when moratoria are lifted .

the national marine sanctuaries system , administered by the national oceanic and atmospheric administration , was originally created under the marine protection , research , and sanctuaries act of 1972 ( mprsa ) and later amended most significantly as the national marine sanctuaries act of 1992 .

this legislation provides authority for the secretary of commerce , under certain conditions , to: designate as marine sanctuaries those areas of the oceans , coastal , and other waters , as far seaward as the outer edge of the continental shelf ... which he determines necessary for the purpose of preserving or restoring such areas for their conservation , recreational , ecological , or esthetic values .

the national marine sanctuary system comprises of 14 sanctuaries ranging in size from less than one square mile to 137,792 square miles .

of the 14 sanctuaries , 10 are currently or potentially located within areas that might be attractive for oil and gas exploration .

see box below .

oil and natural gas exploration and development are not permitted within the boundaries of the national marine sanctuaries , but such activities may be allowed nearby depending on specific provisions of the boem leasing programs .

because of ongoing concerns about the effects of nearby oil and gas development on the health of the national marine sanctuary habitat , the boem has monitored the effects of oil and gas activities on a coral reef area of the flower garden banks national marine sanctuary in the gulf of mexico for over 25 years .

this effort is ongoing and conducted in partnership with the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) , who administers the sanctuary .

although a buffer zone of three miles is maintained , oil and gas activities have increased in the surrounding area with no observable effects to the corals .

boem requires that the nearby industry shunt wastes ( dispose of through a pipe to near the seafloor ) away from the banks .

this mitigation was developed based on oceanographic research that indicated this would prevent these materials from coming in contact with the coral reefs .

all environmental aspects of offshore exploration , development , drilling , production , transportation , and decommissioning are subject to regulation .

in addition to the general legal and regulatory framework that includes the oclsa , several environmental laws and executive orders have been enacted or amended since the first congressional moratorium for offshore areas in 1982 , including: the 1990 clean air act amendments ( p.l .

101-549 ) transferred jurisdiction over air quality from boem to epa for all ocs areas outside the central and western gulf of mexico , and require boem to coordinate air pollution control activities with epa .

the regulations are the same as onshore leasing requirements .

epa also is setting emission limits on diesel engines and marine vessels to decrease emissions .

the oil pollution act of 1990 ( p.l .

101-380 ) , in part , revised section 311 of the clean water act to expand federal spill - response authority ; increase penalties for spills ; establish u.s. coast guard pre - positioned oil - spill response equipment sites ; require vessel and facility response plans ; and provide for interagency contingency plans .

on february 11 , 1994 , president clinton issued executive order 12898 , entitled federal actions to address environmental justice in minority populations and low - income populations , which directs federal agencies , including boem , to assess whether their actions have disproportionate environmental effects on people of ethnic or racial minorities or with low incomes .

national fishing enhancement act of 1984 ( p.l .

98-623 ) , also known as the artificial reef act , establishes artificial reef development standards and a national policy to encourage the development of artificial reefs that will enhance fishery resources and commercial and recreational fishing .

boem adopted a national rigs - to - reefs policy that supports and encourages the reuse of oil and gas structures for offshore artificial reef developments , which provide valuable habitat for species of fish in areas devoid of natural hard bottom .

it is anticipated that approximately 10% of ocs platforms installed would become a rigs - to - reef after decommissioning .

president clinton issued executive order 13089 on coral reef protection on june 11 , 1998 .

boem carries out the mission of e.o .

13089 by supporting coral reef research and developing mitigation measures to protect these fragile and biologically rich ecosystems .

other acts , such as the shore protection act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-688 ) and marine plastic pollution research and control act of 1987 ( p.l .

100-220 ) , require containment of trash and debris , and restrict its disposal offshore .

as a result of these acts , boem has issued notice to lessees on awareness and elimination of marine trash and debris , which pose a threat to fish , marine mammals , sea turtles , and other marine animals .

the 1996 amendments to the magnuson - stevens fishery conservation and management act ( p.l .

94-265 , as amended ) emphasized the need to protect fisheries habitat for long - term conservation of fisheries .

under its authority , fishery management plans designate essential fish habitat ( efh ) for managed species .

the act requires that federal agencies consult with noaa ( national marine fisheries service ) about actions that could damage efh .

this process ensures consultation on fisheries of concern in a given project area .

the national environmental policy act of 1969 ( nepa , p.l .

91-190 , as amended ) requires that all federal agencies use a systematic , interdisciplinary approach to assess the impacts of proposed actions on the human environment ; this approach is intended to ensure the integrated use of the natural and social sciences in any planning and decision - making that may have an impact upon the environment .

since its enactment , thousands of environmental assessments and environmental impact statements have evaluated the potential impacts of ocs oil and gas exploration and development on environmental and socioeconomic resources .

as with many development activities , offshore oil and gas exploration and development requires environmental impact statements ( eis ) .

the eis provides the public with an opportunity to comment on the estimated environmental impacts of development alternatives .

the ocs report mms 2009-015 summarizes the eis process: as required in section 20 of the outer continental shelf lands act ( ocsla ) , the mms has established a tiered process that evaluates the potential environmental consequences for each successive management decision starting with the proposed program , then individual lease sales , and finally project - specific plans .

the 5-year programmatic environmental impact statement ( eis ) analyzes the proposed leasing schedule , focusing on the size , timing , and location of proposed lease sales for the 5-year period identified in the proposed program document .

the programmatic eis takes a broad overview of the environmental effects from the potential activities .

once the 5-year lease sale schedule is approved , a more detailed environmental analysis is conducted for each proposed lease sale in a given area .

these lease sale eiss are more detailed , including analyzing scenarios of potential activities that could result , should a lease sale occur .

at this point , mms identifies lease stipulations , which are protective of the environment , to be included in the leases granted to industry .

in some cases , an eis is prepared for multiple lease sales in a program area .

this multisale eis is the only environmental review conducted for the first sale held in a program area .

an additional environmental review , in the form of an environmental assessment ( ea ) or supplemental eis , is conducted for each subsequent proposed lease sale to address any new relevant information .

along with the preparation of a lease sale eis or ea , the mms carries out informal and formal consultations with other federal agencies , the affected states , and the public .

this includes the esa section 7 consultations with the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) and the u.s .

fish and wildlife service ( fws ) , an essential fish habitat ( efh ) consultation with noaa , government to government consultations with tribes , and preparation of a consistency determination for each affected coastal state , as required in the czma .

after leases are issued , the mms conducts environmental reviews for every exploratory and development plan to ensure that the proper environmental protective measures ( mitigations ) are employed .

the mms identifies site - specific mitigation measures in the form of conditions of approval .

the mitigations may include avoidance of sensitive biological communities and archaeological resources , or inclusion of specialized discharge requirements .

perhaps the greatest environmental concern associated with offshore oil production is oil spills or "blowouts. .

a blowout is the potentially catastrophic loss of control of the fluids in a well during drilling that releases drilling fluids , oil , and natural gas into the water , such as the deepwater horizon blowout and oil spill that occurred on april 20 , 2010 .

with the drilling of oil wells and the production and transport of oil offshore , there is always some risk of oil leakage or spillage , and the serious damage that crude oil has on wildlife and on wildlife habitat is extensively documented in a number of environments .

prior to the deepwater horizon oil spill in the gulf of mexico , the industry had demonstrated some progress in reducing the risk of oil spills , as described in boem's draft proposed outer continental shelf ( ocs ) oil and gas leasing program , 2010-2015 : since the santa barbara channel ocs oil spill in 1969 , measures have been underway continuously to improve the technology of offshore operations , and the federal government has developed more stringent regulations governing ocs operations .

each ocs facility is subject to an announced inspection for compliance with environmental and safety regulations at least once a year and mms also conducts periodic unscheduled inspections .

the result of all of these efforts is an excellent record that has been documented in detail in previous 5-year program analyses and in several mms publications .

in the fifteen year period between 1993 and 2007 , federal ocs operators produced 7.49 billion barrels of oil ( crude oil and condensate ) .

during that same period , the amount of oil spilled totaled about 47,800 barrels ( crude & refined petroleum spills of 1 barrel or greater ) ( 0.0006% of that produced ) or about 1 barrel of petroleum spilled for every 156,000 barrels produced .

despite improvements in the offshore technologies such as improved blowout protectors and subsurface safety shutoff valves ( sssv ) and the accompanying reduction in the risk , equipment may fail , drilling procedures may be not be followed , and oil spills may still occur .

in addition to spills that occur during general drilling operations such as the recent spill , the number of spills generally increases during hurricanes in the gulf of mexico , as reflected in the high number of spills in 2004 ( hurricane ivan ) and 2005 ( hurricanes katrina and rita ) .

see table 10 .

of course , the number of spills per year does not fully communicate the impact of individual spills such as the deepwater horizon incident .

the boem regulations require that the producers be prepared for oil spills: the mms requires that all drilling or production operations on the ocs have an approved oil spill contingency plan that describes where the nearest equipment is located , where the trained personnel are , and how everyone is notified .

additional site - specific information as to response capabilities specific to a worst case spill will be required .

during drilling operations , a company can be required to have equipment staged on a dedicated vessel located at the rig , which can immediately contain and clean up a spill .

there is also oil spill equipment available at onshore bases .

the mms conducts frequent inspections of all ocs activity — both at the drilling stage and at production .

it also requires the use of subsurface safety valves that shut - in the flow of oil in emergencies such as loss of the entire rig or platform .

of course , the effectiveness of such measures depends upon compliance and enforcement of the regulations .

virtually every oil and gas exploration program involves the gathering of two - dimensional or three - dimensional reflective seismic data .

seismic data are collected by generating intense sound waves using percussive air guns towed by ships .

the sound waves are propagated through seawater into the underlying sediment and rocks , and reflected sound waves are detected using an array of hydrophones towed behind the ship .

these data provide images of subsurface rock strata and structures and guide exploration and development .

the impact of seismic surveys on fish and marine mammals is mixed .

one study indicates that there is a local and temporary reduction in the catch of cod by fishermen after seismic data collection , whereas other studies suggest little or no effect on other fish species .

in neither case is permanent damage to individual fish or to fish populations ascribed to seismic surveys .

the effects of seismic surveys on whales and other marine mammals have been more carefully studied and have received more public attention .

the rigorous study by jochens et al .

of whales and other cetaceans found no unusual effects of experimentally controlled exposure to seismic exploration on the swimming and diving behavior by sperm whales in the gulf of mexico .

a more complete discussion of environmental issues associated with offshore oil and gas exploration and development can be found in section iii of ocs report mms 2009-015 .

proved reserves .

the quantities of hydrocarbons estimated with reasonable certainty to be commercially recoverable from known accumulations under current economic conditions , operating methods , and government regulations .

current economic conditions include prices and costs prevailing at the time of the estimate .

estimates of proved reserves do not include reserves appreciation .

reserves .

the quantities of hydrocarbon resources anticipated to be recovered from known accumulations from a given date forward .

all reserve estimates involve some degree of uncertainty .

reserves appreciation .

the observed incremental increase through time in the estimates of reserves ( proved and unproved ) of an oil and / or natural gas field as a consequence of extension , revision , improved recovery , and the additions of new reservoirs .

resources .

concentrations in the earth's crust of naturally occurring liquid or gaseous hydrocarbons that can conceivably be discovered and recovered .

undiscovered resources .

resources postulated , on the basis of the geologic knowledge and theory , to exist outside of known fields or accumulations .

undiscovered technically recoverable resources ( utrr ) .

oil and gas that may be produced as a consequence of natural pressure , artificial lift , pressure maintenance , or other secondary recovery methods , but without any consideration of economic viability .

they are primarily located outside of known fields .

undiscovered economically recoverable resources ( uerr ) .

the portion of the undiscovered technically recoverable resources that is economically recoverable under imposed economic and technologic conditions .

unproved reserves .

quantities of hydrocarbon resources that are assessed based on geologic and engineering information similar to that used in developing estimates of proved reserves , but technical , contractual , economic , or regulatory uncertainty precludes such reserves from being classified as proved .

