since shortly after the establishment of limited palestinian self - rule in the west bank and gaza strip in the mid - 1990s , the united states has periodically provided assistance to the palestinian authority ( pa ) for civil security and counterterrorism purposes .

following the death of yasser arafat in late 2004 and the election of mahmoud abbas as his successor as pa president in early 2005 , then - u.s. secretary of state condoleezza rice created the office of u.s. security coordinator ( ussc ) for israel and the palestinian authority to help reform , train , and equip pa security forces which had been personally beholden to arafat and his political allies .

the ussc has been charged with helping professionalize and consolidate pa forces and with coordinating their activity with israeli officials pursuant to both sides' obligations under the 2003 "performance - based roadmap to a permanent two - state solution to the israeli - palestinian conflict" ( or "roadmap" — see "roadmap obligations" text box below ) .

these obligations are predicated on the understanding that security is a core issue upon which israeli - palestinian peace depends .

previous israeli - palestinian efforts at security cooperation collapsed during the second palestinian intifada ( also known as the al aqsa intifada , or "uprising" ) that took place earlier this decade .

since hamas gained control of the gaza strip in june 2007 , lieutenant general keith dayton , head of the ussc since december 2005 , has provided guidance to the jordanian public security directorate ( jpsd ) and international contractors in connection with their u.s. - funded "gendarmerie - style" training of west bank - based pa security personnel .

the funding has come through the state department's incle account , managed by the bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement affairs ( "inl bureau" or "inl" ) , which coordinates with the ussc .

as of january 2010 , approximately 400 presidential guardsmen and 2,200 national security forces ( nsf ) troops ( comprising four nsf battalions ) have been trained at the jordan international police training center ( jiptc ) near amman ( see " u.s. training assistance to pa forces " below ) .

dayton envisions that a total of ten 500-man nsf battalions will eventually be trained for the west bank , and ussc / inl seeks funding from the 111 th congress to that end .

see figure 1 above for a map of west bank governorates and of zones of pa security responsibility ( so - called "area a" under the oslo agreements of the mid - 1990s ) .

dayton also has accepted a request from the u.s. special envoy for middle east peace , former senator george mitchell , that dayton remain in his post at least through 2010 .

most reports note that law and order have improved where u.s. - sponsored , jiptc - trained pa forces have been deployed in the west bank , and operations featuring these forces in places such as jenin , hebron , and qalqilya have resulted in some success in countering militant groups such as hamas and palestinian islamic jihad ( pij ) — both of which are u.s. - designated foreign terrorist organizations .

yet questions regarding the ussc mission persist .

might the pa forces establish a sustained pattern of success in countering and dismantling militant and terrorist networks , despite the facts that the united states may only supply non - lethal equipment to pa forces and that u.s. - sponsored training in jordan has not concentrated heavily on counterterrorism techniques ? .

some palestinians and outside observers assert that the effectiveness and credibility of pa operations are undermined by israeli restrictions — including curfews , checkpoints , no - go zones , and limitations on international arms and equipment transfers — as well as by israel's own security operations in the west bank and its control over land , air , and sea access to gaza .

israel claims that its continuing operations in the west bank are necessary in order to reduce the threat of terrorism emanating from the territory .

these operations underscore the fact that the israeli - palestinian agreements that authorized the creation of palestinian security forces in the 1990s in areas of limited palestinian self - rule contained clauses that preserve israel's prerogative to conduct operations in those same areas for purposes of its own security .

additionally , how might short - term operational success translate into permanent consolidation of competent , defactionalized civilian control over the pa forces and the broader criminal justice sector ? .

can this occur in a complex political environment featuring ( 1 ) the continuing presence of israeli occupying forces and settlers ; ( 2 ) other overt and / or possible covert assistance from , among others , arab and other muslim - majority states , russia , the united states , and europe ; ( 3 ) possibly competing goals of ( a ) convincing the palestinian populace to view — and unify around — pa forces as legitimate , nonpartisan protectors and as a potential bellwether of statehood and ( b ) thwarting terrorist / militia activity against israel ; and ( 4 ) historical obstacles posed by institutional inertia , palestinian factionalism , and region - wide political trends ? .

if it can , what are the long - term implications vis - à - vis hamas - controlled gaza ? .

political complexity and attempts to address the demands of multiple stakeholders have troubled other u.s. security assistance and police training missions this decade — including those in iraq , lebanon , and afghanistan .

it is unclear to what extent similarities and differences between the palestinian context and these other situations are likely to influence outcomes .

it is also unclear how u.s. security assistance to the pa might lead to overall progress on ( 1 ) the israeli - palestinian political track ( including israel's willingness to halt settlement building in the west bank and east jerusalem and to contemplate west bank redeployments in connection with final - status negotiations ) , ( 2 ) palestinian civil society , governance , and economic development , and ( 3 ) efforts to end geographical and factional divisions between palestinians in the west bank and in gaza .

the ussc is a multinational organization of military officers and civilians with a core staff of approximately 45 personnel — 16 americans based at the u.s. consulate general in jerusalem and approximately 29 canadians , britons , and turks based in jerusalem and ramallah .

one of the advantages of having non - u.s. persons among the ussc staff is that they are not subject to the same limitations on travel to and within the west bank that americans working for the u.s. government face .

incle funding for security assistance for security and criminal justice sector assistance to the pa comes from the inl bureau .

inl maintains an office in the jerusalem consulate ( approximately 12 persons , including a contractor based in jordan ) staffed by one foreign service officer , four contractors , and seven foreign service nationals ( generally , local resident palestinians employed by the state department ) .

inl coordinates its activities and funding decisions with the ussc .

historically , inl is largely known for its work assisting latin american countries and afghanistan and pakistan with their counternarcotics capabilities .

inl's involvement in the west bank is part of a trend over the past five years for inl to expand beyond counternarcotics assistance to more general assistance for the internal security forces of middle eastern countries ( such as iraq and lebanon ) .

contractors working in concert with ussc / inl are hired by inl to staff mobile training teams ( mtts ) and to staff the strategic planning directorate ( spd ) , an office created in 2007 with the intent that it would spearhead strategic planning tasks for the palestinian ministry of interior to prepare it to help reform , strengthen , and assert consolidated civilian control over the pasf .

the u.s. - based company dyncorp international is the primary contractor in charge of training , strategic planning , and equipment delivery .

approximately 22 u.s. and foreign law enforcement and security training specialists work on the mtts .

approximately seven u.s. and foreign technical advisors — with expertise in subjects such as national security and middle eastern affairs , strategic planning and organizational development , contracts and grants , procurement and logistics , and finance — have been hired to support the spd and moi in the pa's west bank seat in ramallah .

ussc / inl and its associated contractors are available to consult with pa security officials on recruitment , strategic planning , and deployment issues .

the most significant u.s. - sponsored training efforts for the pasf are carried out by arabic - speaking jordanian public security directorate police trainers , assisted by the mobile training teams , at the jordan international police training center .

contractors also furnish u.s. - funded and supplied non - lethal equipment to the pg and nsf with israeli approval , and this equipment is subject to end - use monitoring ( see " equipment " below ) .

in addition , some incle assistance is being used to construct training facilities and bases for the pg and the nsf in the west bank ( see " facilities " below ) .

see table 1 below for a breakdown of how the $295 million in funds directed to the incle account from fy2007-fy2009 have been apportioned ( an additional $100 million — bringing the fy2007-fy2010 total to $395 million — were appropriated for fy2010 in december 2009 pursuant to the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) , but have not been officially apportioned ) .

perhaps the best measure of u.s. training assistance offered to pa security forces is how the battalions receiving training have performed .

most notable have been efforts made by u.s. - sponsored , jiptc - trained pa forces ( national security forces and presidential guard ) in cities such as jenin and hebron , and these forces' participation in pa operations to permit but regulate demonstrations held in the west bank during the december 2008-january 2009 gaza conflict between israel and hamas .

a july 2008 international crisis group report stated that nablus and jenin , "which once stood as archetypes of security dysfunction[,] have come to exemplify progress against criminality. .

u.s. - sponsored , jiptc - trained forces in the west bank also have participated in the apprehension or killing of militants and conspirators affiliated with u.s. - designated foreign terrorist organizations such as hamas and palestinian islamic jihad .

palestinian civil police trained through the eupol copps program have joined the u.s. - sponsored , jiptc - trained forces in many of their operations .

the 111 th congress , through its capacities to provide oversight and to authorize and appropriate funds , has the opportunity to monitor the statements and activities of the obama administration ( including u.s. special envoy for middle east peace george mitchell ) closely and to fulfill its constitutionally distinct but co - equal role on this subject .

yet , congress might also consider to what extent it is advisable to involve itself in the details of security assistance efforts , and to what extent it is advisable to accord deference to those who are tasked with the efforts on a day - to - day basis .

there also could be calls for congress to take into account how u.s. security assistance might lead to progress on ( 1 ) the israeli - palestinian political track ( including israel's willingness to halt settlement building in the west bank and east jerusalem and to contemplate redeployment from the west bank in connection with final - status negotiations ) , ( 2 ) palestinian civil society , governance , and economic development , and ( 3 ) efforts to end geographical and factional divisions between palestinians in the west bank and in gaza .

one concern is whether u.s. involvement in palestinian affairs is enhancing the legitimacy of abbas and the pa or detracting from it by allowing hamas and others to gain political traction with their long - time argument that the pa is too beholden to the united states .

another is whether u.s. involvement in strengthening and reforming pa security forces is feeding a perception that the pa forces are more "israel's cops" than focused on state - building from a palestinian perspective .

opponents of an emphasis on pa security reform and on measures promoting incremental progress in civil society , governance , and economic development at the expense of a more expeditious political resolution with israel might argue that efforts to bolster palestinian moderates in the 16-plus years since oslo have appeared to make hamas stronger , not weaker .

 ( yet , hamas is also politically vulnerable to charges that it is the proxy of an external power — in its case , iran. ) .

in the final calculus , some believe that these possible political liabilities , when considered together with doubts that u.s. assistance can enable the pa to overcome the challenges and obstacles it faces on security matters — including the difficulties posed by israeli occupation — militate against continued assistance .

others might argue against continued assistance out of concerns that it could contribute to future intra - palestinian or israeli - palestinian violence .

at minimum , periodic reevaluations might be advisable with regard to the cost - efficiency and effectiveness of ( 1 ) venues for and types of training , ( 2 ) methods and types used in furnishing equipment and constructing facilities , and ( 3 ) provision of strategic and tactical assistance .

yet another concern is the possibility that u.s. security assistance efforts might be publicized by either or both the israelis and / or the palestinians to fit a political narrative that may not be in u.s. interests of promoting a lasting , peaceable two - state solution .

examples could include israeli support for pa security reform efforts as part of a movement toward an "economic peace" that downgrades the importance of final - status negotiations or eventual palestinian sovereignty , or pa / plo claims that a supposed lack of israeli reciprocity in response to pa security efforts is a sign of israeli bad faith .

an additional concern is the economic and logistical sustainability of the pasf infrastructure .

given the pa's current dependence on the international donor community ( on which it relies to defray its annual budget deficit of over $1 billion ) , some have queried whether the international community should be actively assisting the pa to ( 1 ) assume salary obligations for new pasf personnel and pay substantial pensions for retirees , ( 2 ) build new facilities with considerable fixed costs and maintenance obligations , and / or ( 3 ) acquire additional vehicles and equipment from widely different sources that call for different types of specialized maintenance .

some believe that this may prolong the pa's dependence on external assistance , and that the onus is on the united states ( and other donors ) to identify and cut unsustainable or unnecessary assistance because , although the recipient ( in this case , the pa ) may recognize that the assistance is suboptimal in one or more respects , the temptation to take what is offered might be too strong to refuse .

some recommend both improving the quality and increasing the quantity of ussc staff members .

the washington institute for near east policy , in a lengthy report on u.s. security assistance to the pa , stated: the ussc should be staffed to capacity immediately and augmented beyond its current unsatisfactory level now that it has developed a concrete mission and demonstrated success .

assigned personnel should have arabic - language skills and military experience and qualifications appropriate to the assignments they will be performing .

what sufficient "capacity" might be for the ussc to proceed in its duties more robustly and expeditiously is open to debate .

a senior western official in the region has suggested that an ideal number of full - time staff ( not including state department contractors ) might be between 50 and 80 ( up from the current number of approximately 45 ) .

others might seek to advance the u.s. interest in strengthening palestinian moderates while at the same time keeping the u.s. "footprint" more modest .

a european official in the region has suggested that "any expansion of the ussc should tally with pa needs and complement other donor commitments .

once this is gauged the mission will have a better picture of what it could do beyond what it is already doing .

it would then follow to look at what resources are needed. .

as discussed at various points above ( see " counterterrorism and consolidation: comprehensiveness of ussc role " and " criminal justice sector reform " ) , some maintain that the u.s. mandate in security assistance matters should be expanded to give the ussc more comprehensive reach over all pa security organizations ( including intelligence organizations ) , along with authority to help train and outfit these organizations more directly for counterterrorism operations , and perhaps also to give the state department's inl bureau an enhanced role in criminal justice sector reform .

expanding the ussc / inl mandate could involve increases both in personnel and in funding .

on the other hand , giving ussc / inl too many tasks could hinder rather than help the security assistance effort by , among other things , spreading the ussc's resources too thin and distracting its attention from its core objectives of helping train and outfit the national security forces , helping the ministry of interior with strategic planning , and facilitating israeli - palestinian security coordination .

one option may be to encourage ussc / inl to increase its emphasis on ( and possibly to apportion greater resources toward ) strategic planning and consultation aimed at further consolidating accountable , defactionalized civilian control within the moi ( see " how u.s. efforts are coordinated " above ) .

thus far , $13.5 million out of the initial $295 million appropriated through the incle account has been apportioned to these efforts ( see table 1 above ) .

alternatively or concurrently , measures might be taken aiming to ensure that no other assistance programs to the pa security forces — u.s .

or foreign — are obstructing the ability of ussc / inl ( and partner programs such as eupol copps ) to carry out its current mandate .

some have protested the strict limitations on travel by american staff members of the ussc to and within the west bank .

they assert that the ussc's effectiveness is likely to increase if its u.s. contingent is given greater freedom to travel to pa deployment areas , bases , and political offices and to regularly monitor the level of israeli - pa coordination and pa freedom and exclusivity of operation .

others might say that this change might invite more risk than is advisable in light of the progress the mission has achieved under current operating standards .

some have called for executive action to exclude ussc staff from west bank travel limitations , and have even proposed legislative action to transfer authority over the ussc mission from the state department to the defense department in order to get rid of the limitations on both travel and on other matters relating to assistance .

yet , formally militarizing the mission could upset the current balance , under which the u.s. security assistance mission operates within a larger diplomatic context .

moreover , with the defense department's attention still very much focused on its military operations in iraq and afghanistan , it might not be eager to assume full responsibility for this mission as well .

u.s. interagency consultation and coordination does take place , and it is possible that , as it continues , this process can draw upon the interagency experiences and best practices of other international donors .

another way for members and committees of congress to carry out their responsibilities with respect to u.s. security assistance to the pa might be to insist on sound contingency planning , given the possibility that unforeseen events in the region could have a major impact in the future .

congress might choose to confer closely with the obama administration ( including the president himself , the national security council , the defense department , the state department , special envoy mitchell , and ussc / inl ) on this subject .

one way to do so would be to challenge the administration to disclose whether it has options , and what those options are , in the event that one or more of the following short - , mid - , or long - range contingencies come to pass ( listed in no particular order ) : the conclusion of a final - status israeli - palestinian peace agreement and / or the establishment of a palestinian state the formation of a pa consensus or unity government that includes hamas ( either with or without the approval of the so - called "quartet conditions" by all members of the government ) a full or partial return of pa authority to the gaza strip ( such as with regard to the border crossings ) a hamas victory in legislative and / or presidential elections the clear establishment of authoritarian rule in the west bank and further segregation of the west bank and gaza from each other the clear pursuit by any key party of an alternative to a negotiated two - state solution an outbreak of factional palestinian conflict within the west bank and / or the gaza strip an outbreak of israeli - palestinian conflict an outbreak of war in the wider region depending on the contingency , response options might include cessation , reduction , or suspension of all u.s. assistance or various types of assistance , expansion of various types and levels of assistance , possible continuation of security assistance exclusively through either the pa president or the pa government ( if one or the other is an unacceptable partner due to terrorist associations and / or its failure to meet the quartet conditions ) , possible plans for coexistence / integration of pa forces and hamas forces ( assuming hamas has met the quartet conditions ) , and / or possible contribution to and / or coordination with a potential arab and / or international peacekeeping / monitoring force .

the israeli daily ha'aretz reported that secretary of state hillary rodham clinton warned pa president abbas during their march 2009 meeting in ramallah that u.s. pledges of assistance for the pa would likely be withdrawn if a pa consensus or unity government including hamas did not meet the quartet conditions .

according to the article , the ussc / inl program "would be the first to be axed. .

congressional insistence on sound contingency planning could be communicated to the obama administration through public hearings or conferences , private consultations , information - gathering visits to key actors in the region , or some combination of these means .

it might be well for congress to weigh the pros and cons of publicity carefully , given that many of these contingencies touch upon politically and diplomatically sensitive issues .

a further option for congress is to regularly and continually evaluate the progress of security assistance efforts and to tailor parameters for appropriations based on these periodic evaluations .

having benchmarks and reporting on progress under them are conditions precedent to obligating security assistance to the pa under current appropriations legislation .

possible parameters for benchmarks could include terrorist attack frequency ; specific levels of criminality ; and progress in dismantling terror networks , in consolidating accountable civilian control over all pa security organizations , and / or in coordination with israel .

parameters could be tied to performance benchmarks for the pa and its security forces ( with or without specific timetables ) that could be verified through executive branch certification , direct congressional observation , or a third party specifically dedicated to the purpose .

whether proposed benchmarks are more quantitative / objective or qualitative / subjective in nature , they might not be particularly useful in charting progress if they are unable to isolate the impact of u.s. assistance on pa security reform discretely from possible intervening variables .

another question to consider is whether and how benchmarks might be considered in the larger israeli - palestinian context .

for example , might there be a way to have benchmarks that vary depending on the extent to which israel might loosen restrictions on pa freedom and exclusivity of action in key areas and remove obstacles to movement ( i.e. , checkpoints ) ? .

perhaps more qualitative evaluations of pa security progress could take into account reciprocal moves taken by israel toward its roadmap obligations ( specifically , ceasing settlement activity ) or on other measures of progress on the political track ( such as progress on negotiations ) .

yet , benchmarks have their limitations in a complex environment where multiple and unforeseen variables might impact outcomes .

an alternative to setting benchmarks , while still allowing for a measure of heightened accountability , might be to require periodic reports and / or accountings of u.s. assistance and pa security activities from the executive branch similar to those that have been required in the past .

these reports and accountings likely would require detailed information on a variety of subjects , but , by leaving out specific benchmarks , could allow each member of congress greater flexibility in drawing his / her own conclusions regarding the success of u.s. security assistance and in determining whether and how to continue it .

additionally or alternatively , an option for congress is for it to require periodic audits of u.s. security assistance to the pa by the comptroller general / government accountability office ( gao ) , much as it periodically requires gao to audit the usaid west bank and gaza program and u.s. contributions to the u.n .

relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east ( unrwa ) .

an initial report from gao on u.s. security assistance to the pa is expected to be published sometime in spring 2010 .

