title i , part a , of the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) authorizes federal aid to local educational agencies ( leas ) for the education of disadvantaged children .

title i - a grants provide supplementary educational and related services to low - achieving and other pupils attending pre - kindergarten through grade 12 schools with relatively high concentrations of pupils from low - income families .

in recent years , they have also become a "vehicle" to which a number of requirements affecting broad aspects of public k - 12 education for all pupils have been attached as a condition for receiving title i - a grants .

these include requirements for assessments of pupil achievement ; adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) standards and determinations for schools , leas , and states ; consequences for schools and leas that fail to make ayp for two consecutive years or more ; plus teacher and paraprofessional qualifications .

title i - a is the largest federal elementary and secondary education assistance program , with services provided to ( 1 ) more than 90% of all leas ; ( 2 ) approximately 52,000 ( 54% of all ) public schools ; and ( 3 ) approximately 16.5 million ( 34% of all ) pupils , including approximately 188,000 pupils attending private schools .

three - fourths of all pupils served are in pre - kindergarten through grade 6 , while only 8% of pupils served are in grades 10-12 .

the esea was initially adopted in 1965 , and was most recently reauthorized and amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ) , p.l .

107-110 .

nclb authorized title i - a through fy2007 , and an automatic extension , through fy2008 was provided under the general education provisions act ( title iv of p.l .

90-247 , as amended ) .

currently , although the authorization for esea title i - a has expired , appropriations have continued to be provided , and the program continues to be implemented under the policies established by the most recent authorization statute .

the 111 th congress is expected to consider proposals to extend and amend the esea .

the focus of this report is on the formulas used to allocate title i - a funds to states , leas , and schools .

these formulas are used to allocate funds not only under the largest federal k - 12 education program , but also several other esea and non - esea programs under which grants are made in proportion to esea title i - a allocations .

this report will not be updated .

another crs report ( crs report rl33731 , education for the disadvantaged: reauthorization issues for esea title i - a under the no child left behind act , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] ) discusses issues related to the accountability and other policies of esea title i - a .

those interested in a more concise description of the esea title i - a allocation formulas and review of reauthorization issues related to them than found in this report should refer to the final section of that report ( rl33731 ) .

additional crs reports provide more detailed discussions and analyses of selected major aspects of the title i - a program , including pupil assessments , accountability , and qualifications for teachers and paraprofessionals .

also , see crs report rl34721 , elementary and secondary education act: an analytical review of the allocation formulas , for a description and analysis of all of the esea's allocation formulas , as well as a discussion of general allocation formula concepts and procedures .

this report provides: ( a ) descriptions of the esea title i - a allocation formulas ; ( b ) a review of recent funding trends for title i - a ; and ( c ) analyses of major issues related to the title i - a allocation formulas , divided into general categories of broad issues directly affecting all regions of the nation and issues that directly affect only a limited number of states or local educational agencies .

in summary , major title i - a reauthorization issues regarding allocation formulas are likely to include the following: should annual variations in the poverty estimates used to calculate title i - a grants be reduced through multi - year averaging or other methods ? .

annual variations in estimates of school - age children in poor families have been exceptionally large for a number of states .

several options are available to reduce the more extreme variations , if desired .

has the targeting of title i - a funds on high poverty leas increased since 2001 ? .

targeting of title i - a funds on the highest poverty leas has increased since adoption of the nclb , although shifts have been gradual and relatively marginal .

should the population weighting factors of the targeted and education finance incentive grant ( efig ) formulas be modified to more equally favor leas with large numbers of school - age children in poor families and leas with high poverty rates ? .

in some respects , the formula population weighting factors of the targeted and efig formulas favor leas with large numbers of formula children over those with high school - age child poverty rates .

should the expenditure factor continue to play a major role in the title i - a formulas ? .

the expenditure factor has a major impact on the distribution of all title i - a funds , and the rationale for using this factor may be questioned .

at best , it is a crude and indirect measure of variations in the costs of providing public k - 12 education .

should there be some consolidation of the four different allocation formulas ? .

the allocation of portions of each year's title i - a appropriation under four different allocation formulas is a result of legislative compromise , not design .

should the authorization level for title i - a continue to be specified for future years , and if so , at what levels ? .

an authorized appropriation level was specified in the esea only through fy2007 .

should the effort factor in the efig formula be modified ? .

the current effort factor has very limited impact and favors states where school - age children are a relatively small share of the total population .

should the equity factor in the efig formula be modified ? .

the current equity factor might be broadened to consider additional categories of "high cost" pupils .

should the current provisions for intra - lea allocation be reconsidered ? .

the participation of middle and , especially , high schools in title i - a programs is very low , and might be increased through modification of the requirements for allocation of funds within leas .

issues affecting a limited number of states or leas: should the remaining special constraints on grants to puerto rico , the cap on aggregate population weights in the targeted grant formula , be removed ? .

title i - a grants to puerto rico would be substantially higher if remaining special constraints were removed .

should the temporary assistance to needy families ( tanf ) formula factor be eliminated ? .

this formula population factor is of little significance , and may remain primarily for historic and symbolic reasons .

should each county portion of new york city and other multi - county leas continue to be treated as separate leas under the title i - a allocation formulas ? .

this provision leads to substantially different treatment of title i - a schools in different counties within new york city , and has mixed impact on total title i - a grants to the city overall .

finally , a general introductory note regarding funding levels and allocations: most references to appropriation levels , and all discussions and analyses of allocation patterns , in this report refer to those for fy2008 , the most recent year for which actual allocations were available at the time this report was prepared .

therefore , there will be only marginal reference to fy2009 appropriations or allocations for title i - a , whether provided under the american recovery and reinvestment act ( p.l .

111-5 ) or regular fy2009 omnibus appropriations legislation ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

for the allocation of funds to states and leas , esea title i - a has four separate formulas: the basic , concentration , targeted , and education finance incentive grant ( efig ) formulas .

once these funds reach leas , they are no longer treated separately ; they are combined and used without distinction for the same program purposes .

a primary rationale for using four different formulas to allocate a share of the funds for a single program is that the formulas have distinct allocation patterns , providing varying shares of allocated funds to different types of localities ( eg , leas with high poverty rates , or states with comparatively equal levels of spending per pupil among their leas ) , as is discussed later in this report .

in addition , some of the formulas contain elements — such as the equity and effort factors in the efig formula — that are deemed to have important incentive effects or to be significant symbolically in addition to their impact on allocation patterns .

there is also a historical explanation: the targeted and efig formulas , in particular , were initially proposed as replacements for the basic plus concentration grant formulas ; that is , each of the targeted and efig formulas was originally intended to be the title i - a formula .

but in subsequent deliberations , these formulas were ultimately authorized to supplement , but not replace , the basic and concentration grant formulas , and implicitly to complement each other .

the discussion below describes the characteristics of the title i - a allocation formulas as these have been amended by nclb .

the description immediately below is similar to that in a report on all of the esea program allocation formulas , crs report rl34721 , elementary and secondary education act: an analytical review of the allocation formulas , by [author name scrubbed] .

the formulas are described in three different formats: first , the general characteristics of all four formulas are introduced in very brief , narrative form .

second , selected characteristics of the four formulas are summarized in tabular format in table 1 .

third , each of the four formulas is described individually , and in greater detail , including a mathematical expression of each formula .

information on the title i - a appropriations for fy2007-2009 , plus the administration budget request for fy2010 may be found in table 4 , below .

the table is preceded by brief descriptions of appropriations for fy2008 and fy2009 plus the fy2010 request .

fy2008 ( school year 2008-2009 ) grants are the latest available actual allocations under title i - a .

overall , the fy2008 funding level for title i - a is 8.3% above the fy2007 level .

this contrasts with the period of fy2005-2007 , when aggregate funding for title i - a lea grants was essentially constant .

due largely to the comparatively large increase in title i - a funding for fy2008 , all states except one ( wisconsin , where grants declined by 1.3% ) received higher total grants for fy2008 than for fy2007 .

at the lea level , approximately 61% of all leas nationwide that received title i - a grants for both fy2007 and fy2008 received larger grants for fy2008 , while 39% received lower grants for fy2007 .

leas receiving lower title i - a grants for fy2008 than in fy2007 have been experiencing reductions in their estimated number of school - age children in poor families ; these include leas of all sizes and degrees of poverty concentration , in contrast to the fy2002-fy2006 period when a large majority of large or high - poverty leas experienced grant increases , while a majority of leas overall were losing funds .

tables 5-8 provide a series of analyses of the distribution of title i - a funds among the states , as well as different types or categories of leas .

each table is preceded by a brief description of the information provided in the table .

subsequently , these tables will be referred to in the course of a series of analyses of possible title i - a formula reauthorization issues .

table 5 , below , shows state average fy2008 title i - a grants per child counted in the title i - a allocation formulas .

separate amounts are provided for each of the four formulas , plus a title i - a total .

the substantial variation in these amounts reflect a combination of factors , many of which are analyzed in detail in the final section of this report .

these factors include: state minimum grant provisions — under all formulas , average grants per formula child are much higher for the smallest ( in population ) states .

expenditure factor — under all formulas , but especially with respect to basic grants , average grants per formula child are much higher for states with high expenditure factors ( eg , connecticut , massachusetts , new jersey , or new york ) than for states with low factors ( eg , alabama , arkansas , mississippi , or utah ) .

targeting on leas with large numbers of school - age children in poor families — with the exception of the smallest states ( where average grants per formula child are high regardless of poverty rates ) , average grants per child under the concentration , targeted , and education finance incentive grant ( efig ) formulas are higher for several states containing leas with very high numbers of school - age children in poor families ( eg , illinois , michigan , new york , or pennsylvania ) than for other states .

in contrast , states with large numbers of leas with high poverty rates ( eg , alabama , arkansas , mississippi , new mexico ) are below the national average , primarily due to low expenditure factors for these states .

equity factor — several states with especially favorable equity factors ( eg , the district of columbia , hawaii , west virginia , and wisconsin ) receive relatively high average grants per formula child under the efig formula .

however , many key formula factors operate in opposite directions , largely cancelling each other out .

for example , california has leas with very large numbers of school - age children in poor families , but also a relatively low expenditure factor , resulting in an average targeted grant per formula child that is approximately the same as the national average .

table 6 , below , provides each state's percentage share of the funds allocated under each of the title i - a formulas , as well as total title i - a grants , for fy2008 .

the distinctive feature here is that while these shares are similar under all formulas for most states , some states receive substantially higher or lower shares under some formulas than under the other formulas .

focusing on those states where the highest share of grants under any formula is one - third or more above its lowest share , there are 19 states where the share of funds received under one of the four formulas is substantially different from the others .

these include: seven small states where the share under the targeted and / or efig formulas is much greater than under basic or concentration grants , due to the higher state minimum under the former formulas ( alaska , delaware , new hampshire , north dakota , south dakota , vermont , and wyoming ) ; four states with relatively low poverty rates where the share of basic grants is substantially higher than under any other formula ( connecticut , minnesota , new jersey , and wisconsin ) ; two states with many leas with relatively high poverty rates where shares are substantially higher under concentration grants than the other formulas ( louisiana and west virginia ) ; one state where the share of targeted grants is substantially higher than under the other formulas , due to the impact of one very large lea ( nevada ) ; and five states where the share of efig grants is substantially higher than under the other formulas , due primarily to relatively favorable equity factors ( iowa , kansas , nebraska , utah , and washington ) .

table 7 , below , provides average title i - a grants per formula child , by formula and total , for leas in five illustrative categories .

it must be emphasized that these are limited numbers of leas in each category , selected to concretely illustrate certain patterns of title i - a allocations .

they are not necessarily representative of all leas in each category .

 ( the following table 8 provides summary data for all leas in each of 12 standard categories of localities. ) .

the illustrative categories for table 7 are: leas with very large numbers of formula children , leas with very high percentages of formula children , leas in minimum grant states , leas with relatively large numbers , but relatively low percentages , of formula children , and leas with low numbers and percentages of formula children .

distinctive allocation patterns illustrated in table 7 , all of which will be discussed further in the issue analyses at the end of this report , include the following: grants per formula child are much higher than average under the targeted and efig grant formulas for the selected leas with very large numbers of formula children ; the selected leas with very high percentages of formula children receive higher than average grants per formula child under the targeted and efig formulas , but much lower than the leas with very large numbers of formula children , partially due to their treatment under these formulas but primarily because they are located in states with low expenditure factors ; the selected leas in minimum grant states receive higher grants per formula child than leas in any other category under all formulas except possibly concentration grants ; the selected leas with relatively large numbers , but relatively low percentages , of formula children receive concentration , targeted , and efig grants per formula child that are above the national average , in spite of their low formula child percentages ; and the selected leas with low numbers and percentages of formula children receive grants per formula child that are well below average under all formulas except basic grants .

the last of the data tables in this report section , table 8 , displays the distribution of total school - age population , title i - a formula children , and title i - a grants ( by formula and total ) among leas in 12 standard locale categories .

 ( note that puerto rico is excluded from this analysis. ) .

these categories are based on the "urban - centric" locale codes developed by the national center for education statistics ( nces ) .

the final column ( column j ) in table 8 shows the percentage difference between the share of total title i - a grants going to leas in that category ( column i ) and the share of title i - a formula children ( column d ) .

this figure indicates the aggregate size and direction of variations in the distribution of title i - a formula children and the distribution of title i - a grants .

for example , if the amount in column j were large and positive , this would indicate that leas in that category receive a substantially higher share of title i - a funds than their share of the children counted in the title i - a formulas .

conversely , if the amount in column j were large and negative , this would indicate that leas in that category receive a substantially smaller share of title i - a funds than their share of the children counted in the title i - a formulas .

as shown in table 8 , applying an arbitrary threshold of + / - 10% or more to indicate substantial differences in shares of grants versus formula children , the following patterns are illustrated: the urban group as a whole ( locale codes 11-13 ) receives substantially higher shares of grants than their share of formula children ( +13.8% ) with virtually all of this differential occurring with respect to the large city groups of leas ( code 11 ) with a difference of +25.3% .

in addition , whether substantial or not , the direction of the difference is negative for all locale code groups except large city ( 11 ) and midsize city ( 12 ) .

the town ( codes 31-33 ) and rural ( codes 41-43 ) lea groups as a whole receive substantially lower shares of grants than their share of formula children .

the suburban ( codes 21-23 ) lea group receives lower shares of grants than its share of formula children , although the difference does not exceed the 10% threshold with respect to the large suburban group ( code 21 ) or the suburban codes overall ( codes 21-23 ) .

the remainder of this report describes and analyzes a number of issues that may arise in the context of efforts to amend and reauthorize the esea during the 111 th congress .

in recent decades , puerto rico has been treated as a state in the title i - a allocation formulas , but with a few special provisions that resulted in puerto rico receiving grants that were somewhat lower than it would receive if it were treated fully as a state .

the most significant of these constraints placed a limit on puerto rico's expenditure factor that was lower than the minimum expenditure factor for any state .

however , the nclb provided for a gradual phase - out of this constraint , and this was fully implemented with respect to fy2008 grants .

two special constraints on title i - a grants to puerto rico remain , each of which affects only one of the four allocation formulas .

first , the effort factor under the efig formula is set at the minimum level ( 0.95 ) for puerto rico .

however , this provision has limited ( if any ) impact .

as was discussed above , the effort factor has such a limited range ( 0.95-1.05 ) that its effect on the grant to any state is marginal .

nevertheless , if the calculated effort factor for puerto rico were higher ( up to the limit of 1.05 ) , removing this constraint would increase efig grants to puerto rico .

of potentially greater significance for puerto rico is the second current constraint on its grant .

under the targeted grant formula , a cap is placed on the net , aggregate weight applied to puerto rico's formula child count .

this cap , of 1.82 , was intended to provide to puerto rico a share of total targeted grants that was equivalent to its share of funds under the previously funded basic and concentration grant formulas .

it is substantially lower than the weight that would be applied to puerto rico's targeted grant formula child count if unconstrained .

if unconstrained , the net aggregate formula child weight for puerto rico under the targeted grant formula would be approximately 2.94 , resulting in an increase in the targeted grant to puerto rico of approximately 60% , and a consequent decrease in the targeted grants to the states and the district of columbia .

as noted earlier , the tanf population factor is now extremely small ( less than 0.1% of all formula children ) .

it may be questioned whether any formula factor that affects only a small minority of leas and states , and is comparatively small even when counted , should continue to be included in the title i - a formulas .

for fy2008 , only 542 of the nation's leas ( 4.1% of all leas receiving title i - a grants ) have any children counted under the tanf factor .

children counted under the tanf factor constitute 1% or more of all title i - a formula children in 148 of the nation's leas , and in no case do they constitute more than 12% of total title i - a formula children .

all but five of the leas where tanf children constitute 1% or more of all formula children are in the states of new york or ohio , and all but two of these leas ( columbus , ohio , and new york county , new york ) are small .

the significance of this formula factor is essentially historic .

in the early years of the title i - a program , formula children included those in poor families school - age children in families whose income exceeded the poverty level as a result of payments under the aid to families with dependent children ( afdc , now tanf ) program .

during a period in the early 1970s , the children counted under the afdc factor actually exceeded those counted under the "poverty" factor .

however , after 1974 amendments to title i - a , the afdc / tanf children have constituted a rapidly declining minority of all title i - a formula children .

with the exception of three areas of the nation , each lea is treated as a single entity by ed in calculating total grants to be allocated to the lea under title i - a .

in addition , in all except these three areas , title i - a funds are allocated within each lea in a manner that treats schools with similar characteristics ( eg , their percentage of pupils from low - income families , among schools at the same grade level ) consistently lea - wide .

in almost all cases , section 1113 of title i - a requires that schools be selected to receive title i - a grants using a single poverty standard , based on the percentage of pupils from low - income families , which is the same throughout the lea .

also in almost all cases , leas are required either to allocate to participating schools equal amounts of title i - a funds per child from a low - income family , or to allocate varying amounts per low - income child only if this results in providing higher amounts per low - income child to schools with higher percentages of pupils from low - income families .

in other words , in every lea except three special cases , there is a single , lea - wide policy to determine which schools may participate in title i - a and the level of title i - a funds per low - income child that will be allocated to participating schools .

under the provisions of esea title i , part a , section 1124 ( c ) ( 2 ) , an exception to this general policy is made for one class of leas — those which serve two or more counties in their entirety .

there are three such areas in the nation: ( 1 ) new york city , a single , citywide lea that serves five counties ( bronx , kings ( brooklyn ) , new york ( manhattan ) , queens , and richmond ( staten island ) ) in their entirety ; ( 2 ) the state of hawaii , a single statewide lea that serves all of the state's five counties ( hawaii , honolulu , kalawao , kauai , and maui ) ; and ( 3 ) the williamsburg / james city county lea in virginia , that serves a county plus an independent city that is treated as if it were a county in ed's allocation procedures .

for these three leas , each county ( or independent city ) is treated as if it were a separate lea in the calculation of lea total grants by ed .

in the allocation of title i - a funds to these leas , each county unit is treated by ed and the sea as if it were a separate lea .

the separately - calculated grants under the four part a formulas are combined into a single , total grant to the lea .

then , in the allocation of most of these funds to individual eligible schools , instead of applying consistent policies lea - wide , these three leas must insure that the share of the lea's total grant that is allocated to schools in each county is the same as the county's share of the school - age population counts used by ed in calculating the lea's total grant .

thus , for example , if one county in a multi - county lea has 30% of the children counted in calculating the title i - a allocations for the lea , then 30% of the title i - a funds which the lea allocates to individual schools must be allocated to eligible schools in that county .

the multi - county lea provision was added to title i - a in the 1994 improving america's schools act ( iasa , p.l .

103-382 ) , and was extended without revision by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclba , p.l .

107-110 ) .

prior to adoption of the iasa , title i - a grants were calculated by ed by county , and seas suballocated county totals to leas .

each county in these multi - county leas was treated as a separate entity in the allocation of funds to , although not within , leas .

the iasa provided that , beginning in fy1999 , if certain conditions were met , ed would begin calculating grants by lea .

the multi - county lea provision was adopted , in part , to preserve the former policy of treating each county separately ( at least in the allocation of funds to the lea ) after that transition .

further , with respect to the allocation of funds to schools within these multi - county leas , the iasa provision addressed the concern expressed by some that schools in certain counties were receiving a share of title i - a grants which was substantially lower than the share of lea total grants generated by their formula population counts .

the implementation of this provision has generated significant debate only with respect to new york city ; therefore the remainder of this discussion will deal specifically with that lea .

the multi - county lea provision has a relatively small , but potentially significant , impact on the total level of funding to the new york city lea .

as shown in table 23 , total ( combining all four formulas ) estimated grants to the new york city lea for fy2008 would be somewhat higher if it were treated as a single lea in the calculation of lea grants by ed .

this difference is due to the targeted grant formula and , to a lesser extent , the education finance incentive grant formula , under both of which the lea's estimated total grant would be higher if new york city were treated as a single lea .

under each of these formulas , leas receive higher grants per formula child , the higher is their total number of formula children or their formula child percentage ( compared to total school age population ) .

thus , under each of these formulas , the total grant to new york city would be somewhat higher if citywide numbers of formula children were combined .

however , for fy2008 , these increases in targeted and efig grants are almost totally offset by estimated deceases in basic and concentration grants to new york city if it were treated as a single lea .

the reason for this is that basic and concentration grants are at a hold harmless level for fy2008 for all boroughs except richmond under current law , and for the city overall if treated as a single lea .

as was discussed above , hold harmless percentages ( 85% , 90% , or 95% ) vary among leas depending on their poverty rate .

when treated as one lea , the hold harmless rate for new york city is 90% , but if treated as five leas , bronx and new york counties qualify for the higher 95% hold harmless rate .

thus , in periods when the estimated number of formula children is declining significantly for new york city , as is the case for fy2008 , the city receives higher grants under the basic and concentration grant formulas when treated as five leas rather than one .

in contrast , if the city's share of the nation's estimated number of formula children were steady or increasing , it would receive the same amount under basic and concentration grants , and substantially more under targeted and efig grants , if treated as a single lea .

with respect to the allocation of funds to schools , it would be theoretically possible for the affected leas to comply with the multi - county lea provision of title i - a by either establishing varying school eligibility thresholds in each county , then allocating the same dollar amount per low - income child to each eligible school , or by setting the same eligibility threshold for schools lea - wide and allocating varying amounts per low - income child to eligible schools in each county , or a combination of these two types of adjustments .

between 1995 and 2003 , new york city , in consultation with ed staff , applied a standard school eligibility threshold citywide , varying only the allocation per low - income child to comply with the title i - a county provision .

as a result , allocations per low - income pupil in title i - a - eligible schools varied widely among the city's counties .

however , beginning with the 2003-2004 school year , again in consultation with ed staff , new york city has employed a combination of variations in school eligibility thresholds and allocations per low - income child in order to comply with the county provision .

as seen in table 24 , in the 2008-2009 school year , both the title i - a funds per low - income pupil and school eligibility thresholds vary among the five counties in new york city .

as shown in table 24 , the school eligibility threshold is slightly lower for queens county ( 55.71% ) , and much lower for richmond county ( 37.84% ) , than for the other 3 counties in new york city ( 60.00% ) .

at the same time , the amount allocated to schools in each county , per child from a low - income family attending an eligible school , varies from a high of $1,274.33 for new york county to $906.77 for queens county .

the last 2 columns of table 24 also show the estimated effects of applying a standard school eligibility threshold and grant per child from a low - income family citywide .

for purposes of illustration , the same total amount is allocated to schools as for 2008-2009 actual grants ; i.e. , there is no attempt to reflect the effects of potentially increased total grants to new york city if it were treated as a single lea ( as discussed above ) .

it is assumed that a standard school eligibility threshold of 60.0% is applied citywide , with a resulting standard grant per child from a low - income family of $1,765.32 .

as a result , the amount allocated to schools in richmond county is estimated to decline by approximately 49% and the amount to kings county by 11% , while the estimated amounts to the other 3 counties would increase by 2% for queens county , 3% for bronx county , and 9% for new york county .

the primary basis for this variation — between actual grants based on current policy versus estimated grants if the title i - a multi - county lea provision were eliminated — is the difference in the distribution among new york city's counties of: ( a ) total school - age children in poor families , versus ( b ) school - age children from low - income families who live in areas of concentrated poverty .

in general , all leas receive title i - a grants on the basis of all of their children in poor families , but funds are allocated only to schools serving areas of concentrated poverty .

as shown in table 24 , for fy2008 ( school year 2008-2009 ) , richmond county has 3.6% of the total school - age children in poor families used by ed in calculating title i - a grants .

however , it has only an estimated 1.5% of the city's total low - income pupils living in areas of concentrated poverty and attending public schools meeting a citywide standard for title i - a eligibility of 60.0% .

in contrast , queens county has 15.4% of the total school - age children in poor families used by ed in calculating title i - a grants , but 19.4% of the city's total low - income pupils living in areas of concentrated poverty and attending schools meeting the citywide standard for title i - a eligibility .

arguments in favor of the current special rule regarding multi - county leas include: the individual counties of new york city have been treated as separate entities in the allocation of title i - a funds to ( although not always within ) the city ever since the program was initiated in 1965 ( previous to implementation of the current multi - county lea policy , grants were calculated nationwide by county ) .

under this provision , schools in each county receive a share of funds which is proportional to their number of school - age children in poor families .

as the largest lea in the nation , new york city is a special case , and it is appropriate to divide it into its primary constituent parts in the allocation of title i - a grants .

arguments opposing this special rule — i.e. , in favor of treating new york city and the other two affected leas in the same manner as all other leas in the nation — include: new york city is a single lea , and similarly situated schools should be treated the same wherever they may be located within the city .

eliminating this special provision would , overall , increase targeting by shifting funds away from the new york city county with the lowest school - age child poverty rate ( richmond ) , while increasing funds to two of the counties with the highest poverty rates ( bronx and new york ) the city overall would receive increased title i - a funds if it were treated as a single lea in the national allocation formulas .

