in february and march 2009 , the obama administration announced its overall plans to increase troop levels in afghanistan and decrease troop levels in iraq for 2009 through 2011 .

using several department of defense ( dod ) data reports , this report describes , analyzes , and estimates deployed troop strength from the 9 / 11 attacks to fy2012 to provide congress with a tool to assess current and future dod war funding requests ; implications for the u.s. military presence in the region ; and deployment burdens on individual service members and each of the services .

in february and march 2009 , president obama approved the deployment of an additional 21,000 service members to afghanistan in the spring and summer of 2009 , meeting most of the request from secretary of defense robert gates , and general david mckiernan , former commanding general of the international security assistance force ( isaf ) in charge of the afghan theater of operations .

according to the president , these additional troops are intended to "stabilize a deteriorating situation in afghanistan. .

in the winter of 2008 before leaving office , president bush approved deploying an additional brigade combat team ( bct ) of about 9,000 to afghanistan in january 2009 .

still pending is a dod request for an additional 9,000 troops that could be deployed in afghanistan sometime in the winter of 2009 .

last october , general david mckiernan requested about 35,000 more combat troops for afghanistan composed of four brigade combat teams with support .

later , 4,000 trainers were added , bringing the total request to 39,000 .

about 30,000 of that request has been approved by either former president bush or president obama .

with these increases , crs estimates the number of u.s. troops deployed in afghanistan is expected to reach about 63,450 by the end of fy2009 , double that of the prior year ; this estimate is somewhat lower than the administration's estimate of 68,000 .

if some 31,000 coalition troops from nato nations serving in the international security assistance force are included , average monthly foreign troop strength in afghanistan would be about 81,000 in fy2009 , and 93,450 in fy2010 .

these figures do not include from 10,000 to 17,000 more u.s. troops dedicated to operation enduring freedom ( oef ) , most of whom provide support in the region .

because all but the 2,000 troops in the philippines are linked to the afghan war , crs uses oef and the afghan war interchangeably in this report .

in a speech to u.s. marines at camp lejeune on february 27 , 2009 , president obama announced that the administration's review of u.s. strategy in iraq was complete and that the u.s. mission in iraq would shift from combat to supporting and training iraqi security forces , and that u.s. troops would decline from the february 2009 level of about 140,000 in - country to 35,000 to 50,000 troops by august 31 , 2010 .

in addition , the policy would meet the deadlines set in the january 1 , 2009 security agreement with iraq that requires all u.s. combat troops to move outside of cities by the end of june 2009 , as recently took place , and that all u.s. troops leave iraq by december 31 , 2011 .

the administration has not explained the effect of these withdrawals on other troops deployed for oif , or the iraq war , which includes not only u.s. troops located in iraq but also some 80,000 to 90,000 troops providing theater - wide support in neighboring areas .

crs uses oif and the iraq war interchangeably in this report .

the president reportedly considered options ranging from the 16-month withdrawal proposed during the campaign to a 23-month alternative reportedly favored by some in the military .

ultimately , the president adopted a 19-month plan .

dod spokesmen have suggested that increasing troop levels in afghanistan depends , at least in part , on decreasing troop levels in iraq if the services are to continue current 12-month tours .

during the surge in troops in 2007 and 2009 , tours grew to 15 months , a move that proved very unpopular .

these two decisions about troop levels are reflected in the fy2009 supplemental request sent to congress in early april and the fy2010 war request submitted in early may 2009 with the regular budget .

the fy2009 supplemental covers dod's war costs for the rest of this fiscal year that ends september 30 , 2009 because dod received only part of its war funding in the fy2009 bridge fund enacted last summer .

according to statute , the administration is to include a full year of war costs with the regular budget in fy2010 , and provide separate budget displays for each war , and troop strength levels as well as the underlying assumptions .

dod provided general information about troop levels but not the underlying assumptions or separate budget displays for each operation in its fy2010 request .

the administration's decisions to reduce the number of troops in iraq reflects declining levels of violence and peacefully conducted provincial elections that took place in january 31 , 2009 , while its decision to increase troop levels in afghanistan reflects rising levels of violence and elections slated for august of 2009 .

another important element in decisions about troop levels is the effectiveness of afghan and iraqi security forces , where the u.s. has invested $38.9 billion thus far to train and equip these forces .

to identify the implications of troop levels for these and other policy issues , this report explains how and why measures of troop levels in five different dod data sources differ ; estimates future troop strength in afghanistan and iraq for fy2009-fy2012 under the obama administration plan using "boots on the ground," the most commonly cited measure ; discusses the potential cost implications of these changes in troop levels along with other adjustments ; analyzes and explains past trends in troop levels for the afghan and iraq wars under the different measures ; and measures contributions and burdens of deployment for the four services .

for detailed description and analysis of the political and military context for changes in troop levels in afghanistan and iraq , see the following crs reports: crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy and crs report rl31339 , iraq: post - saddam governance and security , by [author name scrubbed] ; and crs report r40156 , war in afghanistan: strategy , military operations , and issues for congress and crs report rl34387 , operation iraqi freedom: strategies , approaches , results , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

when discussing deployed troop levels , it is important to be clear about which troops are included and which troops are not included .

crs analyzed five different sources for dod troop strength for the afghan and iraq wars ranging from including only those troops deployed in - country to including not only troops deployed in - country but also those providing theater - wide support in the region .

in the june preceding the september 11 , 2001 attacks , the united states had about 26,000 troops stationed in the u.s. central command region , which encompasses afghanistan and iraq and neighboring areas .

most troops were located in kuwait , saudi arabia and on ships in the region , including some conducting over flight operations for northern and southern watch to contain saddam hussein after the first gulf war .

based on the most comprehensive measure of troop strength , dod's defense manpower data center's location report , capturing all troops deployed for both wars , there were 294,000 u.s. troops in the region for operation enduring freedom and operation iraqi freedom in december 2008 , more than ten times the level seven years ago ( see figure 1 and box 1 ) .

figure 1 shows the number and location of these u.s. troops in december 2008 , with an allocation between oef or oif based on where personnel are located that generally reflects guidelines developed by the joint staff , joint chiefs of staff and central command .

these allocations may or may not match distributions of war costs , which are collected separately by each service .

this figure of 294,000 troops is over 100,000 higher than the december 2008 total of 181,000 reported in dod's oft - cited boots on the ground," ( bog ) report .

military leaders , dod press spokesmen and members of congress use the monthly bog figures to give a snapshot of the number of troops deployed in - country in afghanistan and in iraq .

for example , admiral mullen , chair of the joint chiefs of staff , said there were 150,000 troops in iraq "right now" on november 17 , 2008 , and pentagon press secretary , geoff morrell said in january 2009 that the proposal to add 30,000 troops in afghanistan would double the number there .

dod has reported these boots on the ground figures to congress each month since 2008 .

as of the most recent data for april 1 , 2009 , dod reported that there were 178,400 boots on the ground in afghanistan and iraq , slightly lower than in december 2008 reflecting the withdrawal of some troops from iraq offset by the deployment of additional troops to afghanistan .

part of the difference between dod's boots - on - the - ground figures and the location report is definitional .

boots on the ground reports only personnel in afghanistan or in iraq while the location report counts deployments of all military personnel tracked as part of oef and oif , including primarily personnel providing support in neighboring countries , as well as about 2,000 oef personnel engaged in counter - terror operations in the philippines .

relying primarily on guidelines developed by staff of the joint chiefs of staff and central command , crs allocated troops to each operation based on their location ( see figure 1 and box 1 ) .

crs uses the iraq war interchangeably with oif and the afghan war interchangeably with oef to include not only troops in - country , but also those providing theater - wide support primarily in the region .

 ( all but the 2,000 troops in the philippines are part of oef or the afghan war. ) .

for example , in addition to the 38,000 troops in afghanistan in december 2008 , oef includes: 2,300 troops in kyrgyzstan supporting afghan operations ; 2,100 troops in djibouti where there are groups connected to osama bin laden ; 2,200 in the philippines conducting other counter - terror operations ; and a scattering of other military personnel in the region ( see figure 1 ) .

similarly , while there are 161,000 troops for oif in iraq , the operation also includes: 46,000 troops in kuwait providing a wide range of support ; 15,000 navy personnel on ships in the region ; and several thousand troops deployed to regional headquarters ( 4,800 navy personnel in bahrain , 2,000 air force ( af ) personnel in the united arab emirates , and 8,000 af personnel in qatar for the air force ( see figure 1 and box 1 ) .

there are also some 15,000 troops whose location is unknown or was not provided to the defense manpower data center , probably reflecting either data collection problems in the services or some personnel whose location is classified ( see figure 1 ) .

the gap between boots on the ground figures and the location report reflects differences in both who is counted and how personnel are counted .

at one end of the spectrum , boots on the ground figures reflect once - a - month headcounts collected from the services by the joint staff that include only troops located in - country in afghanistan and iraq .

at the other end of the spectrum , the defense manpower data center data captures all deployments during each month for those in the 28 countries , plus navy members aboard ships in the region who are deemed part of oef and oif .

these figures include short and long - term deployments .

another inclusive measure is "average strength," which captures "person years" for all deployed oef and oif personnel taking into account the length of deployments .

for example , an army member deployed for 15-months would count as 1.25 in average strength while an air force member flying missions for six months of the fiscal year would count as .5 in average strength .

the most appropriate figure to capture troop strength for the afghan and iraq wars may depend on the purpose .

for example , boots on the ground counts may be the best measure for those troops most likely to face combat situations .

on the other hand , location reports capture all troops deployed in the region for the two operations .

finally , average strength may be the best measure for looking at the total demand for troops as well as the cost of both operations .

the obama administration outlined its plans for troop strength in the next several years only in terms of the number of troops in - country , also referred to as "boots on the ground" in afghanistan and iraq .

for this reason , crs estimates of future troop levels are also expressed in terms of troops in - country .

these figures do not include over 100,000 other deployed troops who provide theater - wide support in the region and are dedicated to operation enduring freedom , the afghan war , and operation iraqi freedom ( see figure 1 and later discussion ) .

nevertheless , boots on the ground figures captures those troops most likely to face combat and can provide an overall sense of the direction and scope of change .

the administration's fy2009 supplemental , submitted on april 9 , 2009 , and the fy2010 war budget , submitted on may 7 , 2009 , presumably incorporate the recent decisions to increase troop levels in afghanistan by 30,000 by the summer of 2009 and to reduce troop levels in iraq gradually in fy2009 and then more rapidly in fy2010 and fy2011 .

thus far , the administration has not indicated how these decisions will affect the other 100,000 troops in the region .

these planned adjustments in troop levels are likely to be a key variable in how dod's war costs change .

war costs cover the additional or incremental costs to deploy and support troops ( e.g .

combat pay , upgrading overseas bases , meals ) , conduct operations , and to repair , replace and sometimes upgrade equipment ( see appendix b ) .

the cost of the regular salaries of military personnel , conducting normal training and maintaining equipment or running military installations at home are all covered in dod's regular budget .

crs estimated the cost implications for fy2009-fy2012 war costs of changes in average strength in afghanistan and in iraq along with other changes .

while crs used boots on the ground or in - country troop levels to estimate future troop levels and potential effects on war costs , these figures do not accurately capture the total demand for troops for the afghan and iraq war because other troops deployed in the region are not included .

to get a better sense of changes in the total demand for troops since the 9 / 11 attacks , crs calculated average monthly strength for troops deployed for the afghan and iraq wars using the following five dod data sources , which range from including only troops in - country to all those deployed for oef and oif: boots on the ground or ( bog ) report , a once - a - month headcount limited to u.s. troops in - country that is compiled by the joint staff , joint chiefs of staff ( jcs ) using inputs from the services ; operations report , a more inclusive monthly headcount collected by central command , that counts service members under u.s. central command which captures some , but not all , military personnel deployed for oef or oif ( eg , special operations command is excluded ) .

c ombat pay estimate , based on the funding for combat or imminent danger pay that is reported in dod's war cost reports and used in budget justification materials ; a verage s trength report , a person - year estimate of all oef and oif military personnel collected by the defense manpower data center ( dmdc ) based on its contingency tracking system ( cts ) , which reflects service personnel records and the beginning and ending dates of each service member's deployment ; and location report s , a monthly dmdc count of all those deployed for oef and oif that reports the country where service members are located .

yet another demand for troops resulting from oef and oif operations is the activation of some 50,000 reservists to backfill some of the positions of deployed active - duty troops .

although these reservists are not carrying out oef and oif missions , their activation would not have occurred without those operations .

adding those troops to the 294,000 included in the location report for december 2008 brings the total troops associated with oef and oif to 344,000 , or almost twice the level in the boots on the ground report for december 2008 ( see figure 1 and table d - 1 and table d - 2 ) .

although there are wide differences in troop levels reported by these five dod sources , trends over time are similar ( see table 4 and figure 2 ) .

some of the differences between sources reflect definitions — for example , boots on the ground reports for afghanistan and iraq include only those troops located within each country , whereas operations reports include some of the military personnel providing support in the region .

other differences reflect whether figures are headcounts taken once a month as opposed to average strength which takes into account the number or days each member is deployed for oef or oif .

these distinctions can have important implications for the cost and demand for troops .

in general , more comprehensive measures are more useful .

to get a better sense of monthly trends , crs calculated averages for each dod source for each fiscal year rather than using the more commonly cited boots on the ground figures which captures only a point in time .

using this method , average monthly troop strength for both wars in fy2008 ranged from: 188,000 for dod's boots on the ground or troops deployed in afghanistan and iraq ; 223,000 in the central command's operations report including some but not all troops deployed in the region , or 19% above the bog total ; 248,000 in average strength estimated from combat pay , or 32% above the bog total ; 294,000 in the defense manpower data center average strength or 56% above the bog total ; and 307,000 troops based on dmdc's location report , or 64% above bog figures ; ( see table 4 ) .

generally , figures in average strength reports are higher than once - a - month headcounts because they include all military personnel providing theater support in the region , reflect the time personnel are deployed , and capture those present throughout the month .

it is not clear , however , that these reasons are sufficient to explain the difference of over 100,000 between boots on the ground and average strength reports .

like the average strength measure , location reports are also inclusive measures because they capture all troops deployed at any point during a month .

location reports are probably higher than average strength reports because military personnel who are in - country for short periods of time are counted the same way as those present for the entire month .

there are also substantial differences by service between bog and the more inclusive average strength reports .

average strength reports figures are about: 30,000 to 35,000 or over 20% higher for the army ; 13,000 to 20,000 or 60% to 90% higher for the navy ; about 8,000 or about 30% higher for the u.s. marine corps ; and 6,000 to 7,000 or over 25% higher for the air force .

many observers and military spokesmen have raised concerns about frequent deployments of units for the afghan and iraq wars , characterizing the army , in particular , as "stressed" or "almost broken. .

long and frequent deployments are cited as harming readiness not only because of effects on morale , but also because of the effects on having other units available and ready if another crisis arises .

although how often a unit is deployed is one way to look at the burden , it is useful to look at the effect on service members because the make - up of a unit changes between deployments as individuals leave for other assignments , or retire and are replaced by new personnel .

concern has focused primarily on the army , both active - duty , guard , and reserve units .

reflecting the ground focus of both wars , army troops ( active - duty , national guard , and reserves ) made up 61% of all oef and oif troops in fy2008 with marine corps troops contributing another 12% .

the remaining 27% are split between the navy ( 15% ) and the air force ( 12% ) ( see figure 9 ) .

overall , active - duty forces made up 80% and reserve forces 20% of average strength during fy2008 .

for example , 47% were active - duty army , 10% army national guard , and 5% army reserve .

the air force made up another 12% , the marine corps another 12% , and the navy 15% , almost all active - duty personnel ( see figure 9 ) .

looking at the share of each service and component that is deployed gives one measure of the burden of deployment .

active - duty forces had substantially higher deployment rates than reservists .

of the 2.2 million active - duty and reserve u.s. military personnel serving in fy2008 , some 12% or 260,000 troops were deployed for oef and oif based on average strength reports .

overall , some 17% of active - duty forces are deployed compared to 7% of reserve forces ( see table 7 ) .

the highest deployment rate is for army active - duty forces where over one - quarter are deployed ( 26% ) .

some 7% of army national guard and army reserve strength are deployed , similar to the overall rate for reservists .

deployment rates are lower for the other services including: 16% for the marine corps ; 12% for the navy ; and 8% for the air force ( see table 7 ) .

deployment rates for reserves in the other services were generally half or less than the rate for active - duty forces .

for example , about 7% of the army national guard and the army reserve were deployed compared to 26% for active - duty army in fy2008 .

similarly , 4% of the air force guard and air force reserve were deployed compared to 8% for active - duty ( see table 7 ) .

deployment rates alone , however , do not capture the full impact of oef and oif on the services .

in addition to those currently deployed , other troops are preparing or "training up" to deploy or recovering from a recent deployment .

taking those troops into account suggests that roughly twice as many troops are affected by oef and oif as the number deployed .

in the case of the active - duty army , probably half of the active - duty army is either deployed , undergoing intensive training to deploy , or recovering from a deployment , and about one - third in the case of the active - duty marine corps .

the large share of the army active - duty forces dedicated to oef and oif presumably underlies concerns about the army's readiness to carry out other operations should they arise .

appendix a .

actual and estimated troop levels in afghanistan and iraq , fy2007-fy2012 crs estimated average monthly troop levels in afghanistan and in iraq for fy2009-fy2012 based on the announcements made by the white house on february 17 , february 27 , and march 27 , 2009 , and department of defense press releases and conferences .

where future levels have not been identified , crs made the conservative assumptions described below .

according to these announcements , the administration is deploying 21,000 more troops to afghanistan in fy2009 .

these troops are in addition to a combat brigade with support of about 9,000 that was approved by president bush in december 2008 .

together , this would increase troop levels in afghanistan by 30,000 by the end of fy2009 .

because department of defense secretary gates suggested that increases beyond that are unlikely , crs assumes continuation of that level through fy2012 in this table .

in the case of iraq , the administration plans to reduce troops in iraq by two brigade combat teams in fy2009 by not replacing two brigades coming home in june 2009 .

in addition , several smaller units were withdrawn between december 2008 and april 2009 .

dod is also planning to downsize some replacement units .

according to administration statements , troop levels in iraq would decline to 35,000 to 50,000 by august 31 , 2010 , which crs estimates as 45,000 troops or 5 bct - equivalents ( roughly the midpoint ) .

these troops would be withdrawn by the end of 2011 as required by the security agreement between the united states and iraq .

conservatively , crs assumes that these u.s. troops remain in - country until the last five months of 2011 , the latest possible date that would meet the december 31 , 2011 deadline for the withdrawal of all u.s. troops in the u.s. - iraq security agreement .

based on that assumption , two bcts would be withdrawn at the end of fy2011 ( august and september 2011 ) and three in the first quarter of fy2012 ( october – december 2011 ) .

based on these plans , crs set up a schedule that estimates how long bcts will be in - country .

taking into account the number of troops and their time in - country , crs calculates the number of weighted average brigade combat team equivalents in afghanistan and iraq in each fiscal year in table a - 1 .

crs assumes that each bct has 9,000 troops , 1,000 less than the army's planning assumption in order to reflect the fact that marine corps units are generally smaller .

the schedule also assumes that troops are added or withdrawn at the end of each month , and that all navy and air force troops in - country are providing support to army and marine corps .

this schedule does not reflect changes in the number of troops deployed to countries in the region or related operations .

to check the validity of this approach , crs used this method to estimate troop levels in iraq in fy2007 and fy2008 and then compared the estimate with reported bog figures .

the crs estimates were close to reported average monthly boots on the ground .

estimates for fy2009-fy2012 build on the reported numbers of boots on the ground as of september 1 , 2008 , close to the beginning of fy2009 ( see table a - 1 ) .

appendix b .

the cost of an average brigade combat team: fy2005 and fy2008 to estimate future war costs , budgeters typically look to past experience , and then make adjustments for changes in troop levels , new requirements , savings in infrastructure costs already covered or one - time expenses , or pricing changes .

to estimate the effect of increases and decreases in troop strength , crs used the cost of an average brigade combat team in fy2008 .

between fy2005 and fy2008 , overall war costs rose more rapidly than increases in the number of troops in - country so the cost of an average bct has risen .

this reflects both higher operational costs , and particularly rapid growth in investment spending .

in some cases , such as the rise in investment spending , the administration's new policy to limit war - related procurement to replacement of war losses and replenishment , is likely to reduce future costs .

in other cases , such as the rise in infrastructure spending in iraq , it is not clear whether to expect that experience to be duplicated in afghanistan .

because the administration only provided information about future changes in the number of troops in afghanistan and iraq , crs spread all war costs over the number of troops in - country .

this essentially assumes that changes in the number of troops in - country will be matched by proportional changes in troops in the region , which may or may not be the case .

while it is likely that navy and air force personnel who support ground operations , and some of the army support personnel in kuwait would change in tandem with changes in forces in - country , other headquarters personnel may not change proportionately .

definition of war costs war requests cover funding intended to cover the incremental or additional costs tied to paying and deploying u.s. military personnel to a war zone .

for military personnel , this has included: the costs of special pays like imminent danger pay and separation allowances ; recruiting and retention bonuses ; activating reservists ( paying full - time rather than part - time salaries and benefits ) ; and growing the size of the army and marine corps .

some of these expenses , like "growing the force" are to be transferred to dod's baseline budget in fy2010 , reducing war costs .

recruiting and retention bonuses could also be transferred and are likely to be lower because of the recession .

for operations and maintenance ( o&m ) , war costs include: transporting personnel and equipment to and from the war zone ; higher operating tempo in a war zone ; repairing war - worn equipment ; providing force protection gear to personnel ; setting up and operating communication and intelligence assets ; and building , maintaining and providing security at bases .

for procurement and research , development , test & evaluation ( rdt&e ) war costs have included the following types of items: replacement and upgrading of a wide range of war - worn equipment , defined broadly to include replacement with new weapon systems and upgrading of current systems already part of dod's modernization plans ( e.g .

f - 22s , stryker brigades ) ; equipment to accelerate the army's plans to convert to more standardized modular units and the marine corps' plans to restructure its units ; equipment for additional units in the army and marine corps as part of dod's "grow the force" initiative ; new and upgraded force protection equipment based on experience in the field ( e.g .

mine - resistant ambush protected , or mraps and up armored high mobility wheeled vehicles , or hmmwvs ) ; and rdt&e related to war - related threats such as improvised explosive devices ( ieds ) .

in its fy2009 supplemental request , dod significantly changed its definition of reconstitution , restoring the traditional criteria which limited procurement to replacement of war losses and replenishment of war munitions and stocks .

this resulted in a halving of dod's procurement request in fy2009 .

for military construction , war costs include not only building and upgrading bases in afghanistan with new air strips , generating and water purification plants , and other structures , but also building roads .

changes in afghanistan costs between fy2005 and fy2008 between fy2005 and fy2008 , average monthly troop strength in afghanistan rose by 58% while overall operation enduring freedom ( oef ) war costs almost doubled from $14.6 billion to $27.5 billion .

because costs outstripped the rise in troop levels , the average cost of a bct in afghanistan rose by 19% from $6.9 billion to $8.2 billion ( see table b - 1 ) .

operational costs in afghanistan — covering both military personnel and operation & maintenance ( o&m ) — rose less rapidly than investment costs .

the 10% increase in overall operational costs reflects an increase of almost 50% in o&m costs offset by an 8% decrease in military personnel costs .

the decline in average personnel costs in fy2008 may reflect less reliance on activating reservists , the largest single personnel cost .

in afghanistan , o&m costs more than doubled for combat - related expenses ( e.g .

fuel and spare parts , depot maintenance ) and trebled for base support costs , increasing far more rapidly than troop strength .

increases in operating tempo costs may reflect the u.s. response to rising levels of violence while higher support costs may reflect the build - up of infrastructure in - country .

it is not clear whether average costs will continue to rise or fall as the number of troops in - country increases .

investment costs for replacing and upgrading equipment also more than trebled in the past three years , which may reflect the expanded definition of war - related costs more than changes in the operating tempo ( see discussion of reconstitution below ) .

changes in iraq costs between fy2005 and fy2008 between fy2005 and fy2008 , average monthly troop strength in iraq grew by 10% in iraq while the average cost of deploying a bct rose by 72% .

the average cost of a bct in iraq rose from $4.6 billion to $7.2 billion , a 57% increase , a steeper increase than in afghanistan ( see table b - 1 ) .

like afghanistan , overall average operating costs in iraq rose by about 40% though both military personnel and o&m costs grew faster than troop strength .

unlike afghanistan , average military personnel costs also increased , primarily because of the cost of growing the size of the army and marine corps ( no longer considered a war cost , transferred to dod's fy2010 baseline budget ) .

o&m costs in iraq grew at about the same rate as in afghanistan – about 50% , with growth concentrated more in support than combat - related operating expenses .

for example , the cost of base support rose by 41% while troop strength grew by 10% .

most dramatically , investment costs doubled over three years , again more a reflection of a re - definition of war - related reconstitution rather than more intense wartime operating tempo ( see discussion below ) .

future war costs there are a variety of possible explanations for increases in average costs — higher benefits for deployed personnel , differences in combat intensity , rising spending to repair equipment , substantial support costs for large , well - developed bases , or expanded definitions of reconstitution .

some of these increases may continue in the future and some may not .

dramatic growth in reconstitution costs ends the steepest increase in costs has been in investment accounts , particularly procurement , where the definition of resetting or reconstituting units after their war - related deployments was substantially changed between 2004 and 2008 .

these changes led to a dramatic increase in war - related procurement from $5 billion in to $7 billion in fy2004 to $45 billion in fy2008.cbo , gao , crs , and the center for strategic and budgetary assessment ( csba ) have all questioned whether much of this funding in supplemental appropriation acts for procurement , in fact , reflected war - related needs .

beginning in 2005 , the definition of war - related procurement was broadened to include paying for the conversion and upgrading of army and marine corps units to a new modular or more standardized composition .

in fy2005 and fy2006 , dod requested and received $5 billion each year for these restructuring initiatives underway before the afghan and iraq wars .

the services argued that these changes would make rotations easier because of the greater similarity among units though the impact appears to be small .

a further expansion in the definition of war - related procurement also occurred in 2006 when the services were given new guidance that permitted them to include in war requests items needed for the "long war" and not be "strictly limited to operation enduring freedom ( oef ) and operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) . .

this made it easier for the services to request and receive funding for new and upgraded equipment rather than to replace war losses or replenish munitions or other war stocks .

dod also changed its traditional guidance that limited reset or reconstitution to restoring units to their pre - war condition ( e.g .

with replacements for war losses ) to upgrading equipment to meet new threats .

in a study of the army's reset , cbo estimated that more than 40% of the army's reset funding was not , in fact related to the repair and replacement of war - worn equipment .

a december 2008 csba study concluded that the adoption of the "long war" framework for evaluating war - related requirements "allows the services to include virtually anything in their request for war - related appropriations," and "removed any principled distinction between what should be included in special war - related appropriations and what should be included in the base defense budget. .

dod also allowed the services to include in war funding requests some of the cost of increasing the size of the army and marine or "growing the force," which was originally intended to be temporary with a return to pre - war strength once the conflicts were over .

with president bush's decision in january 2007 to make these increases permanent , the rationale for considering these war costs weakened .

in its fy2009 supplemental request and fy2010 war request , the obama administration reversed this policy and limited war - related procurement to replacing war losses and replenishing war supplies , war - related procurement requests dropped in half in the fy2009 supplemental and fy2010 war request .

in addition , dod has objected to some congressional additions for c - 17 transport and c - 130 aircraft , additional equipment for reserves , and other items contending that these systems are not related to war - time needs , and has not included those systems in its requests .

operational cost increases slow on the operational side , there are some indications that increases in operational costs may be slowing or in some cases , decreasing .

for example , in the past two fiscal years during the surge , o&m costs rose only somewhat faster than in - country troop strength .

the initial months of fy2009 also show decreases in oif operational costs outpacing decreases in strength , which may reflect either lower levels of violence or consolidation of bases .

at the same time , some operational costs for oef continue to rise more rapidly than troop strength , which may reflect more intense combat and expansion of bases for more troops .

estimating the average cost of a bct based on troop strength in afghanistan or iraq could also overstate costs and savings if the number of troops deployed in the region did not rise or fall at the same rate as those deployed in - country .

in fy2008 , an additional 7,300 u.s. troops were deployed outside afghanistan as part of oef , and an additional 80,000 were deployed outside of iraq as part of oif .

at the same time , if troop levels are increased or reduced primarily in afghanistan or iraq , those costs are generally higher than the average because of combat and security costs associated with a hostile environment .

potential cost effects of changes in troop levels in afghanistan where troop levels rose substantially and combat has intensified , the average cost of a bct rose more moderately than in iraq .

if this experience continues , the average cost of a bct in afghanistan could be expected to rise slightly unless there are offsetting savings as infrastructure costs are spread over more troops .

on the other hand , if additional facilities are needed for higher troop levels and if afghanistan becomes a more developed theater like iraq , then the cost of support could grow .

in iraq , it's not clear how quickly savings from withdrawals will match or be proportional to changes in troop strength .

if about one - third of the average cost of a bct did not decrease in the first year , then savings would not be proportional to changes in troop strength .

those savings , however , would be likely to occur the following year .

so each year , savings from the previous year could make up , at least in part , for lags in savings in the current year .

it is also possible that costs may become proportional , or even exceed changes in troop strength , as the pace of redeployments from iraq picks up .

although there are some additional costs associated with the withdrawal itself , such as repair and replacement of equipment that has remained in - theater rather than rotating with units , these costs do not appear to be as large as some have suggested and could be spread over two to three years ( see discussion of withdrawal costs above ) .

appendix c. cbo's projections of war costs , fy2009-fy2018 the congressional budget office ( cbo ) has published widely used ten - year projections of war costs for the past several years .

cbo projects future costs using two different scenarios assuming more and less gradual decreases in total number of troops deployed for oef and oif that some observers have suggested encompass the likely range of alternatives .

cbo does not distinguish between oef and oif .

starting from a deployed troop strength of 210,000 ( about 30,000 above boots on the ground report ) , cbo's scenarios assume: decrease to 30,000 by fy2011 ; or decrease to 75,000 by fy2013 ( see table c - 1 ) .

in both the more rapid and the gradual drawdown , cbo's projections assume that savings initially fall slower than troop levels , catching up or exceeding changes in troop levels by the second or third year ( see table c - 1 ) .

cbo does not provide explanations or rationale for its projections .

although cbo does not calculate a per person or per bct - equivalent cost , it appears that a 9,000 troop bct would initially save about $7 billion a year under the more rapid scenario , rising to $9.6 billion per bct during a steady - state .

in the more gradual drawdown , annual savings per bct would grow from $7 billion to about $8.4 billion once a steady - state is reached .

based on dod's reported obligations , crs estimates that withdrawing an average bct in iraq would save about $7.2 billion and one in afghanistan about $8.2 billion .

cbo's figures may be higher because state / usaid and va medical costs may be included as well as dod costs .

while there is uncertainty about how costs change with troop increases and decreases , as well as whether the costs of an average bct will remain the same , troop strength plays an important role in setting dod's future costs ( see appendix a and appendix b for further details ) .

appendix d. headcounts in boots on the ground and operations reports the defense department makes a distinction between boots on the ground ( bog ) or troops deployed in - country in iraq and in afghanistan and troops deployed for operation enduring freedom ( oef ) and operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) which also include troops deployed to neighboring regions or for other small counter - terror operations .

although dod has not adopted a single definition of the countries included in either oef or oif , the joint staff and central command have both developed guidelines or "business rules" that allocate troops in individual countries to one or the other mission .

the services follow individual guidelines in reporting war costs for each operation .

in many cases , the joint staff and central command guidelines are the same .

in other cases , the joint command guidelines cover countries outside of central command .

in only three cases do the joint staff and central command allocations differ , affecting about 770 military personnel ; in these cases , crs selected the operation most closely associated with that country .

in some cases , countries have assigned missions but no personnel are shown as deployed .

the joint staff guidelines were developed to meet a new congressional reporting requirement to submit monthly "the total number of troops deployed in support of oif and oef , .

 .

 .

delineated by service and component ( active , reserve or national guard ) . .

although the services largely agreed with the country designations , there were some differences , and some concerns were raised that linking personnel and operations would not capture cases where military personnel at one location worked on both oef and oif ( e.g .

qatar ) or where the focus shifted over time ( eg , navy afloat personnel ) .

according to these allocations , the oef mission includes primarily troops deployed in afghanistan and about 5,000 to 15,000 troops in other countries .

the oef operation includes military personnel deployed in the following countries: afghanistan , djibouti , egypt , ethiopia , jordan , kazakhstan , kenya , kyrgyzstan , lebanon , oman , pakistan , philippines , seychelles , sudan , tajikistan , turkmenistan , uzbekistan , egypt , and yemen .

for the oif operation , while most troops are in iraq , another 30,000 to 40,000 are deployed in kuwait , about 15,000 other troops in bahrain , qatar , uae , plus an additional 15,000 to 20,000 on ships afloat in the region .

the oif mission includes: iraq , at sea , bahrain , kuwait , oil platforms , qatar , saudi arabia , spain , turkey , and uae , israel , jordan .

table d - 1 and table d - 2 show monthly troop levels for the joint staff's boots on the ground in afghanistan and iraq and for oef and oif as reported in central command's operations reports to compare the number of military personnel located in - country and a total that also includes those providing theater - wide support , or conducting other counter - terror operations related to oef .

this data is also shown in figure 6 and figure 8 .

