this report focuses on the relationship between intellectual property rights ( iprs ) provisions pursued through international and u.s. trade policy and access to medicines .

patents , a form of ipr , constitute the most common method by which governments encourage research and development ( r&d ) in order to find treatments and cures for diseases and other illnesses .

a patent is a legal , exclusive right granted for the invention of a new product , process , organism , design , or plant that allows the right holder to exclude others from making , using , or selling the protected invention for a period of 20 years .

by granting a temporary , exclusive right to the market for the protected product , a patent enables the right holder to generate profits to recover the costs for investment in r&d and to invest in future innovations .

however , some express concerns that patents enable right holders to price drugs at levels that greatly surpass marginal costs of r&d and production , raising questions about the role of patents in affecting access to medicines and public health .

ipr protection and enforcement have evolved from an area primarily of national concern to an area of international trade policy .

the world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( trips ) established minimum standards for ipr protection and enforcement .

countries have advanced ipr protection and enforcement efforts through multilateral , regional , and bilateral free trade agreements ( ftas ) and unilateral trade policies .

congress makes and shapes u.s. trade policy by passing statutory authorities that authorize trade programs , governing trade policy in a range of issue areas , setting trade negotiating objectives into law , engaging in consultations with the executive branch on trade negotiations , and conducting oversight hearings on u.s. trade policy and programs .

within congress , there has been significant interest in promoting and protecting iprs through trade policy for economic , health and safety , and national security reasons .

ipr - based industries are viewed as an important contributor to u.s. innovation , productivity , economic growth , employment , and international trade .

advocates of a strong international ipr regime claim that counterfeiting and piracy inflict billions of dollars of revenue and trade losses annually on u.s. ipr - based industries .

some policymakers also have expressed concern about the health and safety implications of counterfeit goods , including pharmaceutical drugs .

in addition , there is concern that trade in ipr - infringing products may feed into cross - border organized criminal networks .

the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) considers the protection and enforcement of international ipr standards to be a high priority for u.s. trade policy .

as such , the ustr has pursued strong ipr regimes by participating in multilateral , regional and bilateral ftas , as well as through unilateral trade policy tools , namely the special 301 process and the generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) .

ipr provisions in trade policies are among the range of social , economic , and political factors that may affect public health .

while patents may provide incentives for innovation , their granting of market exclusivities and impact on prices raise questions about the affordability of medicines , particularly for ( but not limited to ) low - income countries and their populations .

through their possible impact on innovation and drug prices , patents may affect the ability of countries to provide medicines to their populations and for populations in general to access medicines .

for some observers , this may represent a conflict between free market and public health policies .

while the commercialization of public health may promote innovation and efficiency , the laws of supply and demand may cause some people to be "priced out" of a given market .

according to the world health organization ( who ) , about one - third of the world's population , primarily residing in poorer parts of africa and asia , lacks regular access to essential medicines .

infectious diseases are major contributors of illness , death , and poverty in the developing world .

at the end of 2008 , an estimated 33.4 million people were living with hiv / aids , with about two - thirds of them in sub - saharan africa .

other infectious diseases , such as tuberculosis , malaria , and influenza , present critical global health challenges as well .

over one billion people , primarily among the world's poorest , also are afflicted with neglected tropical diseases , which largely are infectious parasitic diseases prevalent in "impoverished" environments .

with the global economic crisis , access to medicines may deteriorate .

in 2000 , the united nations established eight millennium development goals ( mdgs ) , to which the united states is a signatory , in an effort to end poverty by year 2015 .

one of the u.n. targets is to achieve universal access to treatment for hiv / aids by 2010 and to have halted and reversed the spread of hiv / aids , malaria , and other major diseases by 2015 .

while prevention is key to combating infectious diseases , access to treatment is also critical to controlling epidemics .

as such , another mdg target is to cooperate with pharmaceutical companies to provide access to affordable essential drugs in developing countries .

access to medicines has improved dramatically over the past couple of decades .

for example , of the approximately 9.5 million people in need of treatment for hiv / aids in 2008 in low - and middle - income countries , 42% had access , compared to 33% in 2007 .

although access to medicines is an important goal and is the focus of the discussion at hand , some public health professionals caution that "over - access" also can be a problem .

proponents of this view assert that that the availability of medicines due to lower prices may promote misuse , leading to the faster onset of drug resistance and shorter duration of the drug's usefulness .

there is ongoing debate within congress about the impact that ipr provisions in international and u.s. trade policies may have on access to medicines and public health .

at the center of the debate is the question of how to balance providing long - term incentives for innovation through patents and addressing the short - term need to provide affordable access to medicines .

the debate over the role of patents and trade policy in affecting access to medicines often has been framed as one in which high - income , developed countries and innovator ( "brand name" ) pharmaceutical companies are pitted against low - income , developing countries and global health advocates .

however , the number of stakeholders is more diverse , and includes middle - income , industrializing countries , and generic drug manufacturers .

in addition , there is debate within the governments of countries about how to balance advancing economic interests and public health outcomes through trade policy .

the debate over iprs and access to medicines represents one component of a broader debate over the relationship between international trade policy and global public health .

over time , these two arenas have shown increasing overlap .

in some cases , the linkages have been clear .

for instance , international trade in goods that contain dangerous pathogens or counterfeit substances presents clear threats to public health .

in other cases , as in the debate at hand , the linkages may not be so clear - cutting , or trade issues may only form one component of the public health issue .

the global pharmaceutical industry is classified as a high - technology industry by the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) .

as a high - technology manufacturing industry , the pharmaceutical industry spends a high proportion of its revenues on r&d , which can lead to innovative solutions to treat global health problems .

the pharmaceutical industry is heavily reliant on protection of intellectual property rights , specifically patents .

patents are the most common way for governments to encourage r&d and to foster innovation .

a patent is a time - limited , legal , exclusive right granted for the invention of new products , processes , organisms , designs , and plants that allows the right holder to exclude others from making , using , or selling the protected invention for a period of 20 years .

a patent does not necessarily provide the right holder with the "right to sell" the protected invention , as the right holder may need to comply with other regulatory laws .

for example , pharmaceutical drugs generally also must be reviewed by a regulatory body ( in the case of the united states , the food and drug administration , fda ) for other considerations , such as health and safety , before it may be sold to consumers .

the public health landscape has changed dramatically over the past 30 years .

the world has witnessed the emergence of the hiv / aids pandemic in the 1980s , as well as an increasing resistance to treatments against malaria , tuberculosis , and a host of bacteria over the past couple of decades .

while hiv / aids is a global pandemic , it disproportionately affects developing countries .

in addition , many other communicable and infectious diseases have afflicted the developing world .

public health outcomes depend on a wide variety of often inter - related social , economic , and political factors , one of which is access to medicines .

according to the u.n. millennium development goals , access to medicines is defined as "having medicines continuously available and affordable at public or private health facilities or medicine outlets that are within one hour's walk from the homes of the population. .

in discussing access to medicines , many public health advocates focus on "essential medicines. .

given that national governments face resource constraints in providing health care , some argue that governments should rationalize their public health policy choices , including the provision of medicines .

according to the who , essential medicines are those that satisfy the priority health care needs of the population .

they are selected with due regard to public health relevance , evidence on efficacy and safety , and comparative cost - effectiveness .

essential medicines are intended to be available within the context of functioning health systems at all times in adequate amounts , in the appropriate dosage forms , with assured quality and adequate information , and at a price the individual and the community can afford .

the implementation of the concept of essential medicines is intended to be flexible and adaptable to many different situations ; exactly which medicines are regarded as essential remains a national responsibility .

for low - income countries and populations , pharmaceutical drug prices may constitute a significant barrier in accessing essential and other medicines .

in most parts of the world , health services are offered through a combination of public and private health services .

oftentimes , in developing countries ( and in some cases , developed countries such as the united states ) , consumers bear much of their health care costs directly .

in contrast , some countries , such as thailand , japan , turkey , and france , have more publicly - funded pharmaceutical markets , reducing the costs borne by consumers .

however , in situations where the government is funding a larger share of health care , higher - priced drugs may add limits to the government's ability to provide public health care .

there is considerable debate on the extent to which patent protection affects access to essential medicines .

the complexity is fueled by differing definitions of what is meant by "essential medicines" and "access to medicines. .

for instance , there often are no agreed - upon units of analysis for evaluating access to essential medicines .

since 1977 , the who has maintained a model essential medicines list ( eml ) to assist national governments to select medicines to address their public health needs and to develop national lists .

while the who eml often is used as a basis for analysis , some global health activists express concern that the eml may not be comprehensive .

they argue that the eml may exclude essential medicines based on cost concerns .

they contend that patents raise the cost of medicines , and that the eml includes very few medicines currently under patent .

however , the eml notes that cost is not a reason to automatically exclude a medicine and points out that multiple criteria are considered in the decision process .

moreover , some argue that the number of essential medicines under patent is under "constant flux" because patents will expire for existing medicines , new patents will be sought for new medicines , new medicines will be added to the who's model essential medicines list , and others will be removed from the eml .

like many other ipr - sensitive industries , the pharmaceutical industry is heavily involved in international trade .

ipr - sensitive products generally rank among the fastest - growing trade commodities .

international trade in pharmaceutical products is heavily dominated by the developed world , both in terms of supply and demand .

the global pharmaceutical market is expected to grow by 4-6% in 2010 , down from 7% in 2009 .

the international economic downturn poses uncertainties and may affect international demand for pharmaceuticals .

although demand for pharmaceutical products tends to be more price - inelastic than for other commodities , the global pharmaceutical market is not wholly insulated from factors affecting the global economy .

the international economic slowdown may constrain performance in some pharmaceutical markets more so than others .

for instance , the pharmaceutical markets of countries in which consumers bear a large degree of the cost of health care may be particularly susceptible to global economic changes .

however , emerging market economies are predicted to fuel growth in the pharmaceutical market sales over the next five years .

historically , intellectual property rights have been a matter of u.s. national concern , but over time , have evolved into a cornerstone of international trade agreements .

at the center of the present international ipr system is the world trade organization ( wto ) agreement on trade - related aspects of intellectual property rights ( "trips agreement" ) .

the conclusion of the uruguay round ( 1986-1994 ) of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) resulted in the creation of the wto , an international organization established in 1995 as the successor to the gatt .

the uruguay round also culminated in numerous wto agreements on trade in goods , services , investment and other non - tariff barriers to trade , one of which was the trips agreement .

the trips agreement sets minimum standards of protection and enforcement for patents , copyrights , trademarks and other forms of intellectual property .

the agreement is based on three core commitments of the wto: minimum standards , national treatment , and most - favored - nation treatment .

adherence to the trips agreement is a prerequisite for wto membership , and provisions of the agreement can be enforced through the wto's dispute settlement understanding mechanism ( dsm ) .

efforts by the united states , european countries , and the ipr business community in the late 1980s were important in elevating ipr as a trade issue on the agenda of the uruguay round of the gatt .

they argued that the prevailing international ipr regime , largely administered through "unenforceable" international treaties , was ineffective .

u.s. industry criticized the lack of consistency in the promotion , protection , and enforcement of ipr across countries .

others contended that ipr protection and enforcement should not be viewed as a trade issue .

among those who held this view , some may have agreed that the movement of counterfeit and pirated goods across national borders could be a trade issue , but may have questioned the inclusion of a wider - ranging set of ipr issues on the uruguay round agenda .

among the debates about the implications of the trips agreement , one of the most controversial is its impact on public health .

prior to the trips agreement , developing country governments regulated public health with little involvement of international ipr regimes .

this is because developing countries either did not have ipr systems in place or excluded pharmaceutical products from patents .

proponents of the trips agreement , mainly developed countries , argued that ipr protection and enforcement contribute to economic growth and development by promoting trade , investment , and technology transfer .

developed countries also asserted that patent protection is critical to public health because patents provide financial incentives for r&d to find pharmaceutical solutions for diseases .

in contrast , critics of the trips , including many developing countries and civil society organizations , asserted that developed countries , which are the major producers of intellectual property , would be the prime beneficiaries of the trips agreement .

some also held the view that the trips agreement would raise the costs of ipr - sensitive goods , such as public health goods , constrain the ability of governments to provide health services to their populations , and hinder innovation and economic development for low - income countries .

in addition , many developing countries preferred to discuss ipr issues under the auspices of the world intellectual property organization ( wipo ) instead of the wto .

wipo is a united nations agency that administers all international ipr treaties with the exception of trips .

ultimately , developing countries acceded to the trips agreement , after being granted delayed compliance periods and after negotiating goals on other issues in the uruguay round such as textiles and clothing .

they also favored the prospect of operating under a rules - based trading system .

nevertheless , many stakeholders continue to be critical of the trips agreement .

they argue that the ipr regime's architecture is biased toward ip right holders .

they also contend that , in negotiations , high - income countries had greater bargaining power than lower - income countries , which are often dependent on developed countries economically .

in addition , some argue that the interests of such groups as ip users , consumers , small - and medium - sized manufacturers , and public health advocates were not sufficiently represented in the trips agreement negotiations .

the provisions in the trips agreement and the doha declaration that affect pharmaceuticals continue to be the subject of ongoing debate .

issues of concern include the transitional implementation of the trips agreement , compulsory licensing provisions , parallel importing , and trade in counterfeit pharmaceuticals .

the u.s. government has placed significant priority on pursuing stronger international ipr protection and enforcement through u.s. trade policy .

in addition to participating in multilateral trade policy negotiations regarding iprs , the united states seeks stronger international ipr protection and enforcement through regional and bilateral free trade agreements ( ftas ) and unilateral trade policy tools .

possible issues of interest for congress include incorporating public health input into the u.s. trade policy advisory process , developing new u.s. trade policy guidance on public health , considering the implications of the u.s. strategy on iprs and trade for u.s. access to medicines , and reviewing the range of options utilized for expanding global access to medicines .

some observers of the u.s. trade policy process assert that the protection of intellectual property has been given more emphasis than the protection of public health .

advocates of public health maintain that the united states has a legal and moral imperative to ensure that public health is safeguarded through trade policy .

they point out that the united states is a signatory to the united nation's international covenant on economic , social and cultural rights .

among the human rights agreed upon in the covenant , article 12.1 provides "the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. .

many human rights organizations view access to medicines as a critical component of the fundamental human right to health .

other observers of the u.s. trade policy process assert that protection of iprs contributes to the protection of public health , and that u.s. trade policy is one of multiple policy arenas that support public health .

some proponents of greater public health representation in the u.s. trade policy process often direct their attention to the ustr advisory committee structure , the central mechanism through which the ustr consults with the private sector and civil society organizations regarding the u.s. trade policy agenda and negotiations .

critics argue that private sector interests are granted greater representation in the advisory system than public health or other civil society interests .

they argue that this "privileged access to government policy makers" allows commercial interests to influence the formulation of u.s. trade negotiating positions , which in turn have affected the wto's agenda .

according to a recent government accountability office ( gao ) report , for the review period of the report ( november 2006 through november 2007 ) , there were 16 industry trade advisory committees ( itacs ) , two of which each had a single public health representative .

these committees are the intellectual property committee and the chemicals , pharmaceuticals , health science products and services committee , which were composed of 20 and 33 members , respectively , during the review period .

defenders of the current advisory system argue that public health representation is included in the itacs most relevant to public health .

furthermore , according to officials from the ustr , it was "not necessary to have two public health representatives on one committee representing the same view , and they said they did not find any other viable candidates with additional perspectives beyond the individuals selected. .

some lawmakers have urged the ustr to reform the formal trade advisory committee system .

among the suggestions put forth are creating a new advisory committee that addresses public health issues , including issues pertaining to developing countries , or a committee focusing on trade and development .

in the 111 th congress , h.r .

2293 ( van hollen ) was introduced and referred to the house ways and means committee on may 6 , 2009 , to ensure that public health views are represented and accommodated in developing u.s. trade policy .

specifically , the bill would require the creation of a public health advisory committee on trade , whose membership would be restricted to individuals with expertise in various trade and public health issues , including issues in access to affordable pharmaceuticals .

membership would exclude individuals who represent commercial interests in health services or regulations .

this committee would be located in the second tier of the trade advisory committee system .

in addition , the bill would require non - governmental public health officials to be appointed to the advisory committee for trade policy and negotiations , a first - tier committee .

in the 110 th congress , representative van hollen also introduced legislation to reform the trade advisory system ( h.r .

3204 ) that differed from h.r .

2293 in certain ways .

both pieces of legislation include provisions for creating a public health advisory committee on trade .

however , h.r .

3204 also would have required that each itac must have at least one representative of labor , consumer interest , and public health .

this provision was not included in h.r .

2293 in the 111 th congress .

while many public health advocates applaud legislation to increase public health representation on advisory trade committees , some caution against creating a trade advisory committee that focuses solely on health issues as this may insulate trade policy discussions from public health concerns .

for instance , critics express concern that the ustr may limit consultations with the proposed health committee to a narrow set of technical issues and not on the broader implications of trade policy for public health .

among industry advocates , some may be critical of legislation that would dilute industry representation on the itacs .

they may contend that the itacs were created as a vehicle for the ustr to consult specifically with industry .

other channels for input on fta negotiations include the "ustr's formal public hearings and the federal register comments. .

while the public health input through these alternate mechanisms may be higher , some question the relative weight of such input compared to that received through the itacs .

for some observers of the u.s. trade policy process , another area of concern is the ustr special 301 report .

ustr identification of countries also involves gathering information and analysis based on the ustr's annual trade barriers report , as well as consultations with a wide variety of sources , including government agencies , industry groups , other private sector representatives , congressional leaders , and foreign governments .

some observers express concern that u.s. industry interests , such as those of phrma , heavily influence ustr's country identifications and that there is limited input from public health advocates , generic drug manufacturers , and other groups .

although the special 301 report is regarded by some as an effective form of u.s. political pressure on trading partners , others express concern that disproportionate representation of industry interests may limit the legitimacy of the special 301 trade policy tool .

in 2002 , congress granted trade promotion authority ( tpa ) to then president bush .

the tpa included a commitment to ensure that u.s international trade agreements respected public health .

should congress decide to renew trade promotion authority ( tpa ) for president obama , members may choose to consider what , if any , public health mandate should the tpa include .

another issue that congress may choose to consider is the extent to which the may 10 , 2007 bipartisan trade deal between then president bush and congressional leaders will serve as a template for the ipr provisions in future ftas .

some also question whether or not this fta template will be used for all future ftas , or if will it be used according to the income status of a country .

for instance , the template's scale - down in patent requirements was incorporated into the recently negotiated ftas with peru , panama , and colombia , which are considered low - income countries .

they were not incorporated into the fta with south korea , which is considered to be a middle - income country .

some also question whether or not the may 10 , 2007 bipartisan trade deal's changes to fta patent provisions will be applied to existing ftas .

some stakeholders encourage congress to revisit the ipr provisions in the may 10 , 2007 , bipartisan trade deal .

among those stakeholders , some innovator pharmaceutical industry representatives hope that the administration will decided to reverse the previous scale - down in patent provisions .

for instance , the national association of manufacturers ( nam ) believes that the pharmaceutical industry was unfairly singled out in the trade deal .

however , others express concern that revisiting the deal may lead to re - evaluation of previously resolved issues .

global health advocates and generic pharmaceutical companies likely would resist changes to the ipr portions and could encourage further weakening of patent provisions in an effort to increase access to medicines .

the trade reform , accountability , development and employment ( trade ) act of 2009 ( h.r .

3012 , michaud ) and its companion bill ( s. 2021 , brown ) , introduced in the 111 th congress , would require a review of the economic , environmental , national security , health , safety , and other impacts of certain u.s. free trade agreements and renegotiation of those agreements based on the review .

the bills also would require that the implementing bills of new trade agreements would not be expedited unless they met certain standards in fourteen different areas .

with respect to ipr , under the bills , terms related to patents in the trade agreements could not limit the flexibilities and rights established in the wto doha declaration on the trips agreement and public health , either overtly or in application .

the united states - peru fta , which incorporates the provisions of the may 10 , 2007 , bipartisan trade deal , largely reflects the ipr and public health provisions called for in h.r .

3012 and s. 2021 .

given that the united states is a primary producer of patents , some argue that a strong international ipr regime is economically beneficial to the united states .

however , some observers question whether continually seeking higher standards of ipr will always be in the u.s. interest .

situations may arise in which the united states may wish to issue compulsory licenses to address global health or security threats .

for instance , when the anthrax scare occurred in 2001 , the united states and canada considered issuing compulsory licenses for cipro , a drug produced by the german company bayer , so that their populations could access the drug at affordable prices .

some viewed u.s. and canadian action as hypocritical , considering that these two countries had pledged to "opt out" of using the trips agreement flexibilities and had pressured other countries to do the same .

some observers saw the incident as a cautionary example of how limiting flexibilities in patent regimes may be detrimental to u.s. interests .

another example is the h5n1 "avian influenza" crisis of 2005 .

the united states threatened to issue a compulsory license for the production of tamiflu , the anti - viral drug produced by the swiss company roche .

the united states was concerned that roche lacked the production capacity to meet global demand for the medication .

roche ultimately agreed to ramp up production for tamiflu by sub - licensing the patent to other manufacturers .

higher vaccine and drug prices associated with ipr protection and enforcement may reduce incentives for developing countries to share virus samples with the who in order to find cures for diseases .

for instance , during the h5n1 "avian influenza" pandemic , indonesia limited sharing h5n1 virus samples with who researchers .

indonesia expressed concerns that the vaccines would be patented and then offered for purchase at marked - up prices unaffordable for indonesia and other developing countries .

in march 2007 , indonesia began sharing virus samples again under the condition that an international agreement would be negotiated for more equitable , affordable sharing of vaccines .

as china , india , and other industrializing countries continue to develop , a larger proportion of global patents may originate from these countries .

although the united states continued to rank as the leading source of applications under wipo's patent cooperation treaty ( pct ) in 2009 , u.s. patent filings fell by 11.4% from the previous year .

in contrast , the growth rate in patent filings stood at 29.4% for china .

these shifts in the concentration of patents and the pharmaceutical marketplace may have implications for the cost of medicines for the united states and other developed countries .

some public health advocates argue that the public should play a greater role in the provision of pharmaceutical solutions for diseases .

some suggest that u.s. strategies to address public health needs through trade policy should expand beyond patenting and compulsory licensing .

the who global strategy on public health , innovation and intellectual property calls for an exploration of a range of incentive mechanisms .

in addition to patents , other methods of incentivizing the private sector to target r&d toward addressing public health needs of developing countries may include advance market commitments , patent pools , and innovation prizes .

while such mechanisms may direct pharmaceutical r&d toward meeting the needs of developing countries , they may require governments to bear a greater share of the risks associated with r&d .

