at the november 2001 ministerial meeting of the world trade organization ( wto ) in doha , qatar , wto member countries launched a new round of trade talks known as the doha development agenda ( dda ) .

one of the negotiating objectives in the dda called for "clarifying and improving disciplines" on trade remedies addressed in the wto antidumping agreement , known formally as the agreement on implementation of article vi of the general agreement on tariffs and trade 1994 ( hereinafter known as the antidumping agreement or ada ) and the wto agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures ( hereinafter the subsidies agreement or ascm ) .

dda talks are being conducted as a "single undertaking," meaning that nothing will be agreed on unless a consensus is reached in all areas of the discussions .

as of this writing , talks in agriculture and on non - agricultural market access are at an impasse .

regarding discussions on trade remedies , during the december 2005 wto ministerial in hong kong , a "high level of constructive engagement" in trade remedy negotiations was reported , and negotiators were directed to "intensify and accelerate" their work .

since that time , discussions in the wto negotiating group on rules have continued based on two draft texts of the ada and ascm ( in november 2007 and december 2008 , respectively ) prepared by the group's chairman "with the objective of stimulating serious reflection by participants on the broad parameters of possible outcomes to the negotiations. .

in march 2010 , significant progress was reported in the rules negotiations , but it was also acknowledged that no consensus was likely to be reached on the "big political issues" until the overall direction of the dda became clearer .

trade remedies are laws implemented by the united states and many of its trading partners to attempt to mitigate the adverse impact of various trade practices on domestic industries and workers .

antidumping ( ad ) laws , for example , provide relief to domestic industries that have been shown to have suffered material injury or are threatened with material injury as a result of competing imports being sold at prices shown to be less than their fair market value .

countervailing duty laws provide a similar form of relief to domestic industries that have been ( or may be ) injured by foreign subsidies on competing exports .

historically , multilateral negotiations on trade remedies , particularly on antidumping issues , have been extremely contentious ; some analysts claim that a failure to reach consensus on what became the ada and ascm was largely responsible for delaying the completion of the uruguay round negotiations by as long as two years .

in the dda , a coalition of developed and developing nations known as the "friends of antidumping" are pushing for reforms in antidumping and other trade remedies that many in congress oppose and u.s. negotiators are resisting .

many wto members regard trade remedy reform as a "make or break" issue in terms of their acceptance of any final dda agreement .

this report analyzes the issue in three parts .

first , background information and contextual analysis are presented .

this section briefly discusses u.s. trade remedy laws and how they are implemented , and the scope of the trade remedy debate in the united states .

this section also provides statistics on u.s. and worldwide use of antidumping and countervailing duty measures .

second , the report focuses on the wto discussions on trade remedies and their part in the overall negotiations within the dda .

the general mandate to negotiate is described , and negotiating activity to date summarized .

some of the major reforms suggested are described in general terms .

third , the report presents a more specific overview of major reform proposals ; for example , those that seek to end "zeroing," to mandatorily shorten the length that trade remedy duties can be assessed , or to provide special treatment for developing country wto members .

some of these proposals , if implemented , could significantly reduce the number of permissible investigations conducted by the united states or lower the amount of duty margins assessed , thus potentially reducing the protective impact of the remedies .

other proposals might benefit u.s. companies because they could provide more transparency in the ad and cvd investigations on u.s. products being conducted by other wto members .

the third section also mentions negotiations in two areas not previously discussed in the context of the wto .

first , limitation on the use of subsidies in the fisheries industry are being discussed in the context of the ascm ; and second , a mechanism for wto monitoring of regional trade agreements ( which technically violate wto non - discrimination principles but are permitted under certain conditions ) is also being negotiated .

the report ends with some general observations and options for congress .

this section provides an overview of u.s. trade remedy laws and procedures as well as an overview of the disciplines that the united states and other wto members agreed to in the antidumping and subsidies agreements .

when the trade ministers of wto member nations convened at the november 2001 ministerial of the world trade organization in doha , qatar , many countries placed launching a new round of trade negotiations high on the agenda .

some members expected that a new trade round would give the world economy a much - needed stimulus after the economic shock associated with the september 11 , 2001 terror attacks .

a primary goal of u.s. officials was to negotiate expanded market access for u.s. agriculture , services , and industrial products .

the dda is being conducted as a "single undertaking," meaning that nothing is agreed to individually unless consensus on an entire package is reached .

thus , agreements must be reached in talks on non - agricultural market access , agricultural talks , and in negotiations on trade in services , as well as in the rules negotiations , before any concessions made can go into effect .

the ada , perhaps by design , is somewhat ambiguous .

many countries , especially the "friends of antidumping," would like to see more specific definitions and guidelines in order to provide some harmonization of nations' implementation of trade remedy laws .

some have suggested a kind of "template" format for conducting ad investigations in order to make the procedure more efficient and cost - effective for developing countries .

the united states could also benefit from modifications to the ada , particularly if they enhance the transparency of antidumping investigations in wto member countries in which the united states has become a target of antidumping action .

however , there are trade - offs between these and other proposals which , if adopted , could ultimately have the effect of raising the threshold for domestic petitioners' ability to obtain relief , lead to lower calculated dumping duty levels , or limit the duration of antidumping orders .

because the ada largely consists of administrative guidelines for investigations , including calculating dumping margins , determining injury , and granting relief , many of the proposals offered involve highly technical changes that are beyond the scope of this report .

however , there are major themes that have emerged for which there seems to be broad support among wto members .

these include proposals for a ban on "zeroing," a mandatory "lesser duty" rule , and increased use of procedures known as "price undertakings. .

some of these proposals , if adopted , could result in significant amendments to u.s. laws .

most of these recommendations would also primarily affect administrative methodology .

another proposal seeks mandatory termination of antidumping measures after a certain period .

many wto members believe that the methodology used by some countries to calculate duty margins — particularly the united states and its use of "zeroing" — leads to highly inflated duty margins .

as a consequence , revisions in the ada that could lower dumping margins have been a major focus of submissions and discussions in the rules negotiations .

since the investigative procedures involved in subsidies actions are very similar to those used to investigate the existence of dumping — and the remedy imposed is also similar — many suggestions related to improved disciplines in the ada mentioned above ( such as price undertakings and compulsory sunset ) are also being discussed in relation to proposed modifications to the agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures .

since they have previously been presented in the context of the ada , they will not be discussed here .

ad and cvd measures , however , address very different forms of price discrimination .

in the case of antidumping investigations , the principal actors are exporting companies who sell goods in the foreign market at less than fair market value .

thus , there is little that exporting governments can do to assist in the elimination of dumping .

in the case of subsidies , however , the actors that provide them are governments and other public entities .

therefore , the ascm addresses disciplines that exporting governments have agreed to that seek to limit the granting of subsidies in the first place , as well as those related to investigative procedures and mitigation of their injurious effects .

the ascm's role in limiting subsidies has been a primary focus of the rules negotiations in two major respects .

first , developing country members , who maintain that subsidies play an important role in the development programs of many developing nations , seek additional special and differential treatment under the ascm .

second , the development of a new set of disciplines that seek to limit fisheries subsidies has been a major focus of attention .

under the gatt , wto members must grant immediate and unconditional most - favored - nation ( mfn ) treatment to the products of other wto members with respect to customs duties and import charges , internal taxes and regulations , and other trade - related matters .

while entering into regional trade agreements ( rtas ) or free trade agreements ( ftas ) would appear to be inconsistent with this obligation , the gatt contains a specific exception to allow such agreements because rtas are generally viewed as promoting trade liberalization .

article xxiv of the gatt requires that all parties must notify the wto of these agreements , and that all rtas are subject to wto review .

the exception applies both to completed rtas as well as to any interim agreements leading up to their implementation .

the wto secretariat estimated that , if all rtas currently in some stage of the negotiating process actually enter into force , a total of nearly 400 rtas worldwide could be scheduled to be implemented by the end of 2010 .

ftas and partial scope agreements account for over 90% of these agreements , while customs unions account for less than 10% .

interpreting the wto rules governing regional trade agreements has proven to be a challenge to the wto regional trade agreements committee , the wto committee tasked with the oversight of these agreements .

as a result , the committee has had some difficulty assessing the individual trade agreements to ensure that they comply with wto guidelines .

when congress granted presidential trade promotion authority ( tpa ) in 2002 ( p.l .

107-210 ) , it agreed to consider legislation to implement trade agreements under special legislative procedures that limited debate and allowed no amendments .

since tpa expired in july 2007 , these requirements no longer apply .

there is some speculation that it will be more difficult to reach any kind of consensus in the wto without tpa being extended to the current administration .

observers advocating this view argue that the principal actors in other wto member countries will be reluctant to agree to a wto pact that could be substantially amended by u.s. lawmakers .

however , in keeping with its constitutional role , as part of the tpa legislation , congress also gave itself considerable oversight authority over trade negotiations by requiring the president and other executive agencies ( particularly the ustr ) to consult with congress , to provide congressional committees with regular , detailed briefings on the status of negotiations , and to coordinate closely with a congressional oversight group consisting of chairmen , ranking members , and other representatives from the house ways and means and senate finance committees .

since modifications to the trade remedy laws were of particular concern to many members , the tpa legislation required the president to report within 180 days prior to acceptance of a trade agreement if any of the proposals could require amendments to trade remedy laws .

the law also provided specific language for a procedural resolution of disapproval to be introduced in either house if congress determined that the proposed changes to the trade remedy laws in any agreement are inconsistent with u.s. negotiating objectives on trade remedies .

although the disapproval resolution would not have been binding on the president or on the ustr , such a resolution , if passed , would have sent a clear message that congress resisted any modifications to the wto agreements that would lead to any weakening of u.s. trade remedy laws .

most of the proposed changes in the ada , if adopted , could further restrict the ability of all wto members to grant relief to import - competing industries .

import - competing industries in the united states could find it more difficult to obtain relief , could have lower dumping margins assessed on targeted merchandise , or could be authorized to receive the relief for a shorter time period .

industries in other countries would face the same restrictions , however , which could benefit u.s. exporters .

u.s. consuming industries , and ultimately consumers , might also benefit from lower prices for production inputs and finished goods .

proposals to change dumping margin calculations ( through "zeroing," for example ) might only require administrative changes in the way in which authorities calculate the level of relief .

however , there is considerable debate in congress about whether or not authorities should be permitted do so .

for example , h.r .

496 ( rangel , introduced january 14 , 2009 ) seeks to express the sense of congress that , in light of "fatally flawed" wto appellate body decisions , that the department of commerce should revisit its february 22 , 2007 decision to modify its methodology in ad investigations "with respect to the calculation of the weighted - average dumping margin" to ensure that "100% of dumping is addressed under united states antidumping law and practice , while also ensuring that the united states complies with its wto obligations. .

h.r .

496 would also prohibit the department of commerce from implementing any further changes unless and until it consults with the appropriate congressional committees and the ustr , and provides an opportunity for public comment by publishing proposed modifications in the federal register .

further , the legislation would state that a final rule or other modification should not go into effect before the end of a 60-day period beginning on the day consultations were requested .

during the 60-day period , the house ways and means and the senate finance committee may conduct a non - binding vote to indicate their agreement or disagreement with the proposed rule or modification .

the legislation also proposes to extend the final modification on "zeroing" already approved by the department of commerce until march 1 , 2009 , after which the department is directed to return to the original methodology "unless or until" it issues a revised modification according to the process described in the legislation .

suggestions for changes in improved transparency in injury determinations would probably result in fewer changes to u.s. laws and administrative procedures because u.s. trade remedy actions already provide considerably more quantitative guidance , more specific definitions , and narrower timetables than those in some other wto member countries .

in addition , u.s. exporters could benefit from increased transparency in ad investigations in foreign markets , while u.s. domestic industries' ability to seek ad action in the united states might be only minimally affected .

however , since the overall objective of many wto members seems to be to restrict the ability of domestic industries in the importing countries to receive relief , it is still possible that concessions to modifications in this area could lead to changes that diminish the use and effectiveness of ad actions .

proposals for modifying the duration of ad orders , such as requiring mandatory sunset after five years , could also have a significant effect on u.s. industries seeking relief through the trade remedy laws .

the united states currently has about 190 ad orders that have been in effect longer than five years ( the oldest as of this writing , on polychloroprene rubber from japan , dates from 1973 ) .

statistics on five - year reviews conducted from january 2000 to january 2005 indicate in the 116 reviews initiated during the period , the ita and itc decided to revoke 37 ad orders , continued 52 orders , and an additional 27 investigations are still pending .

these statistics indicate that a number of u.s .

ad orders do continue in place beyond the five - year period .

therefore , adoption of a mandatory five - year revocation of ad orders could have a substantial impact on u.s. trade remedy policy , as well as on industries that have benefitted from the protection of these orders .

in addition , since the united states was found to be in violation of its wto obligations with regard to the cdsoa and the usage of zeroing when conducting initial investigations , some observers suggest that it might be advantageous for the united states to concede on these issues in dda negotiations , especially if by doing so u.s. negotiators can avoid other changes to the agreement that might adversely affect u.s. trade remedy laws .

two issues unique to the wto subsidies debate are ( 1 ) special and differential treatment of developing countries relative to relaxing disciplines on subsidies that governments may provide to fledgling industries , and ( 2 ) the ongoing discussion on limiting subsidies to fisheries industries worldwide that could contribute to overcapacity and overfishing .

u.s. negotiators have formally opposed any extension of the special and differential treatment on subsidies beyond that which was previously provided in article 27 of the ascm .

the united states bases this position on economic research indicating that providing subsidies in the long term creates artificial advantages that can lead to distortion of market signals .

in turn , the distortions created by subsidies can undermine efficient allocation and utilization of resources .

if concessions were made in favor of extending or granting additional favorable subsidies treatment to developing country wto members , it would do little to weaken the effectiveness or the administration of u.s. trade remedy laws .

however , it could lead to further injury to u.s. import - competing producers who , depending on the nature and duration of the special treatment provided , might not have recourse to subsidies action .

on the issue of fisheries subsidies , the united states is one of the countries in favor of developing disciplines in the fisheries sector .

u.s. negotiators have written that the united states especially favors a broad prohibition on any subsidies that contribute to overcapacity and overfishing .

those who oppose this viewpoint include japan and korea , who believe that injurious fisheries subsidies can already be dealt with in the context of the ascm , and developing countries who believe that their small - scale and artisanal fisheries merit special and differential treatment .

even if consensus is not reached on this issue in the context of the dda , limits on overcapacity and overfishing could possibly be addressed in a context other than international trade through other ongoing international discussions on fisheries conservation .

in the area of regional trade agreements , wto members have already reached consensus on a provisional mechanism designed to enhance transparency .

what remains is for wto members to evaluate its effectiveness and reach consensus on any recommended modifications .

while modifications to wto oversight may be agreed to in the context of the dda rules negotiations , any provisions that seek to limit the ability of the united states or other wto members to enter into these agreements are not on the table .

the dda is being conducted as a "single undertaking," meaning that no individual concessions are binding unless a total package of obligations and concessions is agreed to by all parties .

as of this writing , negotiations on agriculture and non - agricultural market access — not trade remedies — appear to have brought the discussions to an impasse .

however , given the desire of congress and others to preserve the trade remedy laws and the ability to implement them effectively , reaching consensus on trade remedy issues could prove to be another sticking point .

the gap between the u.s. position ― especially with regard to antidumping ― and that of u.s. wto trading partners appears to be very wide and may be difficult to narrow .

however , trade negotiators from all countries face a weighing of concessions made against gains in other areas in the wto negotiations .

