s hort - time compensation ( stc ) , sometimes called work sharing , is a program within the federal - state unemployment compensation ( uc ) system .

it provides pro - rated unemployment benefits to workers whose hours have been reduced in lieu of a layoff .

stc may be helpful to a firm and its workers during an economic downturn or other periods when employers determine that a temporary reduction in work hours is necessary .

the stc program has never reached many workers .

as will be discussed below , approximately half of states have enacted stc legislation and , within these states , few firms and workers have participated .

the reasons for this seem to be a combination of difficulty the u.s. department of labor ( u.s. dol ) has had in implementing the 1992 authorizing legislation , lack of awareness on the part of employers , unsuitability of work sharing arrangements for some firms or workers , and costs of the program .

congress passed legislation in february 2012 , p.l .

112-96 , which provided clarification to the definition of stc and also provided incentives to states to adopt and modify stc programs .

despite these changes , the proportion of uc claimants participating in stc remains low .

the terms short - time compensation and work sharing are sometimes used interchangeably , however the term work sharing also refers more broadly to any arrangement under which a firm chooses to reduce work hours across the board for many or all workers instead of permanently laying off a smaller number of workers .

in a typical example of work sharing , a firm that must temporarily reduce its 100-person workforce by 20% would accomplish this by reducing the work hours of the entire workforce by 20% — from five to four days a week — in lieu of laying off 20 workers .

workers whose hours are reduced are sometimes compensated with stc , which is equivalent to regular unemployment benefits that have been pro - rated for the partial work reduction .

in this example , workers' stc benefits would be 20% of the unemployment benefit they would have been entitled to had they been laid off .

as unemployment benefits generally replace almost half of an average worker's wages ( with considerable variation among states ) , stc benefits for a worker who has experienced a 20% reduction in hours would amount to about 10% of the worker's wages before the reduction in hours .

employees would therefore receive a combined income of about 90% of their full - time wages as compensation for four days of work: 80% as wages plus 10% as stc .

working reduced hours because of economic conditions is currently quite common .

in september 2016 , an estimated 61% ( 3.5 million ) of all part - time workers were employed part - time because of slack work or business conditions .

work sharing has a decades - long history in the united states .

for example , in the early 1930s , president hoover encouraged employers to reduce employees' hours instead of laying them off .

in 1932 , the president's organization on unemployment relief issued a report that concluded , "reduction in the working time is the principal method of spreading employment" through such means as reduced days per week , reduced hours per day , or rotating time off .

the federal government introduced a temporary , national stc program in 1982 with the tax equity and fiscal responsibility act ( tefra ; p.l .

97-248 ) , which expired in 1985 .

the u.s. dol did not curtail the program's operation in existing states , nor did it stop new states from adopting the program .

the recession of 1990-1991 brought renewed attention to stc , leading congress to enact permanent stc legislation , the unemployment compensation amendments of 1992 ( uca ; p.l .

102-318 ) .

however , at the time , government officials argued that the 1992 law was restrictive in application and would have put many existing state stc programs out of compliance and required clarification .

in february 2012 , congress passed p.l .

112-96 , which , among other provisions , clarifies requirements related to stc programs .

under p.l .

112-96 , the term short - time compensation program means a program under which employers participate on a voluntary basis and submit a written plan to the appropriate state agency ; an employer reduces the number of hours worked by employees in lieu of layoffs ; employees' workweeks have been reduced by at least 10% and by no more than the percentage determined by the state ( if any , but in no case by more than 60% ) ; stc is paid as a pro rata portion of the unemployment compensation that would otherwise be payable to the employee if such employee were employed ; eligible employees are not required to meet the "able , available and actively seeking work" requirement of regular unemployment compensation , but they must be available for their normal workweeks ; eligible employees may participate in a state - approved , employer - sponsored , or workforce investment act training program ; and employers who provide health or retirement benefits ( defined benefit or defined contribution pension plans ) must certify to the appropriate state agency that such benefits will continue to be provided to stc participants under the same terms and conditions as though the workweek of such employee had not been reduced or to the same extent as other employees not participating in the stc program .

as described below , p.l .

112-96 provided temporary , federal financing for 100% of stc benefits in states that meet the new definition of an stc program .

a transition period of up to two years and six months from enactment of this law was provided for states with existing stc programs that did not meet the new definition .

currently , over half of the states and the district of columbia have enacted stc programs .

a description of stc programs in the states that currently operate them can be found in the appendix .

although just over half of states now have stc programs , there continues to be only limited use of the option .

from 1982 through 2008 , the ratio of stc beneficiaries to regular unemployment compensation beneficiaries among all states attained 1% only twice , in 1992 and in 2001 .

in 2009 , however , the ratio of stc beneficiaries to regular unemployment compensation beneficiaries rose to 2% , and this ratio reached nearly 3% in 2010 , as shown in table 1 .

use of stc is highly countercyclical to business conditions because employers are more likely to be interested in work sharing when they need to manage labor costs in the face of relatively low demand for their products .

the local peaks in 1992 , 2001 , and 2009-2011 correspond with the recessions of july 1990 to march 1991 , march 2001 to november 2001 , and again with the december 2007-june 2009 recession .

almost 98,000 workers received stc in 1992 , about 111,000 received stc in 2001 , about 314,000 received stc benefits in 2010 , and about 236,000 workers received stc in 2011 .

in 2013 , stc use fell significantly to under 74,000 beneficiaries .

by 2015 , the number of new stc beneficiaries had fallen to just over 60,000 ; however , it remains higher than numbers reported in the pre - recessionary years of 2004-2007 .

table 2 shows first payments of stc benefits during 2015 in states with stc programs .

stc usage varies significantly among the states with stc programs .

for example , the ratio of stc beneficiaries to beneficiaries of regular unemployment compensation ranged from negligible usage in many states to over 9% in missouri .

a 2002 study ( hereinafter , macurdy et al. ) .

in california , the largest ( numerically ) user of stc , found that manufacturing firms were more likely than other firms to use stc .

manufacturing firms accounted for only 11% of firms generating unemployment benefits of all kinds but they accounted for 62% of stc firms .

wholesale trade was the other sector more likely than average to use stc .

firms that used stc were generally older and larger than non - stc users .

the average employment in stc firms was 239 , compared to average employment of only 40 workers in firms that generated ui charges through layoffs in 2002 .

older and larger firms were also more likely to have human resources departments to assist with implementing stc .

in connecticut in 2009 , manufacturing firms were more likely than other firms to use stc .

an interesting finding in the california study is that stc firms often have jobs that require lengthy apprenticeships or on - the - job training programs in which workers learn skills not taught in school .

within the manufacturing sector , the industries that used stc the most were manufacturers of electronics , industrial machinery , fabricated metals , instruments , furniture , primary metals , leather , rubber and plastics , and paper products .

within the construction sector , stc firms were more likely than other construction firms to be "specialty trades contractors" such as plumbers and electricians .

a firm's decision to seek stc as part of a work sharing arrangement hinges on a number of factors , for example whether work sharing is appropriate for both a firm and its employees .

the low usage rate of stc , even in some states that offer the program , may be due in part to the fact that work sharing itself is not appropriate for all firms or all employees .

it is sometimes said that states are laboratories for policy , and the history of stc appears to bear this out .

following the recession of 1973-1975 , state governments , businesses , and labor groups began to promote work sharing arrangements that included government - provided income support .

table 3 provides the enactment year for all states with an stc program .

new york was the first state to consider stc legislation , in 1975 , as part of a broader employment policy bill .

the legislation died in committee .

in 1978 , california became the first state to enact an stc law .

california's action was in response to anticipated large - scale public sector layoffs arising from proposition 13 tax reductions that limited state spending .

although the public sector layoffs never occurred , the private sector used the program .

california was followed by arizona in 1981 .

oregon enacted stc legislation in 1982 , with strong support from the motorola corporation .

during this period of state innovation , u.s. dol did not challenge states' stc programs , although federal unemployment compensation law did not explicitly allow states to use their unemployment trust funds to pay stc .

the federal government introduced a temporary , national stc program in 1982 with the tax equity and fiscal responsibility act ( tefra ; p.l .

97-248 ) .

motorola and the committee for economic development both lobbied in washington for the legislation .

the american federation of labor and congress of industrial organizations ( afl - cio ) , after some initial opposition , came to support stc provided that safeguards were incorporated to protect pension and health insurance benefits and to secure union certification for employers' work sharing plans .

tefra , which expired in 1985 after three years , authorized states to use monies in their state accounts in the unemployment trust fund to pay stc benefits to eligible employees whose work hours had been reduced by at least 10% under a qualified employer work sharing plan .

the law required the employer to draw up a formal work sharing plan and to seek the relevant state agency's approval of the plan as well as certification by the relevant union ( s ) if applicable .

tefra also provided that employees who received stc benefits would not be required to meet a state's work search and refusal of suitable work requirements for unemployment benefits .

employees would , however , be required to be available to work a normal work week .

tefra required employers to continue to provide health and pension benefits to employees whose workweek was reduced as if the employees worked their normal hours .

the act required that employers who used stc be charged in the same manner as other ui taxes , in order to ensure that stc costs were paid by participating employers instead of being passed on to other employers .

tefra directed the secretary of labor to develop model stc legislation for use by the states and also to provide technical assistance to states .

finally , p.l .

97-248 directed the secretary of labor to submit a final report evaluating the program and making recommendations .

u.s. dol published model state legislative language and guidelines in july 1983 .

during tefra's three - year experimental period , eight additional states enacted stc programs .

following the expiration of the three - year temporary program in 1985 , the existing state programs continued .

u.s. dol stopped promoting stc when its mandate to act expired with the end of the temporary federal law .

however , u.s. dol did not curtail the program's operation in existing states , nor did it stop new states from adopting the program .

u.s. dol allowed states to use the expired 1983 federal guidance and continued to collect reporting data on stc programs in the states .

the recession of 1990-1991 renewed attention to stc , leading congress to enact permanent stc legislation , the unemployment compensation amendments of 1992 ( uca ; p.l .

102-318 ) .

the 1992 law amended the internal revenue code to authorize states to pay stc benefits from their accounts in the unemployment trust fund .

uca essentially consisted of a five - point definition of stc as a program under which ( 1 ) individuals' workweeks were reduced by at least 10% ; ( 2 )  stc was paid as a pro rata portion of the full unemployment benefit that an individual would have received if totally unemployed ; ( 3 ) stc beneficiaries were not required to meet availability for work and work search requirements , unlike beneficiaries of regular unemployment compensation , but they were required to be available for their normal work week ; ( 4 ) stc beneficiaries could participate in employer - sponsored training programs ; and ( 5 ) the reduction in work hours was in lieu of layoffs .

uca also directed the secretary of labor to assist states in establishing and implementing stc programs by developing model legislative language and providing technical assistance and guidance to the states .

finally , uca directed u.s. dol to report on implementation of the stc program .

uca did not contain the employee and employer safeguards that had been present in tefra .

in particular , uca did not require employers to do the following: submit work sharing plans to the state for approval ; certify to the relevant state agency that the reduction in work hours was in lieu of temporary layoffs ; win consent from the relevant union ( s ) ; or contribute to health insurance or pension plans as if the employee continued to be fully employed .

uca also did not contain the tefra provision that stc be charged to employers "in a manner consistent with the state law" for the purposes of determining state unemployment taxes on employers ( p.l .

97-248 §194 ( e ) ) .

finally , uca did not give the u.s. secretary of labor the ability to determine what program elements would be appropriate beyond the 1992 law's five definitional items .

these provisions were removed by committee staff in order to give states more flexibility .

from 1992 until 2012 ( when congress passed p.l .

112-96 ) , u.s. dol largely sidestepped implementation of stc , neither developing new model state legislative language nor providing new guidance to the states .

u.s. dol did , however , support a study of the program ( the 1997 study by berkeley planning associates and mathematica ) .

shortly after enactment of the 1992 law , u.s. dol and clinton administration officials claimed the permanent federal law was "unworkable," according to an article by david e. balducchi and steven wandner ( hereinafter , balducchi and wandner ) .

at the time , government officials argued that the 1992 law was restrictive in application and would have put many existing state stc programs out of compliance .

for example , clinton administration and u.s. dol officials were concerned that existing state provisions requiring employers to continue to provide health and pension benefits were out of compliance with uca's definition of stc , and u.s. dol would need to require states to roll back these provisions .

stc is currently legislated in just over half of the states and the district of columbia .

in these states , it has never reached a large number of workers , although there is evidence of increased use in 2009 through 2011 .

congress passed p.l .

112-96 in february 2012 to promote state adoption and implementation of stc programs ; however , stc remains a little - used program .

currently , 27 states and the district of columbia have active stc programs .

table a - 1 displays how stc is implemented in those states .

the basic structure of each state's stc program is broadly similar: eligible individuals have had their workweeks reduced by at least 10% , and this reduction in work hours must be in lieu of temporary layoffs .

the amount of unemployment compensation payable to an individual is a pro rata share of the unemployment compensation to which that individual would have been entitled if he or she had been totally unemployed .

eligible employees are not required to meet the "able and available for work" requirement of regular unemployment compensation , but they must be available for their normal workweek .

finally , eligible employees may participate in an employer - sponsored training program .

within these broad outlines there is considerable variation among states .

an employer's stc agreement cannot exceed a period of 6 months in 5 states but may span up to approximately 1 year in 20 states and the district of columbia .

an individual may receive stc benefits for up to 18 weeks in colorado or for up to 52 weeks in 8 states .

alternatively , california , michigan , washington , and wisconsin place no limits on the number of weeks a worker may receive stc benefits , although these states have caps on total benefits paid to an individual to the maximum potential total uc entitlement .

