the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , subsequent biological incidents , and natural threats such as hurricanes or pandemic illness , have motivated consideration of contingency planning options in the federal government and the private sector .

contingency planning incorporates a broad array of planning processes and preparedness capacities , including basic emergency preparedness and recovery plans leading to the resumption of normal operations of an organization .

in congress , contingency planning efforts include the consideration of options for the succession of congressional leadership , or for filling multiple vacancies in either chamber that might occur due to wide - scale death of members or their absence from congress due to injury or incapacitation .

concerns have been expressed that following an incident in which many members of congress are killed , incapacitated , or missing , a delay in seating new members , or identifying sitting members who might continue to serve , could adversely affect the ability of congress to carry out its constitutional responsibilities .

some efforts to incorporate member replacement activities into legislative branch emergency preparedness planning may raise constitutional issues .

prior to the september 2001 attacks , congressional practice regarding disruptions of membership in either chamber was dependent on the type of disruption .

the confirmed death of an individual member in either chamber creates an automatic vacancy which could be filled under existing procedures .

in the house , the existence of a vacancy is communicated to the appropriate state , and a special election to fill the seat is held pursuant to state law .

the laws of most states authorize governors to make temporary appointments to the senate , with some exceptions .

where procedures regarding the death of a member of congress are well established , matters related to the capacity or availability of a member to serve have been addressed by the house and senate only on a case by case basis .

in instances of death or incapacitation , congressional practices appear to assume a membership disruption of one member at a time , and do not address the potential implications of mass congressional casualties , or the perceived need to quickly reconvene congress after an incident so it can continue to carry out its constitutional responsibilities .

while issues related to members who are missing or incapacitated affect both chambers , concerns related to mass vacancies in membership appear to fall more heavily on the house , due to the requirement that its members be selected only by election .

as a consequence , questions have been raised about the ability of the house to meet constitutionally mandated quorum requirements to conduct business after an incident in which many members may have been killed or injured , or go missing .

in response , during the 109 th congress ( 2005-2006 ) , the house adopted rules to establish a provisional quorum after catastrophic circumstances , formally codifying longstanding house practice that a quorum is a majority of the members elected , sworn , and living .

in practice , the speaker or speaker pro tempore now typically announces a revised whole number of the house in light of changes in the membership of the house , but the question of whether a provisional quorum is constitutional has not been addressed .

in addition to rules changes , during the 109 th congress , legislation was enacted to require states to hold special house elections when extraordinary circumstances cause mass vacancies in the house .

the act provides that extraordinary circumstances exist following an announcement by the speaker of the house that vacancies in the chamber have exceeded 100 seats .

states in which a vacancy exists in its house representation are then required to hold a special election within 49 days , subject to some exceptions .

states are required to ( 1 ) make a determination of the candidates who will run in the special election not later than 10 days after the vacancy announcement by the political parties authorized by state law to nominate candidates , or by any other method the state considers appropriate ; ( 2 ) ensure to the greatest extent practicable that absentee ballots for the election are transmitted to absent uniformed services voters and overseas voters not later than 15 days after the speaker announces that the vacancy exists ; and ( 3 ) accept and process any otherwise valid ballot or other election material from an absent uniformed services voter or an overseas voter , as long as the ballot or other material is received by the appropriate state election official not later than 45 days after the state transmits the ballot to the voter .

those who support the adjustment of the quorum and the enactment of law to require special elections in extraordinary circumstances believe those provisions afford the house sufficient institutional protections .

some critics argue that those actions are insufficient .

the critics argue that holding special elections to seat new representatives up to seven weeks after an announcement of extraordinary circumstances could deprive the nation of a functional , broadly representative legislative response at a time of great national challenge .

others raise what they believe to be constitutional concerns related to provisional quorum rules .

those who oppose current house practices regarding provisional quorum procedures argue that , contrary to longstanding house practice , quorum requirements are based on the number of seats in either chamber , and not on the number of members present to conduct business .

article i , section 5 , clause 1 of the constitution states , in part , that " ... a majority of each [chamber] shall constitute a quorum to do business ... ," but does not specify whether the majority is based on members or the number of seats authorized for the chamber .

observers raising constitutional concerns believe that if more than half of the 435 seats in the house , or the 100 seats in the senate , were vacant because the members who held them were killed , or those members were unable to serve because they were incapacitated or missing in the aftermath of an incident , any actions taken by fewer than a majority of the remaining members in either chamber could be seen as potentially illegitimate , and arguably unconstitutional .

actions in the house have attempted to enable the chamber to withstand a range of interruptions that could kill or incapacitate large numbers of members , while supporting the principle that membership in the chamber is gained only through election by the people .

in the senate , most vacant seats could be replenished in a relatively brief period through appointments ( assuming state - based authorities were available to make such appointments ) , but similar questions may arise if a sufficient number of senators survive but are incapacitated , or if their whereabouts are unknown , and the senate cannot meet with a quorum to do business .

as a consequence , some observers argue that the policies adopted or enacted since 2001 may not provide adequate protection against a sudden loss of membership in either chamber , and may raise constitutional and implementation concerns .

they believe that these concerns can only be remedied by amending the constitution to allow for the rapid replenishment of vacant seats in the event of a significant loss of membership in either chamber .

several proposed constitutional amendments to address the consequences of catastrophic losses of congressional membership have been introduced since the 2001 attacks .

during another period of uncertainty , 1946 to 1962 , similar measures were proposed .

in current times , the perceived need for such measures is based on the possibility that terrorists could target congress itself , or the washington , dc , region .

earlier , the emergence of the cold war between the united states and its allies and the soviet union and its allies , the successful testing of an atomic bomb by the soviets in september 1949 , and subsequent claims that it might be stockpiling atomic weapons , brought considerable interest to the issue of filling congressional vacancies in the event of a national emergency among some members of congress .

more than 30 proposed constitutional amendments , which provided for temporarily filling house vacancies or selecting successors in case of the disability of a significant number of representatives , were introduced from the 79 th congress ( 1945-1947 ) through the 87 th congress ( 1961-1963 ) .

during that period , hearings were held in the house and senate .

on three occasions , the senate committee on the judiciary reported a proposal , and three proposals were passed on the senate floor .

from 1954 through 1960 , the senate passed by large margins three proposed constitutional amendments that provided for temporarily filling house vacancies due to a national emergency .

the first proposal , s.j.res .

39 , was amended and passed by a vote of 70-1 on june 4 , 1954 .

it authorized governors to make temporary appointments to the house after notification of vacancies and "whenever by reason of the occurrence of acts of violence during any national emergency or national disaster , the total number of vacancies in the house of representatives shall exceed one hundred and forty - five.... " the house took no action on the measure .

the second proposal , s.j.res .

8 , was passed by a vote of 76-3 on may 19 , 1955 .

it provided that when the number of vacancies in the house was greater than one half of the authorized membership , for a period of 60 days a state governor would have authority to make temporary appointments to fill any vacancies in the representation from his state in the house of representatives .

s.j.res .

8 was referred to the house judiciary committee ; no further action was taken .

the senate passed the third proposed constitutional amendment , s.j.res .

39 , on february 2 , 1960 , by a vote of 70-18 .

it authorized governors to fill vacancies in the house "on any date that the total number of vacancies ... exceeds half of the authorized membership. .

the governor's appointive authority would have been limited to 60 days , and the appointee would have served until a successor was elected in a special election .

in house action on the measure , continuity provisions were struck .

many of the proposals introduced since 2001 and between 1946 and 1962 have been designed to address two or more of the following issues: the conditions under which the vacancies would be filled , the number or percentage of vacancies needed to invoke implementation of the measure , the selecting agents , and the duration of the temporary appointments .

for example , some proposals would have directed state legislatures to meet and select persons to take the place of such senators or representatives .

the measures also stipulated that this procedure would go into effect only if a majority of the house or senate were unable to perform their duties .

some of the earlier proposals required a notification procedure in which the president , the speaker of the house , or some other specified official would be required first to declare that a national emergency or disaster existed and that a specified number of the seats in the house or senate were vacant .

governors would then make temporary appointments until elections could be held .

the notification process raised a number of questions related to the definition of terms and the establishment of procedures .

for example "national disaster" was not specified , and it was not always clear who would determine when it occurred .

to address those concerns , later measures would have authorized governors to make temporary appointments to the house when vacancies in the house exceeded half of the authorized membership .

some post - 2001 proposals limited the scope of potential appointees to those specified in advance by a representative or those who were elected in their own right as an alternate representative .

table 1 provides a summary of measures introduced since 2001 .

recent arguments in favor of , or in opposition to , amending the constitution to provide for the temporary appointment of senators or representatives are similar to those made during the early years of the cold war .

the events of september 11 , 2001 , and actions taken in response , however , may have altered the circumstances under which those issues are considered .

some concern has been expressed that the advent of suicidal terrorists who are independent of national governments and , thus , may not be deterred from using weapons of mass destruction ( wmd ) because of the possible consequences for their own people , may make the use of these weapons more likely in the future .

on the other hand , the lack of state support , or the challenges of acquiring or improvising a wmd , and then delivering it to a target that affects significant numbers of members of congress , might prove beyond the capacity of a terrorist adversary .

at the same time , some observers argue that the united states capitol and congress have been targeted in the past , and that they continue to be targets of high social , political , and symbolic significance .

if congress believes that no action is needed to ensure the continuity of congressional representation , it might continue the status quo .

otherwise , congress may explore additional statutory or constitutional approaches to address issues related to congressional representation in contingent circumstances .

in doing so , it would face consideration of the balance between the demands of representative government on the one hand , and what some perceive as a need to assure that the legislative branch maintains the capacity to quickly carry out its constitutional responsibilities in challenging circumstances on the other .

it may also take into account the extent to which further consideration of these issues might be necessary , or whether developing additional plans for continuity of representation would better prepare congress to withstand potential interruptions .

