the location and permitting of facilities used to transmit electricity to residential and commercial customers have been the province of the states ( with limited exceptions ) for virtually the entire history of the electricity industry .

state and local governments are well positioned to weigh the local factors that go into siting decisions , including environmental and scenery concerns , zoning issues , development plans , and safety concerns .

because the grid formerly consisted of many localized transmission and distribution networks , federal interest in siting of the transmission system was limited .

although the federal government has increasingly exercised its authority over transmission reliability , it has , for the most part , left transmission siting decisions to states .

however , as concerns over grid congestion and its impact on reliability have grown , the federal government has carved out a role in transmission siting as a "backstop" siting authority in designated transmission corridors .

although this new role has met some resistance from those who oppose expanding federal authority over siting , other policymakers and commentators have advocated an increased federal role in order to encourage development of renewable energy , which is often located in remote areas that are not easily connected with the interstate grid .

the courts have also thwarted the federal government's efforts to create transmission corridors .

in 2011 , the ninth circuit vacated the department of energy's congestion study underlying the designation of national interest electric transmission corridors , and as a result , there are presently no such corridors in effect .

moreover , the fourth circuit reversed ferc's interpretation of its siting authority with respect to electric transmission facility applications that have been rejected by a state agency .

the increased federal role in transmission siting decisions raises a number of legal and policy issues .

foremost among these are the concerns over loss of local and regional input and control that often accompany an expansion of federal power into a process traditionally reserved for the states .

indeed , the federal power act specifically reserves certain aspects of governance over the electricity industry to the states , and efforts to expand the federal role in the past have met with resistance from state public utility commissions and advocates of federalism .

this report provides a review of the history of transmission siting ; a summary and analysis federal authority to designate transmission corridors and provide backstop siting authority for transmission facilities in those corridors ; a discussion of the legal issues associated with this expansion of federal authority and any future expansions of federal transmission siting authority ; and a look at recent developments concerning transmission siting on federal lands .

in order to understand the issues that arise from federal involvement in electricity transmission siting decisions , it is necessary to briefly review the history of the power industry and the development of the transmission grid .

transmission lines connect power generation facilities to distribution systems that make final delivery of electricity to commercial and residential customers .

for most of the 20 th century , these lines were generally constructed and operated by "vertically integrated" electric utilities ; that is , state - authorized and state - regulated monopolies that owned power generation plants , transmission facilities , and local distribution systems , and ultimately sold electricity to retail customers .

while these transmission lines were almost exclusively intrastate in nature at first , the transmission system expanded rapidly to include interstate transmission lines .

the federal power act ( fpa ) , first enacted in 1920 as the federal water power act and amended to include interstate electricity transmission in 1935 , granted the federal power commission jurisdiction over wholesale electric power transactions and the interstate transmission of electric power .

the states , for the most part , retained jurisdiction over the siting of generation and transmission facilities as well as the pricing of most retail electric power transactions .

over the next several decades , this mostly local electric power system began to interconnect into larger regional grids .

interconnections were motivated by the reliability benefits of connecting a utility to its neighbors , opportunities for power sales , and joint ownership of increasingly large and expensive power plants .

the development of higher voltage transmission lines — which made it possible to transmit electricity long distances with relatively small losses — also spurred interconnection .

throughout this expansion , the states continued to be the sole authority for most decisions about where to site electric power transmission facilities .

federal transmission systems , such as the tennessee valley authority and some municipal and cooperative utility systems , were able to site transmission lines independent of state authority .

however , the vast majority of transmission facilities were constructed by investor - owned utilities under state jurisdiction .

difficulty in constructing new transmission led congress to include federal transmission siting authority as part of the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact ) .

one section of epact authorized the department of energy ( doe ) to designate "national interest electric transmission corridors" based on doe's findings after conducting a study of congestion as directed by epact .

epact authorized ferc to permit the construction and operation of electricity transmission facilities within the boundaries of the national interest electric transmission corridors .

this authority may not be exercised by ferc unless the state where the facility would be sited lacks the authority to issue the permit , the applicant does not qualify for the permit in the state , or the state has "withheld approval" of the permit for more than one year .

the federal transmission siting authority created in epact is a "backstop" authority that is exercised only if the state cannot authorize the facility or if it has "withheld approval. .

this authority , which is discussed in detail infra , was adopted after the blackouts in august of 2003 that interrupted service , in some cases for days , to many customers across the northeastern united states and in canada .

epact directed the secretary of energy to designate the corridors only in areas in which it finds "electric energy transmission capacity constraints or congestion that adversely affects consumers. .

in addition , ferc was authorized to permit transmission facilities only upon a finding that the proposed construction or modifications would "significantly reduce transmission congestion in interstate commerce and protects or benefits consumers. .

recent events , however , have led some legislators and commentators to push to expand the federal role in transmission siting .

some have advocated an expanded federal role as a means to encourage development of green energy technology .

others have suggested that a recent ruling by the u.s. court of appeals for the fourth circuit interpreting the transmission siting section of epact has limited federal siting authority too severely , and that legislation is needed to expand ferc's siting authority to guard against future congestion problems .

these concerns , and some of the proposals that address them , are explored further below .

traditionally , the federal government has had a limited role in electric facility transmission siting , as siting decisions have in large part been made by state agencies .

however , in recent years there has been a push to expand the federal role in transmission siting .

the energy policy act of 2005 created a "backstop" siting authority for ferc in certain instances where grid congestion was a concern .

recently there have been suggestions and legislative proposals that would further expand the federal role in electric facility transmission siting .

legal precedent suggests that federal involvement with transmission siting would likely pass constitutional muster , assuming a connection to interstate commerce is shown .

however , federal courts of appeals have impeded the government's attempts to create transmission corridors and issue electric transmission facility permits in the absence of state approval .

