producers , consumers , and members of congress have expressed strong interest in the connection between farm prices for agricultural commodities and retail prices for food products .

their interest and concerns have been heightened in recent years ( particularly since 2006 ) , as prices for many farm commodities have soared to record highs — first in 2008 , and again in 2011 , 2013 , and 2014 — pulling wholesale and retail prices along with them .

while farm prices eventually receded in each instance , most retail prices held firm or declined only slightly ( figure 12 ) .

when a consumer spends a dollar for food at the supermarket , not all of the dollar reaches the farmer .

as the raw ingredients for retail food items move along the marketing chain from the farm to a grain elevator or collection terminal , then on to a processor , a wholesaler , and finally to the retail customer , an array of costs is layered on top of the price of the raw agricultural commodity ( figure 1 ) .

these marketing costs include labor expenses for handling , sorting , cleaning , and packaging the product ; transportation charges to move the product along at each stage ; and fees for processing , storing , insuring , financing , and retailing the product ( eg , store maintenance and utilities , refrigeration , labeling , shelf display , and advertising and promotional costs ) .

the farm share of the market price declines as a commodity moves from the farm to the retail outlet and consumer .

the relative importance of the marketing costs ( or marketing value - added ) versus raw farm input costs varies widely across retail food products depending on the degree of processing and transformation .

for eggs , fresh meat , and raw fruits and vegetables , this marketing chain may be significantly shorter than for highly processed products , such as a box of breakfast cereal or a ready - to - eat meal .

marketing costs can also vary by type of retail outlet — for example , consider the differences for a farmer's market , big box discount store , local supermarket , in - store deli , 24-hour quick - mart , or ballpark concession stand — as some outlets include substantially more marketing and retailing costs than others .

the consumer's food dollar can be divided into two major components ( figure 1 ) : the farm - value share , which measures proceeds of farm commodity sales tied to a food dollar expenditure and sold to non - farm establishments ; and the value - added marketing share , which is the market value added to farm commodities that are embodied in a food dollar expenditure .

understanding the economic forces affecting both the farm - value and marketing value - added shares of the consumer's food dollar provide useful information concerning the potential effect of a farm price change on retail prices , and vice versa .

the farm - value share of consumer food expenditures also has fallen by more than half , from 41% in 1950 to 17.4% in 2013 ( figure 2 ) .

this means that u.s. farmers have been receiving an increasingly smaller share of what consumers pay for many retail food products over time .

however , this should not be misconstrued to suggest that marketing costs are too high or that farmers' well - being has declined .

these statistics do not address either of those issues .

marketing services expand in direct response to consumer demand for more marketing services , which , in turn , occurs for a variety of reasons .

price is the primary mechanism by which various levels of the market system are linked .

while farmers and consumers sometimes do meet directly in farmers' markets , in most cases the raw farm product is separated from the retail food product by a complex processing and distribution system .

farm - to - retail price changes may originate from three potential sources: ( 1 ) changes in farm prices ; ( 2 ) changes in prices of marketing inputs along the farm - to - retail marketing chain ; or ( 3 ) changes in retail prices .

this section will briefly discuss the various factors involved in understanding farm - to - retail price linkages — in particular , how they are measured and what influences them .

during the 2006 to 2009 period , the news media reported on unusually wide variances between low farm and high retail prices , suggesting that perhaps some food retailers were profiting unfairly by engaging in price gouging .

the retail grocery business is highly competitive , making it unlikely that such activity could occur either on a large scale or for a sustained period of time .

sometimes consumers tend to focus on a single highly visible item that is purchased routinely ( such as milk ) to draw their conclusions about retail price responsiveness and market power , without fully understanding the time lag involved in a farm - to - retail price response for most commodities .

another retail marketing consideration that may cloud retail price perceptions by consumers ( about whether asymmetric price transmission has occurred ) is the use of "loss leader" items , whereby a retail outlet sets the price for highly visible consumer items at below cost as a marketing strategy to attract consumers into the store .

supplementary consumer purchases of other goods with normal retail markups would then offset the loss on the leader items .

consumers may be easily confused when neighboring stores use different products as loss leaders , particularly in a period of volatile prices .

this final section uses national average price data to examine the farm - to - retail price linkages for several major commodities since 2006 when volatile prices characterized many agricultural markets .

this section is followed ( in appendix ) by a series of comparisons of actual price data for certain select retail food products and their corresponding agricultural commodities .

price indexes for major food groups are presented in a series of graphs to allow for a visual comparison of farm , wholesale ( when available ) , and retail price movements for differences in magnitude , timing , and asymmetry in adjustment .

national aggregate price indexes are presented in figure 12 and include: farm level represented by usda monthly average farm price ( mafp ) received for relevant food commodities , wholesale level represented by bls producer price index ( ppi ) for finished consumer foods , and retail level represented by bls consumer price index ( cpi ) for food - at - home purchases .

in 2008 , prices for many farm commodities rose to record highs in the first half of the year .

this scenario of rapidly rising farm prices ( driven by tight supplies , drought , and other factors ) occurred again three more times since 2009 — late 2010 and early 2011 , late 2012 , and early 2014 .

in each case , the farm price run - ups eventually worked their way through the marketing system , first to wholesalers , then to consumers , where they translated into higher retail food prices .

but the farm price rises were short - lived in each instance .

prices for most farm commodities eventually reversed direction and , in nearly every case , declined to such an extent that they gave back much , if not all , of the original rise .

in contrast , most wholesale and retail prices leveled off or declined only slowly and only partially relative to the original price rise .

the spread between the food - at - home cpi ( reflecting retail prices ) and the ppi for finished consumer foods ( reflecting wholesale prices ) is often studied by market analysts as a gauge for grocer margins .

clearly , by this comparison , the first three months of 2009 ( figure 12 ) , when the cpi exceeded the ppi , represented a period of profitable margins for grocers ( as did the first half of 2006 ) .

of course , retail price changes vary widely by specific commodity and market .

grocery store sales are generally competitive and , as a result , most prices stay within a fairly narrow trading range to avoid altering consumer behavior .

in addition , the value added by the food marketing system is largely independent of farm prices , as evidenced when consumer prices have held steady or risen in the face of a decline in farm prices .

historically farm prices have been subject to significant downward pressure due to tremendous gains in agricultural productivity resulting from improvements in farm machinery , cultivation and conservation practices , fertilizers and pesticides , animal husbandry , and animal and plant genetics .

these productivity gains , in turn , have resulted in agricultural output tending to expand faster than demand .

as a result , farm prices declined in real terms steadily from the late 1940s until 2006 , as exemplified by the farm price of corn ( figure 13 ) .

several major market - shifting factors have emerged since 2006 — including increased demand for corn under strong federal biofuels incentives , a prolonged surge in china's soybean import demand , and the severe u.s. drought of 2012 — that resulted in tight u.s. and global grain and oilseed supplies and sharply higher farm and wholesale commodity prices through most of 2013 .

since 2014 , a return to normal weather has helped farm production to catch up with demand and pressure most commodity prices lower .

in contrast , the marketing bill has been subject to general inflationary pressures despite certain technological gains ( eg , in the processing , storage , and transportation sectors ) .

as a result , the food marketing bill has risen rapidly in nominal dollars , and slowly but steadily in real terms ( figure 4 ) .

as a result , the farm share has tended to decline for most foods , while farm - to - consumer price spreads have widened .

this is indicative of the extent to which the components of general inflation ( i.e. , energy , labor , rental rates , etc. ) .

have increased in importance as a share of retail food prices .

this section uses a series of charts ( figure 14 to figure 20 ) to compare price indexes for farm , wholesale ( when available ) , and retail prices for several major food groups .

the monthly average farm price ( mafp ) - received data represent national averages that have been adjusted to comparable indexes where the average price for the year 2006 = 100 .

this allows a pure comparison across all prices indexes — farm ( mafp ) , wholesale ( ppi ) , and retail ( food - at - home cpi ) — relative to their 2006 base .

as mentioned earlier , most agricultural prices began their rise in 2006 , making it an obvious point of comparison .

readers should note that , in every case: the farm and wholesale price movements are substantially larger than the corresponding retail price movements ; and the retail price peak follows the farm price peak with a lag of one to two months , with the exception of egg prices , where the farm and retail price indexes peaked in the same month , and cereal and bakery products , which peaked several months later than the farm price .

this appendix includes several figures that graph retail and farm prices for those food products that have clearly identifiable farm commodities as their raw ingredient .

the farm prices are national average farm prices received as reported monthly by the national agricultural statistics service ( nass ) of usda .

the retail prices are u.s. city average retail prices as reported monthly by the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) .

in all the figures presented here , retail prices are highly correlated with the farm price of their corresponding raw commodity .

in most cases , retail prices alter their direction in response to farm prices changes with only a slight lag .

