the administration requested a total budget authority of $67.551 billion in budget authority for commerce , justice , science , and related agencies ( cjs ) for fy2010 .

this amounts to a $6.904 billion , or 11.1% increase over the $60.79 billion enacted for fy2009 ( not including funding included in the american recovery and reinvestment act , p.l .

111-5 ) .

the administration's proposal included $13.789 billion for commerce , $27.074 billon for justice , $25.737 billion for science , and $950.9 million for related agencies .

on june 12 , 2009 , the house appropriations committee reported the fy2010 cjs appropriations bill ( h.r .

2847 ) .

the house passed h.r .

2847 on june 18 , 2009 .

the house - passed bill included a total of $67.695 billion for cjs , 11.4% more than the total appropriated for fy2009 and 0.2% more than the administration's fy2010 request .

on june 25 , 2009 , the senate appropriations committee reported h.r .

2847 with an amendment in the nature of a substitute .

the senate passed its version of h.r .

2847 on november 5 , 2009 .

the senate - passed version of h.r .

2847 would have provided a total of $67.953 billion for cjs .

the proposed amount would have represented a 11.8% increase over what was appropriated for fy2009 .

the senate - passed amount would have been a 0.6% increase over the administration's request , and it would have been 0.4% more than what was included in the house - passed bill .

the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-32 ) , was signed into law by president obama on june 24 , 2009 .

the supplemental appropriations act provided a total of $205.1 million for cjs departments and agencies .

of this amount , $40.0 million was for the department of commerce and $165.1 million was for the department of justice ( doj ) .

on december 8 , 2009 , a conference committee met to resolve differences between the house - and senate - passed versions of transportation - housing and urban development ( hud ) appropriations bill ( h.r .

3288 ) .

the version of h.r .

3288 reported by the conference committee — now entitled the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 — included six of the seven fy2010 appropriations bills that had not yet been signed into law .

on december 16 , 2009 , president obama signed the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 , hereafter , "the act" ) into law .

the act includes a total of $68.705 billion for cjs , an amount that is 13.0% more than the fy2009-enacted amount , 1.7% more than the administration's request , 1.5% more than the house - passed amount , and 1.1% more than the senate - passed amount .

the origin of the department of commerce ( commerce department ) dates to 1903 with the establishment of the department of commerce and labor .

the separate commerce department was established on march 4 , 1913 .

the department's responsibilities are numerous and quite varied ; its activities center on five basic missions: ( 1 ) promoting the development of u.s. business and increasing foreign trade ; ( 2 ) improving the nation's technological competitiveness ; ( 3 ) encouraging economic development ; ( 4 ) fostering environmental stewardship and assessment ; and ( 5 ) compiling , analyzing , and disseminating statistical information on the u.s. economy and population .

the following agencies within the commerce department carry out these missions: international trade administration ( ita ) seeks to develop the export potential of u.s. firms and to improve the trade performance of u.s. industry ; bureau of industry and security ( bis ) , formerly the bureau of export administration , enforces u.s. export laws consistent with national security , foreign policy , and short - supply objectives ; economic development administration ( eda ) provides grants for economic development projects in economically distressed communities and regions ; minority business development agency ( mbda ) seeks to promote private and public sector investment in minority businesses ; economic and statistics administration ( esa ) , excluding the bureau of the census , provides ( 1 ) information on the state of the economy through preparation , development , and interpretation of economic data ; and ( 2 ) analytical support to department officials in meeting their policy responsibilities ; bureau of the census , a component of esa , collects , compiles , and publishes a broad range of economic , demographic , and social data ; national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) advises the president on domestic and international communications policy , manages the federal government's use of the radio frequency spectrum , and performs research in telecommunications sciences ; united states patent and trademark office ( uspto ) examines and approves applications for patents for claimed inventions and registration of trademarks ; national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) assists industry in developing technology to improve product quality , modernize manufacturing processes , ensure product reliability , and facilitate rapid commercialization of products on the basis of new scientific discoveries ; and national oceanic and atmospheric administration ( noaa ) provides scientific , technical , and management expertise to ( 1 ) promote safe and efficient marine and air navigation ; ( 2 ) assess the health of coastal and marine resources ; ( 3 ) monitor and predict the coastal , ocean , and global environments ( including weather forecasting ) ; and ( 4 ) protect and manage the nation's coastal resources .

established by an act of 1870 with the attorney general at its head , doj provides counsel for citizens in federal cases and protects them through law enforcement .

it represents the federal government in all proceedings , civil and criminal , before the supreme court .

in legal matters , generally , the department provides legal advice and opinions , upon request , to the president and executive branch department heads .

the major functions of doj agencies and offices are described below .

united states attorneys prosecute criminal offenses against the united states , represent the federal government in civil actions , and initiate proceedings for the collection of fines , penalties , and forfeitures owed to the united states .

united states marshals service provides security for the federal judiciary , protects witnesses , executes warrants and court orders , manages seized assets , detains and transports unsentenced prisoners , and apprehends fugitives .

federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) investigates violations of federal criminal law ; helps protect the united states against terrorism and hostile intelligence efforts ; provides assistance to other federal , state , and local law enforcement agencies ; and shares jurisdiction with drug enforcement administration over federal drug violations .

drug enforcement administration ( dea ) investigates federal drug law violations ; coordinates its efforts with state , local , and other federal law enforcement agencies ; develops and maintains drug intelligence systems ; regulates legitimate controlled substances activities ; and conducts joint intelligence - gathering activities with foreign governments .

bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) enforces federal law related to the manufacture , importation , and distribution of alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives .

it was transferred from the department of the treasury to the doj by the homeland security act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-296 ) .

federal prison system ( bureau of prisons ) provides for the custody and care of the federal prison population , the maintenance of prison - related facilities , and the boarding of sentenced federal prisoners incarcerated in state and local institutions .

office on violence against women coordinates legislative and other initiatives relating to violence against women and administers grant programs to help prevent , detect , and stop violence against women , including domestic violence , sexual assault , and stalking .

office of justice programs ( ojp ) manages and coordinates the activities of the bureau of justice assistance , bureau of justice statistics , national institute of justice , office of juvenile justice and delinquency prevention , and the office of victims of crime .

community oriented policing services ( cops ) advances the practice of community policing by awarding grants to law enforcement agencies to hire and train community policing professionals , acquire and deploy crime - fighting technologies , and develop and test innovative policing strategies .

most crime control has traditionally been a state and local responsibility .

with the passage of the crime control act of 1968 ( p.l .

90-351 ) , however , the federal role in the administration of criminal justice has increased incrementally .

since 1984 , congress has approved five major omnibus crime control bills , designating new federal crimes , penalties , and additional law enforcement assistance programs for state and local governments .

the science agencies fund and otherwise support research and development ( r&d ) and related activities across a wide - variety of federal missions , including national competitiveness , climate change , energy and the environment , and fundamental discovery .

president obama's fy2010 budget request included $25.737 billion for science agencies , an increase of $1.459 billion ( 6.0% ) over the enacted fy2009 amount of $24.278 billion ( see table 5 ) .

the fy2010 request included $423.0 million for the national science foundation's ( nsf ) participation in the national nanotechnology initiative ( nni ) and $16.6 million for the national aeronautics and space administration's ( nasa ) nanotechnology research and development ( r&d ) activities .

the house - passed bill included a total of $25.147 billion for the science agencies , a 3.6% increase over fy2009 appropriations for these agencies , but 2.3% less than the fy2010 requested funding .

the senate - passed bill provided a total of $25.609 billion for science agencies , 0.5% less than the administration's request , but 5.5% more than the fy2009-enacted funding and 1.8% more than the house - recommended amount .

the act provides $25,657.8 million to cjs science agencies for fy2010 , an increase of 5.7% above the fy2009 level , 0.3 percent less than the president's request , and above both the house - passed and senate - passed levels .

as shown in table 7 , the fy2009-enacted level included $872.4 million for related agencies .

the administration's request included a total of $950.9 million for related agencies , a proposed 9.0% increase in funding .

the house - passed bill would have provided a total of $956.2 million in funding for the related agencies .

this amount would have been 9.6% greater than what was appropriated for fy2009 and it would be 0.6% greater than the administration's request .

the senate - passed bill would have provided a total of $916.0 million for related agencies .

the senate - passed amount would have been 5.0% greater than the fy2009 appropriations for these agencies , but it would have been 3.7% less than the administration's requested funding and 4.2% less than the house - recommended amount .

the act provides a total of $934.8 million for the related agencies .

this amount is 7.4% more than the fy2009 appropriation and 2.1% more than what the senate recommended , but the fy2010 enacted amount is 1.7% less than the administration's request and 2.2% less than the house - passed amount .

established by the civil rights act of 1957 , the u.s. commission on civil rights ( the commission ) investigates allegations of citizens who may have been denied the right to vote based on color , race , religion , or national origin ; studies and gathers information on legal developments constituting a denial of the equal protection of the laws ; assesses the federal laws and policies in the area of civil rights ; and submits reports on its findings to the president and congress when the commission or the president deems it appropriate .

for fy2010 , president obama has requested $9.4 million for the commission compared to fy2009 appropriations of $8.8 million , which would have represented a 6.8% increase in funding .

the house - passed bill included $9.4 million for the commission , the same as the administration's request .

the senate recommended $9.4 million for the commission , the same as the administration's request and the house - recommended amount .

the act provides $9.4 million for the commission , the same as the administration's request and the house - and senate - passed amounts .

the eeoc enforces laws banning employment discrimination based on race , color , national origin , sex , age , or disability .

in recent years , appropriators have been particularly concerned about the agency's implementation of a restructuring plan , initiated in 2005 , that included the creation of the national contact center ( ncc ) , realignment of field structure and staff , and restructuring of headquarters operations .

in response to congressional concerns about call intake practices , the eeoc transitioned to an in - house call center , known as the intake information network , to replace the ncc .

the network handles all calls and starts processing queries immediately through an electronic assessment system .

the president requested $367.3 million for the eeoc for fy2010 , which is $23.4 million more than the fy2009-enacted level of $343.9 million .

the house - passed bill included $367.3 million for the eeoc , the same as the president's fy2010 budget request .

the senate - passed bill would have provided the same amount as the administration's request and the house - passed bill .

the act includes $367.3 million for the eeoc , the same amount as the president's request , and what was recommended by both the house and senate .

congress remains concerned about the backlog of private sector cases filed with the eeoc , which is projected to increase to 102,944 in fy2010 — 39% higher than the inventory at the end of fy2008 ( 73,951 ) .

although the fy2010 budget request included funding for hiring 224 full time equivalents — such as investigators , mediators , attorneys , and support staff — the conference committee recommends that the eeoc develop a multiyear plan for further increasing staffing to reduce expected increases in workload .

to monitor the adequacy of the commission's personnel resources , the conference committee directed the eeoc to submit quarterly reports on projected and actual staffing levels .

the projected increase in the agency's workload partly reflects the transition from a contractor - operated center to an in - house call center , which allows the public to begin the charge process online .

in addition , passage of the lilly ledbetter fair pay act ( p.l .

111-2 ) in january 2009 could increase charge filings .

the eeoc also anticipates that economic factors , such as higher unemployment rates , layoffs , and business closings , could affect the number of charges filed .

to increase the efficiency of the hearing process for federal employee cases , the eeoc intends to implement a system that divides cases into fast , regular , or complex discovery tracks .

the conference committee , in response , directs the eeoc to submit to congress an implementation plan within 60 days of enactment that includes background on the need for the tracking system , the plan's implementation schedule , and an analysis of the potential impact on federal employees of getting "a fair hearing" under the tracking system .

the itc is an independent , quasi - judicial agency established by congress that advises the president and congress on u.s. foreign economic policies .

the mission of itc can be categorized into three separate functions: ( 1 ) administering u.s. trade remedy laws within its mandate in a fair and objective manner ; ( 2 ) providing the president , the u.s. trade representative , and congress with independent analysis , information , and support on matters of tariffs and international trade and competitiveness ; and ( 3 ) maintaining the harmonized tariff schedule of the united states .

as a matter of policy , its budget request is submitted to congress by the president without revision .

the fy2010 enacted amount for itc is $81.9 million , $0.8 million ( 1.0% ) less than the administration's request of $82.7 million and $6.8 million more ( 9.0% ) than the fy2009-enacted appropriation of $75.1 million .

the budget request stated that the requested increase for fy2010 was primarily due to the acquisition of additional space to meet workload demands , as well as required increases in salaries and benefits .

the house - passed bill would have provided the same level of funding for the itc as the administration's request ( $82.7 million ) .

the senate - passed bill would have provided the same amount for itc as the administration's request and the house - passed bill .

the lsc is a private , non - profit , federally - funded corporation that provides grants to local offices that , in turn , provide legal assistance to low - income people in civil ( non - criminal ) cases .

the lsc has been controversial since its incorporation in the early 1970s and has been operating without authorizing legislation since 1980 .

there have been ongoing debates over the adequacy of funding for the agency and the extent to which certain types of activities are appropriate for federally funded legal aid attorneys to undertake .

in annual appropriations bills , congress traditionally has included legislative provisions restricting the activities of lsc - funded grantees , such as prohibiting any lobbying activities or prohibiting representation in certain types of cases .

current lsc funding remains below the lsc's highest funding level of $400 million in fy1994 and fy1995 .

for the first time in many years , the administration proposed to increase funding for the lsc .

for fy2010 , the obama administration requested $435.0 million for the lsc .

this amount was $45.0 million ( 11.5% ) above the fy2009 appropriation of $390.0 million for the lsc .

the house - passed bill would have provided $440.0 million for the lsc , which would have represented a 12.8% increase over fy2009 funding and 1.1% increase over the administration's request .

the senate recommended $400.0 million for lsc for fy2010 .

the proposed amount would have been 2.6% more than the fy2009 appropriation , but it was 8.0% less than the administration's request and 9.1% less than the house - passed amount .

the act provides $420.0 million for lsc , which is a 7.7% increase over lsc's fy2009 appropriation .

however , the fy2010 appropriation for lsc is 3.4% less than the administration's request and 4.5% less than the house recommended amount , but it 5.0% than what the senate recommended for lsc for fy2010 .

moreover , since its inception , the legal services program has been controversial .

congress through the lsc act and various annual appropriation laws has imposed many restrictions on activities of lsc - funded legal services programs .

the obama administration and certain congressional proposals would eliminate some of these restrictions .

the obama administration's fy2010 budget proposed that lsc restrictions on class action suits and attorneys' fees be eliminated .

a general provision in title v of the act revises the administrative provision in order to permit lsc grantees to pursue the recovery of attorney's fees when recovery is permitted or required under federal or state law .

the marine mammal commission is an independent agency of the executive branch , established under title ii of the marine mammal protection act ( mmpa ; p.l .

92-522 ) .

the marine mammal commission ( mmc ) and its committee of scientific advisors on marine mammals provide oversight and recommend actions on domestic and international topics to advance policies and provisions of the marine mammal protection act .

as funding permits , the marine mammal commission supports research to further the purposes of the mmpa .

for fy2010 , the administration proposed $3.0 million for necessary expenses of the marine mammal commission , a decrease of $200,000 ( 6.3% ) from the fy2009 appropriation of $3.2 million for this independent agency .

the house - passed bill included $3.3 million for the mmc , 3.1% more than fy2009 appropriations for the commission , and 10.0% greater than the fy2010 request .

the senate - passed bill would have provided approximately $3.3 million for the marine mammal commission for fy2010 .

the recommended amount would have been 1.6% more than the fy2009 appropriation and 8.3% more than the administration's request , but it was 1.5% less than the house - recommended amount .

the act provides approximately $3.3 million for the mmc , which represents a 1.6% increase compared to the fy2009 appropriation , a 8.3% increased compared to the president's request , a 1.5% decrease compared to the house - passed amount , and it is the same as the senate - passed amount .

the ustr , located in the executive office of the president , is responsible for developing and coordinating u.s. international trade and direct investment policies .

the ustr is the president's chief negotiator for international trade agreements , including commodity and direct investment negotiations .

ustr also conducts u.s. affairs related to the world trade organization .

the fy2010 enacted amount for ustr is $47.8 million , $0.5 million ( 1.0% ) less than the administration's request of $48.3 million and $0.5 million ( 1.2% ) more than the fy2009-enacted appropriation of $47.3 million .

the house - passed bill would have provided $48.3 million for this account , the same as the administration's request .

the senate - passed amount was the same as the administration's request and the house - recommended amount .

the sji is a nonprofit corporation that makes grants to state courts and funds research , technical assistance , and informational projects aimed at improving the quality of judicial administration in state courts across the united states .

it is governed by an 11-member board of directors appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate .

under the terms of its enabling legislation , sji is authorized to present its budget request directly to congress , apart from the president's budget .

the administration proposed $5.1 million in funding for sji for fy2010 , 25.1% more than the $4.1 million congress appropriated for sji for fy2009 .

the house - passed bill included $5.1 million for sji , the same level as the administration's request .

the senate - passed bill would have provided $5.0 million for sji , which was 22.0% more than the fy2009 appropriation but 2.6% less than the administration's request and the house - recommended funding .

the act includes $5.1 million for sji , the same as the administration's request and the house - passed amount and 2.6% more than the senate - passed amount .

