the annual interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill includes funding for agencies and programs in three separate federal departments , as well as numerous related agencies and bureaus .

it provides funding for department of the interior ( doi ) agencies ( except for the bureau of reclamation , funded in energy and water development appropriations laws ) , many of which manage land and other natural resource or regulatory programs .

the bill also provides funds for agencies in two other departments — the forest service in the department of agriculture , and the indian health service ( ihs ) in the department of health and human services — as well as funds for the environmental protection agency ( epa ) .

further , the annual bill includes funding for arts and cultural agencies , such as the smithsonian institution , the national endowment for the arts , and the national endowment for the humanities , and for numerous other entities and agencies .

in former years , the appropriations laws for interior and related agencies provided funds for several activities within the department of energy ( doe ) , including research , development , and conservation programs ; the naval petroleum reserves ; and the strategic petroleum reserve .

however , at the outset of the 109 th congress , these doe programs were transferred to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering energy and water , to consolidate jurisdiction over doe .

at the same time , jurisdiction over the epa and several smaller entities was moved to the house and senate appropriations subcommittees covering interior and related agencies .

this change resulted from the abolition of the house and senate appropriations subcommittees on veterans affairs , housing and urban development , and independent agencies , which previously had jurisdiction over epa .

since fy2006 , appropriations laws for interior , environment , and related agencies have contained three primary titles .

this report is organized along these lines .

the first section ( title i ) provides information on interior agencies ; the second section ( title ii ) discusses epa ; and the third section ( title iii ) addresses other agencies , programs , and entities .

a fourth section of this report discusses selected cross - cutting topics that encompass more than one agency .

entries in this report are for major agencies ( eg , the national park service ) and cross - cutting issues ( eg , everglades restoration ) that receive funding in the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

for each agency or issue , we discuss some of the key funding changes that appear to be of interest to congress .

we also address related policy issues that occur in the context of considering appropriations legislation .

appropriations are complex , and not all issues are summarized in this report .

for example , budget submissions for some agencies number several hundred pages and contain innumerable funding , programmatic , and legislative changes for congressional consideration .

further , appropriations laws provide funds for numerous accounts , activities , and subactivities , and the accompanying explanatory statements provide additional directives and other important information .

for information on programs funded in the bill but not directly discussed in this report , please contact the key policy staff members listed at the end of the report .

in general , in this report the term appropriations represents total funds available , including regular annual and supplemental appropriations , as well as rescissions , transfers , and deferrals , but excludes permanent mandatory budget authorities .

this report contains fy2009 appropriations levels for agencies , programs , and activities as enacted in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

funds generally are referred to as omnibus funds , or funds provided by the omnibus law .

increases and decreases generally are calculated on comparisons between these fy2009 omnibus funding levels and those supported by president obama or enacted for fy2010 .

p.l .

111-5 , the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , contained $10.95 billion in additional fy2009 funding for some of the agencies and programs typically funded by the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations bill .

this amount was a 40% supplement to the $27.59 billion in omnibus appropriations for fy2009 .

in general , the funds were made available for obligation until september 30 , 2010 ( the end of fy2010 ) .

they are discussed in the pertinent sections throughout this report , in both the text and accompanying tables .

they generally are referred to as stimulus funds , or funds provided by the stimulus law .

for additional information on these stimulus funds , including a detailed table , see crs report rl34461 , interior , environment , and related agencies: fy2009 appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

the house committee on appropriations is the primary source of the funding figures used throughout the report .

other sources of information include the senate committee on appropriations , agency budget justifications , and the congressional record .

references to the report of the house appropriations committee for fy2010 refer to h.rept .

111-180 , on h.r .

2996 .

references to the report of the senate appropriations committee for fy2010 refer to s.rept .

111-38 , on h.r .

2996 .

references to the conference report or the explanatory statement for fy2010 refer to h.rept .

111-316 , on h.r .

2996 .

in the tables throughout this report , some columns of funding figures do not match the precise totals provided due to rounding .

the epa's primary responsibilities include the regulation of air quality , water quality , pesticides , and toxic substances ; the regulation of the management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes ; and the cleanup of environmental contamination .

epa also distributes grants to assist states and local governments in complying with federal requirements to control pollution .

for fy2010 , the interior appropriations law provided $10.29 billion for epa , an increase above the $10.16 billion proposed by the senate but less than the $10.46 billion proposed by the house and the $10.49 billion included in the president's fy2010 budget request .

the fy2010 appropriation was 35% above the fy2009 omnibus appropriations of $7.64 billion for epa .

including the additional $7.22 billion in fy2009 stimulus appropriations , congress appropriated a total of $14.86 billion for epa in fy2009 .

table 12 presents funding levels proposed and enacted for fy2010 compared to appropriations enacted in fy2009 for the eight statutory accounts that fund epa .

altered natural flows of water by a series of canals , levees , and pumping stations , combined with agricultural and urban development , are thought to be the leading causes of environmental deterioration in south florida .

in 1996 , congress authorized the u.s. army corps of engineers ( corps ) to create a comprehensive plan to restore , protect , and preserve the entire south florida ecosystem , which includes the everglades ( p.l .

104-303 ) .

a portion of this plan , the comprehensive everglades restoration plan ( cerp ) , was completed in 1999 , and provides for federal involvement in restoring the ecosystem .

congress authorized the corps to implement cerp in title iv of the water resources development act of 2000 ( wrda 2000 , p.l .

106-541 ) .

while restoration activities in the south florida ecosystem are conducted under several federal laws , wrda 2000 is considered the seminal law for everglades restoration .

appropriations for restoration projects in the south florida ecosystem have been provided to various agencies in multiple annual appropriations bills .

the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations laws have provided funds to several doi agencies for restoration projects .

specifically , doi conducts cerp and non - cerp activities in southern florida through the national park service , fish and wildlife service , u.s. geological survey , and bureau of indian affairs .

from fy1993 to fy2009 , federal appropriations for projects and services related to the restoration of the south florida ecosystem exceeded $3.3 billion , and state funding topped $12.0 billion .

the average annual federal cost for restoration activities in southern florida in the next 10 years is expected to be approximately $286 million per year .

for fy2010 , the interior appropriations law did not specify total funding for everglades restoration in bill language or report language .

generally , total funding for everglades restoration for a fiscal year is not known until the administration's budget request is submitted for the subsequent year .

the modified water deliveries project ( mod waters ; see below for a description of the project ) , however , was addressed by the appropriations law .

the conference agreement specified $8.4 million for mod waters: $4.2 million to be used by the nps and $4.2 million to be used by the corps .

this funding level represented a significant reduction from the fy2009 omnibus level of $60.0 million for mod waters .

detailed information on doi activities related to everglades restoration is provided in table 18 .

mod waters is designed to improve water deliveries to everglades national park and , to the extent possible , to restore the natural hydrological conditions within the park .

the completion of this project is required prior to construction of certain projects under cerp .

funding and planning for the tamiami trail portion of mod waters is being conducted by the corps .

the fy2009 omnibus appropriations law provided that funding in the law , as well as any prior acts , for implementation of mod waters shall be made available to the corps to implement a project regarding the tamiami trail , as described in the limited reevaluation report with integrated environmental assessment and addendum ( lrr ) .

this report details a project to increase water flows southward to everglades national park by creating a 1-mile bridge on tamiami trail and increasing the height of a canal by 1 foot .

the project is expected to cost $227 million .

according to the conference report and the house appropriations committee report for fy2010 , funding for mod waters is expected to allow for continuous work on the tamiami trail and bridge modifications , which both reports state is to be completed at the earliest possible date .

the house committee further urged doi to continue its work on restoring the everglades and to focus on those projects with the greatest restoration benefits .

the level of commitment by the federal government to implement restoration activities in the everglades continues to receive attention .

some observers measure commitment by the frequency and number of projects authorized under cerp , and the appropriations they receive .

because only three restoration projects have been authorized since wrda 2000 , these observers are concerned that federal commitment to cerp implementation is waning .

others assert that the federal commitment will be measurable by the amount of federal funding for construction , expected when the first projects break ground in the next few years .

some state and federal officials contend that federal funding will increase compared to state funding as cerp projects move beyond design into construction .

still others question whether the federal government should maintain the current level of funding , or increase its commitment , because of escalating costs and project delays .

the lwcf ( 16 u.s.c .

§§ 460 l - 4 , et seq. ) .

is authorized at $900 million annually through fy2015 .

however , these funds may not be spent without an appropriation .

the lwcf is used for three purposes .

first , the four principal federal land management agencies — bureau of land management , fish and wildlife service , national park service , and forest service — draw primarily on the lwcf to acquire lands .

second , the lwcf funds acquisition and recreational development by state and local governments through a grant program administered by the nps , sometimes referred to as stateside funding .

third , congress has appropriated money from the lwcf to fund some related activities , with programs varying from year to year .

from fy1965 through fy2009 , about $32 billion was credited to the lwcf .

roughly $15 billion of that amount has been appropriated .

annual appropriations from lwcf have fluctuated considerably over time .

table 19 shows funding for lwcf since fy2006 .

for fy2010 , the administration , house , and senate supported increases in lwcf appropriations over the fy2009 total appropriation of $275.3 million .

the interior appropriations law for fy2010 provided even higher funding — a total of $450.4 million from lwcf .

the administration , house , and senate sought to increase funds for federal land acquisition for fy2010 over the fy2009 level of $152.2 million .

the fy2010 interior appropriations law provided still higher funding for land acquisition — $265.8 million .

the law also included an additional $12.1 million for land appraisals related to federal land acquisition , to be derived from lwcf , as had been supported by the administration , house , and senate .

most of the appropriations for federal acquisitions generally are specified for management units , such as a specific national wildlife refuge .

the fy2010 appropriation for land acquisition was more than double the level of five years ago — $111.9 million for fy2006 .

the variability of funding for this activity throughout history reflects a tension regarding the extent of federal land ownership .

the conferees on the fy2010 bill expressed concern with the processes for acquiring lands , and provided several related directives to the agencies .

conferees directed the agencies to use funds for inholdings to acquire high - priority lands that are threatened by development , and address delays in conducting land appraisals , including by considering alternative organizational structures .

the conferees expressed their intention that , to the maximum extent possible , there be a single set of policies among the four agencies for conducting land acquisitions .

they directed the doi and agriculture secretaries to jointly examine their acquisition policies and practices and to submit a report with findings and recommendations to the house and senate appropriations committees .

further , the conferees expressed concern that lands acquired with lwcf funds are being used in ways inconsistent with the recreation , conservation , or public access uses for which they were purchased , and directed the doi and agriculture secretaries to notify the appropriations committees before changing the use of the lands .

for stateside grants , the fy2010 appropriation was $40.0 million .

this was more than double the fy2009 level of $19.0 million .

the administration , house , and senate had sought increased funds for the stateside program over fy2009 .

the appropriations for the state grant program typically are not specified for individual projects or areas , but rather are allocated to states in accordance with a formula in law .

over the past decade ( since fy2000 ) , stateside funding has ranged from a high of $143.9 million in fy2002 to a low of $19.0 million in fy2009 .

through provisions of the gulf of mexico energy security act of 2006 ( p.l .

109-432 ) , a portion of revenues from certain ocs leasing are provided ( without further appropriation ) to the stateside grant program .

an estimated $9.7 million in revenue from such ocs leasing was projected to be collected in fy2009 and disbursed to the stateside program in fy2010 .

the administration , house , and senate had sought varying levels of funds from lwcf for two other purposes — fws cooperative endangered species grants and the fs forest legacy program .

the fy2010 interior appropriations law funded these two programs at $56.0 million and $76.5 million , respectively .

for fy2006 and fy2007 , the largest portion of the lwcf appropriation was for other programs , as shown in table 19 .

since fy2008 , the largest portion of the lwcf appropriation has been for land acquisition .

table 20 shows the other programs for which congress appropriated funds for fy2006 through fy2010 .

wildfire protection programs and funding continue to be controversial .

ongoing discussions include questions about the high cost of fire suppression efforts ; locations for various fire protection treatments ; and whether , and to what extent , environmental analysis , public involvement , and legal challenges to administrative decisions hinder fuel reduction and post - fire rehabilitation .

the fs and doi wildfire line items include funds for fire suppression , preparedness , and other operations .

comparing fy2010 appropriations with senate - and house - passed levels , administration - requested funds , and fy2009 appropriations is difficult .

this is due in part to the treatment of suppression funds and the inclusion of any emergency , contingency , and prior year funds .

for fy2010 , the interior appropriations law provided a total of $3.37 billion for the fs and doi for wildland fire management ( $2.52 billion for the fs and $855.9 million for doi ) , after adjusting for $200.0 million in prior - year funds .

including these prior - year funds , the statute contained $3.57 billion for fy2010 , which was $87.5 million ( 2% ) less than the house , $6.3 million ( 0.2% ) more than the senate , and $77.7 million ( 2% ) more than the request .

further , the fy2010 total was $183.5 million ( 5% ) less than total fy2009 funding ( including $250.0 million in fy2009 emergency funding in p.l .

111-32 and $515.0 million in the stimulus law , p.l .

111-5 . ) .

the fy2010 law established two new flame funds in title v — the federal land assistance , management , and enhancement ( flame ) act of 2009 — with related funding for doi and the fs .

both the senate and the house had included funding for a new fire suppression reserve , as had been proposed in the administration's request .

the senate also included funds for a recently authorized collaborative forest landscape restoration fund , and for a new flame fund in the section creating the fund .

 ( see " wildfire suppression and emergency funds ," below. ) .

see table 21 .

enacted fy2010 funding for wildfire preparedness — equipment , training , baseline personnel , fire prevention , and fire detection — totaled $965.5 million , $5.0 million more than the administration's request .

the statute matched the $675.0 million requested for fs fire preparedness , and was less than the senate - and house - passed levels .

for doi , the interior appropriations law provided $290.5 million , the same as the house - passed level , $1.3 million more than the senate - passed level , and $5.0 million ( 2% ) more than the administration's request .

for fy2010 , the interior appropriations law modified the traditional approach to funding wildfire suppression .

title v , the federal land assistance , management , and enhancement ( flame ) act of 2009 , established in the treasury the flame wildfire suppression reserve fund for doi and the flame wildfire suppression reserve fund for the department of agriculture ( for the forest service ) .

the funds are to be used to cover the costs of large or complex fires , when amounts provided in the wildland fire management accounts for suppression and emergency response are exhausted .

the requirements are the same for the two accounts .

each secretary may transfer funds from the flame fund into the respective wildland fire management account , for suppression activities , upon a secretarial declaration .

the declaration may be issued if the fire covers at least 300 acres or threatens lives , property , or resources , among other criteria .

the conferees stated their intent that the money in the flame funds , together with appropriations through the wildland fire management accounts , should fully fund suppression needs and prevent borrowing funds from other programs .

they directed the secretaries to develop new methods of estimating fire suppression funding needs as part of their fy2011 budget requests .

the interior appropriations law included $474.0 million ( $413.0 million for the fs and $61.0 million for doi ) for the flame funds .

this would supplement the fs and doi fire suppression funding in the law , which totaled $1.38 billion ( $997.5 million for the fs and $383.8 million for doi ) .

thus , fy2010 appropriations for wildfire suppression totaled $1.86 billion ( $1.41 billion for the fs and $444.8 million for doi ) .

the total wildfire suppression funding in the house - passed bill and the administration's request matched the enacted level , $1.86 billion , but differed in structure .

the administration and the house included $1.50 billion for wildfire suppression ( $1.13 billion for the fs and $369.8 million for doi ) , and $357.0 million for a proposed wildland fire suppression contingency reserve fund ( comprising $282.0 million for the fs and $75.0 million for doi ) .

the senate also had approved $1.86 billion , but structured the funding differently still .

the senate had provided $664.3 million for wildfire suppression ( $369.5 million for the fs and $294.8 million for doi ) , $357.0 in wildland fire suppression reserve funds ( $282.0 million for the fs and $75.0 million for doi ) , and $834.0 million for a new flame fund ( with no allocation between the fs and doi ) .

other wildland fire operations include an array of activities — burned area rehabilitation , biomass fuels reduction , research , and assistance to states and private entities .

for fy2010 , the interior appropriations law provided $751.9 million for other operations , $20.1 million ( 3% ) more than the senate , $69.4 million ( 8% ) less than the house , and $72.7 million ( 11% ) more than the administration's request .

fuel reduction — activities to protect resources and infrastructure by removing "excess" biomass fuels from forests — has received the bulk of other operations funding .

 ( for background , see crs report r40811 , wildfire fuels and fuel reduction , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

the interior appropriations law provided $556.5 million for fuel reduction in fy2010 ( $350.3 million for the fs and $206.2 million for doi ) .

this was an increase of $36.1 million ( 7% ) over the administration's request .

the enacted level matched the senate - passed level ( including the $10.0 million for the collaborative forest landscape restoration fund authorized in section 4003 ( f ) of p.l .

111-11 ) .

the house had provided $611.2 million for fuel reduction in fy2010 ( $378.1 million for the fs and $233.1 million for doi ) .

for burned area rehabilitation — to control erosion and restore vegetation on burned areas — in fy2010 , the fy2010 interior appropriations law provided $31.9 million , matching the house - passed level and slightly exceeding the senate level ( by $0.1 million ) .

the enacted level was also slightly ( $0.1 million ) more than the fy2009 appropriations and an increase of $2.6 million more than the request .

also , fs funds for emergency burned area rehabilitation can be drawn from suppression funding , while additional funds to restore burned areas are provided in the various accounts for the national forest system .

for related activities of fs forest health management — to survey and control insects , diseases , and invasive species — the fy2010 law included $32.2 million , an increase of $6.3 million ( 44% ) above the request for federal lands and of $4.4 million ( 63% ) above the request for cooperative ( non - federal ) lands .

the enacted level was less than the house - passed level of $37.2 million but more than the senate - passed level of $27.2 million .

 ( this activity also receives funds through state and private forestry ; see table 14 , above. ) .

the fy2010 appropriations matched the house , senate , and administration levels of wildfire appropriations for fire research at the fy2009 level .

doi funding for the joint fire science program remained at $6.0 million ; fs funding for the joint fire science program remained at $8.0 million .

wildfire funding for fs fire plan research and development was kept at $23.9 million .

 ( fire research also receives funds under fs research ; see above. ) .

further , the law maintained the fy2009 level for doi wildfire facilities — $6.1 million .

for fs fire assistance to states , the fy2010 law included $80.3 million .

this included $71.3 million for state fire assistance , $8.8 million less than the house , $15.0 million more than the senate , and $21.3 million more than the request .

for volunteer fire departments , the law included $9.0 million , which matched fy2009 omnibus funding and the senate - passed level , and was $1.0 million less than the house and $2.0 million more than the request .

 ( fs fire assistance also is funded through state and private forestry ; see table 14 above. ) .

doi funding for community assistance remained at $7.0 million , as passed in both the house and senate bills .

