large - scale deployment of concentrating solar power ( csp ) , a renewable energy technology for generating electricity , has the potential to affect the availability of water resources in the southwest for other uses .

because the water demand of csp is highly dependent on the type of csp facilities constructed ( eg , whether thermal storage is included and whether wet cooling is used ) and their locations , and because the data for these evolving technologies are preliminary , there remains much uncertainty about the impacts of csp on southwest water use .

water resource constraints are likely to prompt adoption of more freshwater - efficient technologies , or decisions not to site csp facilities in certain locations .

however , water constraints do not necessarily preclude csp in the southwest , given the ability to reduce the freshwater use at csp facilities .

this report presents a brief primer on csp , then discusses the potential water implications of csp deployment in the southwest .

in arid and semi - arid regions like the southwest , or other areas with intense water demand , water supply is an issue for locating any thermoelectric power plant , not only csp .

the cumulative impact of installing multiple thermoelectric power plants in a region with existing water constraints raises numerous policy questions .

as previously noted , there is significant uncertainty about the future rate and location of csp deployment ; this uncertainty significantly restricts the ability to evaluate the extent and location of potential water resource implications of csp deployment .

additional data and analysis on where csp may deploy and how it may affect local water availability would benefit federal , state , and local decision - makers when evaluating the potential consequences of general policies and individual permitting and siting decisions .

the analysis presented in this report is based on available projections for csp deployment at the county level .

without new water supplies becoming available and assuming that most water supplies in these arid regions are already allocated to existing uses , the water used by csp may be purchased from existing water rights holders , or a csp facility might develop its own supplies from impaired waters .

the most likely source of water rights to purchase would come from the agricultural sector of these states .

if policy makers choose to require that csp not consume the water quantities described above , csp facilities could reduce their freshwater footprint by employing more water - efficient cooling technologies or by cooling using alternate water supplies ( i.e. , impaired water supplies such as saline groundwater ) .

growing populations and changing values have increased demands on water supplies and river systems , resulting in water use and management conflicts throughout the country , particularly in the west .

in many western states , agricultural water needs can be in direct conflict with urban needs , as well as with water for thermoelectric cooling , threatened and endangered species , recreation , and scenic enjoyment .

debate over western water resources revolves around the issue of how best to plan for and manage the use of this renewable , yet sometimes scarce and increasingly sought after , resource .

traditional users of water supplies often are wary of new water demands that may compete or result in reduced deliveries to farms ( leading to lost agricultural production ) .

deployment of csp would add an additional demand to existing freshwater competition in the southwest .

as indicated in the analysis herein , there remains significant uncertainty about where , how much , and what type of csp capacity may be installed .

technological advances in csp , thermal storage , and cooling technologies also may change the water intensity of any csp that is deployed .

water resource data gaps on current and projected non - csp water consumption and on availability of impaired water supplies add uncertainty to analyses of the potential significance of csp freshwater use and alternatives to its use .

for these reasons , any estimate of how much water may be consumed by csp at the regional , state , or county level is highly uncertain .

any shift of freshwater resources to csp from an existing use would have costs and benefits .

for example , if the water is shifted from agricultural use to csp cooling , the region would forgo the benefits of that agricultural production .

alternatively , the water could also become available for use in csp through improvements in agricultural or municipal and industrial water efficiency .

csp , however , would bring jobs and investments to the southwest while producing electricity ( without significant greenhouse gas emissions ) that could be put to use by municipal , industrial , and other consumers in a broader area of the country .

how to manage existing and new water demands is largely up to the states .

most electricity siting and water planning , management , and allocation decisions are delegated to the states .

federal agencies support state water management efforts through data collection and technology research .

whether and how the federal government should promote water conservation , efficiency , markets , and regional - and state - level planning and collaboration is a matter of debate , and actions in these areas often occur on a piecemeal or ad hoc basis .

at the same time , federal policies ( eg , energy , agriculture , and tax policies ) can affect water - related investments and water use , and operations of federal facilities can affect the water available for allocation .

crs analyzed nrel's csp deployment scenario for 2050 in order to evaluate potential state and local water resource implications .

crs chose nrel's scenario as the basis for this analysis because it provided county - level deployment estimates ; other available renewable deployment projections are at much larger geographic scales , typically at the region or state level .

a major drawback of using a deployment scenario that extends to 2050 is that it is highly speculative .

at the same time , water resource planning , projects , and decisions often are performed and evaluated on time scales encompassing many decades .

illustrative scenario of state water use under 2050 deployment projection nrel projected as part of its concentrating solar deployment system ( csds ) that 55 gw of csp would be deployed by 2050 and assumed that the csp facilities would all have six hours of storage .

nrel estimated the mean capacity factor for these facilities at 43% .

if 55 gw of capacity by 2050 is achieved using wet cooling , the water requirements would be roughly 505 thousand acre - feet per year ( ka - f / year ) .

crs developed a scenario , shown in table a - 1 , for how the 55 gw of csp capacity might be distributed across the five states that are identified for csp deployment in figure 2 .

table a - 1 shows an illustrative scenario of water use in each state if wet cooling is used .

csp water use would fall if more water - efficient cooling is employed and if not all the facilities under the 55 gw deployment projection have thermal storage .

alternatively , water use could be higher if 12 hours of thermal storage are employed in some facilities .

the scenario used in table a - 1 is based on the nrel projection in figure 2 ; as more current projections of how much and where csp may be deployed are released , any estimates of state water use impacts would change .

for example , if updated projections show that new mexico , texas , and colorado have more csp deployment than shown in figure 2 , the csp water footprint may be greater in those states than shown in table a - 1 .

similarly , if deployment in arizona and california is less than shown in figure 2 , the csp water footprint in these states would be smaller .

that is , if csp deployment by 2050 in arizona were to be 9 gw , rather than the 18 in the scenario in table a - 1 , csp water use would be half of the 3.9% .

the illustrative scenario of potential water consumption from the 55 gw is sensitive to the capacity factor used .

the total water consumption varies from 483 ka - f / year for a capacity factor of 41% to 541 ka - f / year for a capacity factor of 46% ; these capacity factors were the upper and lower ends of the range used in nrel's 55 gw analysis .

nrel varied the capacity factor to capture differences in energy production anticipated based on the solar resource at the different locations in the southwest .

uncertainty about where csp facilities might be constructed , whether these facilities will perform at the capacity factors currently assumed , and which types of cooling technologies these facilities will use contribute to there being little known about the future water resource impacts of csp deployment .

illustrative scenario of county water use under 2050 deployment projection the state - level scenarios in table a - 1 do not fully capture what a 55 gw deployment may mean for water use in the counties with the csp facilities .

crs used figure 2 to develop a scenario of county - level csp deployment and its water use for a sample of counties .

the results , shown in table a - 2 , illustrate that the local effect will depend on the capacity located in the county , the capacity factor of the facilities , the type of cooling used , and the existing consumptive use in the county .

table a - 2 illustrates that , for a number of counties , the potential water demand of wet - cooled csp could be significant in 2050 .

the calculations in table a - 2 demonstrate why there is interest in using non - freshwater sources and in adopting more water - efficient cooling techniques , and why regulators in some states , such as california , may be reluctant to permit wet - cooled facilities .

all of the counties in table a - 2 were identified to have some susceptibility to water supply constraints .

table a - 2 illustrates that , in some counties ( eg , grant , nm , and mineral , nv ) , water use of csp under the nrel deployment projections may result in a notable change in county water use even if dry cooling is employed .

the potential use of water by csp in moderately constrained counties ( eg , grant and luna , nm ) and in highly constrained counties ( eg , san bernardino , ca , and la paz and maricopa , az ) may lead to the adoption of or requirement for freshwater - efficient csp facilities .

