an anaerobic digestion system ( ad system ) captures the methane that may otherwise be released from conventional manure handling methods , and has the potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and produce clean energy .

absent such technology , confined animal feeding operations typically collect and store manure ( eg , in a waste storage facility ) under anaerobic conditions , which produces the potent greenhouse gas methane .

the methane is released into the atmosphere as the manure decomposes while being stored .

livestock producers handle large quantities of manure on a daily basis that emit methane .

some estimate that livestock operations produce more than 1 billion tons of manure yearly and that 7% of total u.s. methane emissions are from managed manure .

through methane capture , anaerobic digestion has the potential to reduce these emissions .

in addition , anaerobic digestion of manure produces biogas — a combination of methane , carbon dioxide , and trace amounts of other gases that can be used for renewable energy purposes or flared .

recent legislation pertaining to agricultural sources of renewable energy has focused primarily on corn - based ethanol and cellulosic ethanol for liquid fuel purposes , and not biogas .

the economic environment is not currently favorable to profit from the investment required to compress biogas produced from an ad system into a liquid fuel .

there are , however , several successful cases where an engine - generator set has been used to generate electricity from the biogas or the biogas is burned in a boiler to produce heat .

biogas from an ad system could be used to assist livestock producers in an effort to have an energy self - sufficient operation as well as , potentially , to sell electricity to the local utility .

there are more than 160 ad systems operating on farms nationally ( see table 1 ) .

some factors that may be responsible for the low technology adoption rates are high capital costs , reliability concerns , and payment rates for the electricity generated .

congress may consider encouraging increased adoption of the technology by ( 1 ) identifying the primary technology benefit , so as to determine whether ad should be pursued in the framework of greenhouse gas emission reduction or clean energy development ; ( 2 ) determining if the captured methane will count as a carbon offset ; and ( 3 ) considering additional financing options for the technology .

moreover , congress may receive insight on collaborative techniques by monitoring the first public - private partnership agreement between the u.s. department of agriculture and the innovation center for u.s .

dairy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from dairy operations by 25% by 2020 .

one goal of the agreement is to "accelerate and streamline the process for adopting anaerobic digesters by the united states dairy farm operators through various usda programs. .

a number of developments have occurred since the agreement was signed in 2009 , including usda providing funds to establish 30 more anaerobic digesters in fy2010 .

this report provides information on ad systems , technology adoption , and challenges to widespread technology implementation , and explores the issues facing congress concerning adoption of the technology .

most manure management systems used on livestock operations store the manure in an open facility , allowing the manure to decompose naturally , which releases the potent greenhouse gas methane into the atmosphere .

by contrast , an ad system feeds manure into a digester that breaks it down in a closed facility in the absence of oxygen ( see figure 3 ) .

the digested feedstock is contained for a period of time as anaerobic bacteria decompose the manure to produce several outputs , including biogas , liquid effluent , and dry matter .

the captured biogas is flared ( see footnote 5 ) or used for energy .

the liquid effluent may be applied to the land as a fertilizer .

the digested dry matter may be sold as a soil amendment product or used for animal bedding .

ad systems have other benefits ( eg , odor reduction ) that may curb negative impacts of livestock operations , including environmental pollution .

an ad system is designed and constructed to suit the needs of an individual livestock operation and is typically selected based on the total solids ( ts ) content of the manure and the manure handling system ( see figure 3 ) .

other criteria taken into consideration when building an ad system include the feedstock quantity , feedstock quality , feedstock availability , feedstock handling , demand for effluent , use of captured biogas , and transportation logistics ( eg , feedstock may be transported to an ad system if it is not available on - site , or effluent transported to a receiving entity if not used on - site ) .

ad systems in the united states are in use on dairy cow , swine , and poultry operations .

more than 80% of the operating ad systems are located on dairy cow operations .

some argue that less complex ad systems could be constructed on dairy cow operations at a lower cost and that the manure could be easily transported to the ad system , thus making them more economically appealing .

others contend that fewer ad systems are installed on swine operations because many swine operations currently store liquid manure in pits beneath the livestock ; the producer would need to redesign the swine operation to incorporate an ad system .

installation of an ad system on a swine operation may also be more expensive if a storage facility must be constructed to contain the digested feedstock .

some assert that ad systems are not a favorable addition to a poultry operation partly because the litter is dry and may require more resources for transport to an ad system and additional inputs to digest .

federal funding ( discussed in the following section ) has supported the installation of many of the more than 160 ad systems in operation on farms nationwide , operating with a total electricity production of approximately 454,000 megawatt - hours ( mwh ) per year as of september 2011 .

epa estimates the ad systems restrict roughly 1,160,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent ( co 2 e ) in direct emissions annually from entering the atmosphere , which is comparable to the annual greenhouse gas emissions from more than 225,000 passenger vehicles .

congress as well as states have enacted legislation that provides financial assistance for ad system installation .

loans , grants , tax credits , tax exemptions , and production incentives are common financial assistance tools available at the federal and state levels .

one principal source of federal funding is the section 9007 rural energy for america program ( reap ) of the food , conservation , and energy act of 2008 ( 2008 farm bill , p.l .

110-246 ) .

section 9007 authorizes $255 million in mandatory funding for 2009-2012 , with an additional $25 million per year in discretionary funding .

for fy2012 , $70 million is available , part of which is to be distributed to eligible applicants for ad system projects .

grants dispensed to applicants are not to exceed 25% of the cost of the activity .

loan guarantees dispensed to applicants are not to exceed $25 million .

the maximum amount of a combined loan and grant can be no more than 75% of the cost of the activity .

another source of financial assistance offered for anaerobic digestion projects is the renewable electricity production tax credit ( reptc ; 26 u.s.c .

§45 ) .

the reptc grants a 1.1 cent per kilowatt - hour tax credit for electricity generated from open - loop biomass ( eg , agricultural livestock waste nutrients ) .

the tax credit is subject to certain conditions ( eg , service start date , nameplate capacity rating ) and expires for open - loop biomass on december 31 , 2013 .

some technology deployment and adoption barriers exist because of the complexity involved in designing and operating an ad system .

thus far , a significant number of successful ad systems are operated by producers who have sophisticated anaerobic digestion technology knowledge .

some assert that the technology will reach its full potential when an array of concerns are addressed .

some challenges include lack of economic return .

ad systems are capital - intensive .

the cost fluctuates depending upon the system type , system size , livestock operation type , and factors specific to the site .

capital costs generally include the ad system cost , the engine - generator set , the engineering design process , and installation .

extra costs are incurred for additional elements ( eg , a post - digestion solids separator , utility and interconnection fees ) .

system costs range from a few hundred thousand dollars to a few million dollars .

a covered lagoon ad system could cost at a minimum a few hundred thousand dollars .

a complete mix ad system or plug flow ad system can cost a few million dollars .

an analysis of 38 ad systems indicates that approximately one - third of the total system cost is estimated to be spent on the electrical generation equipment .

a producer may find it feasible to forgo producing electricity to save money and to use the biogas produced on - site for heating purposes , which still requires a boiler .

a general approximation is that the potential for a positive financial return appears to be most likely at a dairy cow operation with at least 500 cows and a swine operation with at least 2,000 total head of confinement capacity .

reliability .

some argue that producers hesitate to adopt anaerobic digestion technology due to the poor performance rate observed in the 1970s .

ad system performance has improved over time due to better engineering , construction materials , and management .

communicating current performance rates may provide producers with the information needed to gain more confidence in the improved technology .

ad system performance data may be expanded with mandatory reporting on a periodic basis by an independent third party , which might bolster performance claims made by some ad system construction companies .

information ( eg , demonstration projects , long - term performance records ) that communicates recent performance may mitigate producers' doubts about technology reliability and may verify energy generation and greenhouse gas emission reduction data reported .

some producers and construction companies are opposed to a national reporting program because of the release of potentially proprietary information .

lack of an engineering practice standard .

a national practice standard that lists performance criteria , safety precautions , technical components , and design elements and has undergone review from a standards developing organization is not available for anaerobic digestion technology .

some producers may be reluctant to make a financial investment in a technology that may or may not meet future environmental and technical requisites .

the usda natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) issued an anaerobic digester conservation practice standard in 2009 .

utility collaboration .

rates paid by utilities for the electricity generated from ad systems vary by state and within each utility .

it may not be economically attractive for a producer to sell the renewable energy generated depending on the cost per kilowatt - hour offered .

some net - metering agreements pay wholesale rates instead of retail rates for the electricity generated , thus limiting potential profitability .

some gas utility companies may be reluctant to accept a renewable energy fuel originating from a technology with no official standard that may contaminate an otherwise clean energy source .

unquantifiable co - benefits .

certain benefits ( eg , odor reduction ) may not be quantifiable in dollar terms but may add to the value of an ad system .

operation and maintenance .

ad systems perform optimally when they are well maintained .

some estimate that daily ad system operation and maintenance may require 30 minutes to an hour .

the producer may have to acquire a level of technical expertise not previously necessary .

congress is faced with proposed legislation centered on clean energy and the environment .

there may be an opportunity for the agricultural community , particularly the livestock industry , to participate in forthcoming efforts for energy generation and greenhouse gas emission reduction with anaerobic digestion technology .

prior to incorporating anaerobic digestion technology into legislation , congress may choose to consider: identify ing the primary benefit offered by an ad system .

selecting a primary benefit ( renewable energy generation or greenhouse gas emission reduction ) may assist with determining which policy vehicle could support technology deployment ( e.g .

energy legislation , climate change legislation , agricultural legislation ) .

a single message regarding the technology benefit may encourage producers to adopt the technology to achieve the policy goal .

determining if the methane captured from the technology will be included as a carbon offset .

the climate change debate that occurred during the 111 th congress included carbon offsets as a potential greenhouse gas emission reduction strategy .

producers may find it economically worthwhile to invest in ad technology if it produces an additional revenue source in the form of carbon offsets .

if the methane captured and combusted is not treated as a carbon offset , will the 112 th congress consider regulating the methane captured as a pollutant ? .

identifying whether alternat e sources of financial support for technology implementation are appropriate .

most of the federal financial assistance available comes in loans and grants for ad system construction .

a shorter payback period for an ad system may occur if producers receive a more substantial monetary sum for the energy generated and transferred to a utility company via a federal electricity rate premium .

additional tax credits may also improve the economic return for ad technology ( eg , raising the tax credit value for agricultural livestock waste nutrients to that of closed - loop biomass for the renewable electricity , refined coal , and indian coal production credit ) .

