each year , the president is required to submit a comprehensive federal budget proposal to congress no later than the first monday in february .

once the budget is submitted , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) analyzes the proposal using its own economic assumptions and estimation techniques .

the house and senate budget committees also develop their respective budget resolutions after reviewing the president's budget , the views of other committees , and information from cbo .

differences between the senate and house versions are supposed to be reconciled by april 15 , but this deadline rarely is met .

although not binding , the budget resolution provides a framework for subsequent legislative action .

this report provides information on medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) .

it will be updated to reflect relevant legislative activity .

congressional research service ( crs ) staff contact information by topic area is provided in table 2 at the end of the report .

in january 2009 , there was grave concern among policymakers over the widening economic slowdown , bankruptcy in the real estate , automobile , and financial industries , and rapidly increasing unemployment .

the economic conditions that prevailed in january 2009 helped to shape the president's fy2010 budget proposal , as well as major legislation passed by congress that was aimed at underpinning weak economic segments , boosting overall spending , and helping to prevent further economic deterioration .

the severe economic conditions and congressional consensus on the need to address the eminent expiration of chip led to emergency legislation for these initiatives that otherwise might have been included in the president's budget proposal and addressed later in the year .

the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) and the children's health insurance program reauthorization act ( chipra , p.l .

111-3 ) were passed early in 2009 , while the obama administration was developing its fy2010 budget proposal .

arra provided an additional $89.3 billion in federal medicaid funding to states over five years .

the additional medicaid funding included enhanced federal financial participation percentages ( fmap ) , reauthorization of selected medicaid benefits , extension of regulatory moratoriums , and expansion of coverage for certain beneficiary groups .

chipra reauthorized the chip program through fy2013 which provided , among other provisions , $44 billion in additional funds to states , while permitting states to expand chip coverage and benefits .

the president's fy2010 medicaid and chip budget proposals contain no spending increases .

rather , the fy2010 medicaid and chip budget proposals are intended to reduce medicaid , and indirectly , chip expenditures .

in the short - term , cost savings through greater efficiency and accountability could help states to maintain medicaid coverage during the financial crisis by cushioning the program's countercyclical impact .

in the longer - term , the obama administration envisions medicaid cost savings to help fund a $635 billion health reform reserve fund .

for each of the fy2010 medicaid and chip budget proposals , this report provides background , a description of the proposal based on available information , and relevant crs reports .

the house and senate began considering the fy2010 federal budget in march 2009 .

the house and senate budget committees produced their versions of the budget resolution which incorporated most of the president's budget proposals as submitted in president obama's budget outline of february 26 , 2009 .

the two houses adopted their respective fy2010 budget resolutions on april 2 , 2009 .

the senate and house agreed to a conference agreement report on april 29 , 2009 ( h.rept .

111-60 , accompanying s.con.res .

13 ) .

although the budget resolution does not become law , it establishes spending and revenue targets for discretionary spending .

the resolution also creates a framework for the budget subcommittees to follow in developing 12 annual appropriations bills that will fund fy2010 ( discretionary ) federal programs and operations .

with adoption of the budget proposal , appropriations subcommittees for both chambers may initiate legislation authorizing funding for cabinet departments and federal agencies .

on march 26 , 2009 , the senate budget committee reported a budget resolution ( s.con.res .

13 ) , which the senate passed april 2 , 2009 .

the senate budget resolution includes 24 deficit - neutral reserve funds , including provisions that could affect medicaid and chip .

the house budget committee reported a budget resolution ( h.con.res .

85 ) on march 25 , 2009 , which the house passed on april 2 , 2009 .

on march 27 , 2009 , the house filed a report ( h.rept .

111-60 ) to accompany the concurrent budget resolution ( h.con.res .

85 ) .

the house's budget resolution contained 14 deficit - neutral reserve funds , including provisions could affect medicaid and chip .

on march 27 , 2009 the senate and house filed a conference agreement report on the budget resolution ( h.rept .

111-60 which accompanied the senate s.con.res .

13 and house h.con.res .

85 ) .

on april 29 , 2009 the senate and house both adopted the conference report ( h.rept .

111-60 , accompanying s.con.res .

13 ) .

the following major provisions affecting medicaid and chip are included in the conference agreement .

reconciliation instructions .

in the senate , both the committee on finance and committee on health , education , labor , and pensions were required to reduce the federal budget deficit for programs under their jurisdictions by $1 billion over the period from fy2009 to fy2014 .

similarly , in the house , the committees on energy and commerce and ways and means were required to reduce the federal budget deficit for programs under their jurisdictions by $1 billion for the period fy2009 to fy2014 .

senate reserve funds .

the joint budget resolution contained both senate and house budget neutral reserve funds .

the senate provisions included two deficit - neutral funds that could affect medicaid and chip: ( 1 ) to transform and modernize america's health care system , and ( 2 ) to improve the well - being of children .

house reserve funds .

the house budget - neutral reserve fund provisions also included two proposals that could affect medicaid and chip: ( 1 ) a deficit - neutral fund for health care reform , and ( 2 ) a deficit - neutral fund to improve the well - being of children .

budget enforcement .

in the senate , a point of order rule can be applied if the cost of legislation increases the budget deficit by more than $10 billion in any fiscal year covered by the concurrent budget resolution , unless the proposed expenditures are offset by spending reductions in other programs .

in general , medicaid and chip spending are not controlled through the annual appropriations process .

as an entitlement program , medicaid's spending level is determined by the underlying benefit and eligibility criteria established in law .

thus , federal medicaid expenditures vary depending on the amount of services required and the number of beneficiaries that enroll in any federal fiscal year .

chip is a grant program , so federal spending is capped , with annual chip appropriations specified by law .

the medicare , medicaid , and chip extension act of 2007 ( mmsea , p.l .

110-173 ) provided fy2008 and fy2009 chip allotments through march 31 , 2009 , with enough additional funding to cover the federal share of chip spending through march 31 , 2009 .

as noted above , with passage of the children's health insurance reauthorization act of 2009 ( chipra , p.l .

111-3 ) , chip funding was extended through fy2013 .

even though annual medicaid and chip appropriations are not controlled through the appropriations process , congress can exercise some authority over medicaid and chip spending through the appropriations process by limiting funds for specified activities .

for example , the labor , health and human services , and education appropriations bill regularly contains restrictions that limit circumstances when federal funds may be used to pay for abortions .

