some members of congress have expressed concern that the cost of redeveloping closed military property may place a burden on local communities .

on march 12 , 2009 , senator olympia snowe ( maine ) introduced in the 111 th congress on behalf of herself and senator mark l. pryor ( arkansas ) , the "defense communities assistance act of 2009" ( s. 590 ) .

as stated under its section 2 ( sense of congress ) , the legislation is intended to assist communities located near military installations "to either recover quickly from [military base] closures or to accommodate growth associated with troop influxes" brought on by the movement of troops and activities as part of "base closures and realignments , global repositioning , and grow the force initiatives. .

representative chellie pingree ( maine ) introduced the "defense communities redevelopment act of 2009" ( h.r .

1959 ) on april 2 , 2009 .

the bill duplicates the no - cost conveyance section of s. 590 .

representative sam farr , of california , introduced h.r .

2295 on may 7 on behalf of himself , representative kay granger ( texas ) , representative pingree , and representative william delahunt ( massachusetts ) as an identical companion bill to s. 590 .

the three senate and house bills have been referred to their respective committees on armed services .

on september 8 , 2005 , the defense base closure and realignment commission submitted nearly 200 recommendations to president george w. bush .

these recommendations would fundamentally alter the stationing of military forces and the functions carried out at many posts , bases , and stations throughout the united states , its territories , and possessions .

president bush approved the recommendations and , in accordance with the defense base closure and realignment act of 1990 ( dbcra ) , as amended , the secretary of defense is putting into effect the entire list prior to september 15 , 2011 .

the final two sections of s. 590 / h.r .

2295 would further amend the dbcra to expand the indemnification ( holding harmless ) of persons who have taken title to property on closed military installations and to require the conveyance at no cost of surplus military property under certain conditions .

although the introductory sections of s. 590 and h.r .

2295 state that the legislation's purpose is to enhance communities' ability to recover from installation downsizing or to adjust the military population growth , the discussion above indicates that the potential impact of the proposed legislation could extend beyond the current brac round .

as congress considers these bills , members may wish to weigh questions such as the following: if current law permanently authorizes dod to exchange property on closing or realigning military installations for non - dod property that could increase its supply of housing or ease encroachment pressure , to what extent does extending the authority to all excess dod property serve to satisfy the stated purpose of the legislation — assisting communities to recover from the effects of base resizing or closure ? .

what are the risks and benefits relative to the merits of authorizing the military departments to outsource base support , such as refuse removal , the operation of golf courses , libraries , and fitness centers , and public works functions , to county or local governments rather than provide for them through dod employees or private contractors ? .

are there advantages in broadening the secretary of defense's ability to reimburse agencies and organizations for military site cleanup activities to include expenses associated with "processing" of a conveyance of the property ? .

if there are disadvantages , what are they , and could they decrease the secretary's willingness to enter into reimbursement agreements ? .

an extension of indemnification to include removal of statutory and regulatory requirements for site cleanup of past military activity will effectively add to the cost of remediation borne by the federal government and correspondingly reduce the burden on the state or locality near the site or the new owners .

what are the implications for future federal costs ? .

current law requires the secretary of defense to "seek fair market value" for surplus 2005 brac property conveyed to redevelopment authorities for the purposes of job creation on the former military site .

nevertheless , the secretary is permitted to execute such an economic development conveyance for no consideration ( at no cost ) under certain circumstances .

existing statute requires that all "proceeds received from the lease , transfer , or disposal of any property at a military installation closed or realigned" be used only to defray the cost of implementing brac recommendations or remediating environmental degradation on brac - surplus property .

if the secretary is required to convey surplus property at no cost , revenue could be lost that would have to be replaced by appropriated funds .

what are the advantages and disadvantages of foregoing this potential revenue stream ? .

how much in toto will these proposed changes cost the federal treasury relative to the benefits gained by federal agencies , local governments , and private enterprise ? .

