since 1775 , the u.s. government has provided postal services in the united states .

the service began as a conduit for communication between "congress and the armies" during the revolutionary war .

in 1863 , the post office department ( now the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) ) , pursuant to statute , began delivering mail to certain addresses in cities if postage was enough to "pay for all expenses of the service. .

by 1896 , the post office department was making deliveries to certain rural and urban homes six days per week .

in some cities , delivery occurred more than once per day until 1950 .

in other , more remote rural areas , deliveries continue to occur fewer than six days per week .

today , the u.s .

postal service ( usps ) delivers to "150 million homes and businesses , six days a week. .

throughout the service's history there have been discussions about reducing the number of delivery days to conserve fuel and reduce costs .

after running modest profits from fy2004 through fy2006 , usps lost $25.4 billion between fy2007 and fy2011 .

were it not for congressional action to reduce a statutorily required payment to the retiree health benefits fund ( rhbf ) , usps would have lost an additional $9.5 billion .

in the first three quarters of fy2012 , usps had an operating loss of $11.5 billion .

the bleak economic forecast for usps has prompted its leaders , congress , and the public to suggest methods that may increase revenue or reduce expenses .

among these suggestions is to reduce the number of delivery days from six to five .

currently , appropriations law requires usps to maintain six - day delivery .

congress , however , has the authority to legislate how many days of the week usps is to deliver mail .

congress also may authorize usps to determine its delivery schedule .

maintaining six - day delivery could contribute to the economic decline of the u.s .

postal service .

eliminating a delivery day alone , however , would not solve usps's financial challenges and could reduce usps sales and revenue , lead to service delays , prompt job loss at usps , or affect vulnerable populations who rely on six - day delivery .

members of the 112 th congress have introduced nine bills ( h.r .

2309 ; h.r .

2434 ; h.r .

3591 ; h.r .

3744 ; s. 1010 ; s. 1573 ; s. 1625 ; s. 1789 ; and s. 1853 ) and one resolution ( h.res .

137 ) regarding six - day mail delivery .

the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 required that usps maintain six - day delivery during fy2012 .

president barack obama's fy2013 budget requested that congress help "reduce usps operating costs by giving usps authority , which it has said it will exercise , to reduce mail delivery from six days to five days starting in 2013. .

nevertheless , both the house and senate versions of the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2013 ( h.r .

2434 , s. 1573 ) , include language requiring usps to continue delivering mail six days per week .

the continuing resolution ( p.l .

112-175 ) extended the six - day requirement through march 27 , 2013 .

two studies of the possible economic effects of reducing usps delivery were conducted in 2008 .

one study , conducted by usps , estimated the financial savings of a five - day delivery week at $3.5 billion annually , with no anticipated reduction in sales volume .

the other study , by the postal regulatory commission ( prc ) , estimated the savings at $1.93 billion annually , and includes an expected loss of $580 million in sales volume .

a subsequent prc advisory opinion on the elimination of saturday delivery , released in march 2011 , found that usps's study on eliminating a delivery day overestimated net and gross savings and underestimated potential revenue losses .

the advisory opinion estimated that usps could save $1.7 billion in annual net savings by eliminating saturday delivery .

the government accountability office ( gao ) released a report in march 2011 stating that a move to five - day mail delivery could better align services "with reduced mail volume," but could also "reduce service," "put mail volumes and revenues at risk," and "eliminate jobs. .

the report also said that eliminating one delivery day would "by itself , be insufficient to solve usps's financial challenges. .

the report further stated: if congress decides 5-day delivery is necessary , then congress and usps could factor the savings into deliberations about what package of actions should be taken to restore usps's financial viability .

conversely , if congress maintains the mandate for 6-day delivery , congress and usps would need to find other ways to achieve equivalent financial savings , so that the package is sufficient to restore usps's financial viability .

this would likely entail difficult decisions with broad implications for usps's infrastructure , workforce , and service .

as gao has reported , a package of actions by congress and usps is urgently needed to modernize usps's operations , networks , and workforce .

other countries have varied mail delivery schedules .

a sampling of various countries' mail delivery practices found that some countries deliver mail five days per week ( australia and sweden ) while others deliver mail six days per week ( france , germany , and the netherlands ) .

royal mail , which delivers mail in the united kingdom ( uk ) six days per week , reportedly contemplated eliminating saturday delivery in 2008 because of economic concerns .

canada post , which receives no national appropriation , offers letter - carrier services five days per week and does not deliver mail or parcels on most saturdays .

new zealand post offers six - day mail delivery services to some customers , but not to customers living in rural areas .

in addition , new zealand post customers who send mail that requires a saturday delivery must pay an additional fee , and parcels are not delivered on saturdays in new zealand .

currently , all but 25,000 of usps's 135 million residential mail recipients receive six - day mail delivery .

when usps began the practice is unclear .

based on the following review of legislative and postal history , it appears that six - day delivery was not legally required until fy1981 , when congress placed language requiring six - day delivery in usps's appropriation .

on march 18 , 2010 , then - postmaster general john potter testified before the senate committee on appropriations , subcommittee on financial services and general government .

he stated that the statutory mandate to deliver mail six days per week was one of many limitations placed on usps that was "complicating the fiscal health of the postal service. .

later in his testimony , mr. potter said that six - day delivery "places a very large financial burden on the postal service .

due to the unprecedented decline in mail volume , there no longer is sufficient volume to sustain the cost of the current six - day delivery week. .

he said that usps was seeking legislative action to remove the six - day mail delivery requirement from annual appropriations legislation .

according to mr. potter , in 2000 , the average daily home mail delivery consisted of five pieces of mail .

in 2009 , however , the average dropped to four pieces of mail .

moving to a five - day delivery schedule , mr. potter said , would return each delivery to an average of five pieces of mail .

mr. potter said that "[m]oving to five - day delivery is absolutely necessary to ensure financial viability , both now and into the future .

reducing the frequency of delivery is the single most effective way for the postal service to substantially reduce operational costs — allowing us to reduce annual net costs by approximately $3 billion. .

mr. potter then outlined the plan to move to five - day delivery as follows: residential and business delivery and collections would be discontinued on saturday ; post offices that are usually open on saturday would remain open ; post office boxes would receive mail delivery on saturday and customers would be able to access these p.o .

boxes ; express mail would continue to be delivered seven days a week ; remittance mail ( bill payments ) addressed to post office box and business mail pickup customers would be made available to recipients seven days per week ; no mail pick - up from blue collection boxes would occur on saturdays except for dedicated express mail collection boxes ; acceptance and drop shipping of bulk mail would continue on saturday and sunday ; alternate contract locations ( non - usps owned outposts — often in grocery stores — that offer postal service products and services ) could remain open seven days a week on their normal schedules ; and access to all usps online services at usps.com would remain available 24 hours , seven days per week .

mr. potter said usps customers would be given at least six months' notice before any change in the number of delivery days occurred , and that no change would occur earlier than mid - 2011 .

on march 30 , 2010 , usps made its first formal step toward a move to five - day delivery when it submitted 11 pieces of testimony to the prc and requested an advisory opinion on moving to five - day delivery .

usps is required by law ( 39 u.s.c .

§3661 ( b ) ) to ask the prc for an advisory opinion any time it wishes to make changes that generally affect "service on a nationwide or substantially nationwide basis. .

among the documents submitted by usps to the prc was testimony detailing anticipated overall savings for usps as well as more detailed savings figures for anticipated savings from a reduction in fuel and vehicle repair costs , among other savings .

usps's submission to the prc also included a document that offered an overview of why usps is requesting the move to five - day delivery , as well as details of how the elimination of saturday delivery could occur .

the overview document included new estimates for anticipated overall savings if saturday delivery were eliminated , which was $3 billion per year .

the $3 billion savings estimate is $0.5 billion less per year than the savings estimate offered by usps in its 2008 study discussed earlier in this report .

in the new estimate , savings would largely "come from carrier labor and fuel costs .

other savings will be gained from processing , transportation , maintenance , and a reduction in future employee benefit obligations. .

unlike the previous usps savings estimate on five - day delivery , this newer study includes an anticipated $0.2 billion loss "due to a slight" impact in sales volume prompted by the eliminated delivery day .

the plan to move to five - day delivery submitted to the prc on march 30 , 2010 , is identical to the plan described by then - postmaster general potter at the march 18 , 2010 , senate hearing .

the prc's advisory opinion procedures provide for "public , on - the - record hearings to analyze and cross - examine the postal service's 'five - day' proposal and supporting evidence. .

the prc , invited "mail users and interested members of the public" to "offer supporting or opposing views , both informally and as part of more formal , technical presentations. .

throughout 2010 , the prc held field hearings in locations such as las vegas , nv ; sacramento , ca ; dallas , tx ; memphis , tn ; rapid city , sd ; and buffalo , ny , to solicit public comments .

at the prc's december 1 , 2010 , meeting , ann fisher , the director of the prc's office of public affairs and government relations ( pagr ) , said that the commission had received a total of 21,711 comments related to the possible transition to five - day delivery .

of those comments and suggestions , 3,332 "were okay with" the move to five - day delivery , while 16,449 were against the move .

on march 24 , 2011 , nearly a year after it was requested , the prc released its advisory opinion on usps's request to move to five - day delivery .

the opinion included six central points: usps overestimated the annual net cost savings it would incur if saturday delivery were eliminated by $1.4 billion ( usps estimated annual net savings of $3.1 billion ) ; usps overestimated the annual gross cost savings it would incur if saturday delivery were eliminated by $1.0 billion ( usps estimated annual gross savings of $3.3 billion ) ; usps did not acknowledge that "full savings may not be achieved until three years after saturday delivery were eliminated" ; usps underestimated the net revenue it would likely lose if saturday delivery were eliminated by $0.4 billion ( usps estimated it would lose $0.2 billion in net revenue ) ; usps did not factor in a 25% delay in the processing and delivery of first class and priority mail if saturday delivery were eliminated ; and usps "did not evaluate the impact of the proposal on customers who reside or conduct business in rural , remote , or non - contiguous areas. .

in the president's plan for economic growth and deficit reduction , released in september 2011 , the office of management and budget supported authorizing usps to eliminate a delivery day .

since 1976 , congress , usps , and other entities have conducted studies on the possible effects of changing usps delivery days .

the studies have a variety of conclusions , but all find that usps would save considerable money if delivery were reduced to five days .

table 1 includes seven studies that examined the possibility of usps transitioning to five - day delivery .

other countries' mail services have a variety of delivery schedules .

royal mail , which delivers mail in the united kingdom ( uk ) , reportedly contemplated eliminating saturday delivery in 2008 because of economic concerns .

despite these concerns , royal mail , which maintains six - day delivery , generated £211 million ( roughly $339 million usd ) in profit in 2012 .

on april 1 , 2012 , all pension liabilities for royal mail were transferred to the uk government pursuant to parliament's postal services act .

according to a bbc report , the transfer of liabilities "allows the government to privati[z]e the royal mail , but without its huge pension scheme liabilities. .

royal mail also reported focusing more on parcel delivery because of a decline in letters and other mail .

unlike royal mail , canada post offers letter carrier services five days per week and does not deliver mail or parcels on most saturdays .

canada post is a crown corporation that is owned by the government but free from many federal regulations .

the entity , however , must report operations and revenues to an appointed minister .

canada post , which receives no national appropriation , experienced its first operating deficit in 16 years in fy2011 .

unlike usps , canada post contracts out much of its rural delivery service .

table 2 includes the mail services of a selected group of countries around the world and shows how many days per week they make deliveries as well as offers additional information about the services' structure and operations .

on january 25 , 1996 , the senate committee on governmental affairs' subcommittee on post office and civil service and the house committee on government reform and oversight's subcommittee on postal service held a joint hearing .

at the hearing , usps unveiled a study on mail delivery services around the world .

at the hearing , michael e. motley , associate director of government business operation issues at the general accounting office ( now the government accountability office ) , testified that canada post offered the united states its best case study comparison "because of its proximity to the united states and its similarities in geographic size , business environment , and market - oriented economic systems. .

despite the similarities between canada post and usps , however , motley said "canada post has about 6 percent of the u.s .

postal service's mail volume and about 6 percent of its number of employees. .

motley stated that the vast size and volume differences between the united states and the other countries could make successful actions taken in other countries impossible to implement in the united states .

motley added , however , that "issues surrounding the extent and quality of universal mail service , eg , delivery to all communities 6 days a week , could surface in this country as they have in some other countries. .

arguably , usps remains a vital asset for communication across the united states .

the service delivers mail to millions of homes six days per week .

with current economic hardships and a reduction in volume of more lucrative usps products , the service is struggling economically .

one option to reduce the economic stresses on usps is to reduce service delivery from six days per week to five days per week .

as noted earlier in this report , usps derives the vast majority of its funding from sources other than congressional appropriations .

use of congressional appropriations legislation to place restrictions on the entirety of usps funding , could be challenged .

although the laws governing congress's use of restrictions on appropriations may be subject for debate , agencies that choose not to heed such restrictions may do so at their own peril .

until usps held its forum on envisioning america's future postal service on march 2 , 2010 , usps officials had said that reducing the number of delivery days was not their preferred option to bridge the revenue shortage .

eliminating saturday delivery , however , is now among the cost - cutting options preferred by usps .

some other cost - cutting actions sought by usps are obtaining flexibility from congress to do the following: pay less into the fund for future retiree benefits ; raise the price of stamps and other services higher than currently permitted by law , and close less - used post offices and distribution facilities .

moving to five - day delivery is estimated to save usps between $1.7 and $3.5 billion per year .

the difference in total estimated savings would depend on how much mail volume would drop as a result of the service delivery reduction .

even the highest estimated cost savings from moving to five - day delivery ( $3.5 billion ) is $8 billion less than the budget shortfall in the first three quarters of fy2012 ( $11.5 billion ) .

a reduction in delivery days alone , therefore , would not be sufficient to bridge existing or anticipated future budget gaps at usps .

as noted earlier in this report , representative chaffetz introduced an amendment to h.r .

2309 that would give the postmaster general the authority to cut 12 delivery days .

h.r .

2309 , as amended by mr. chaffetz's amendment , would require usps employees receive pay for those 12 days as if they were delivery days .

because most of usps's costs are employee labor costs , it is unclear how much money closing usps for 12 additional days per year would save .

in this case , usps would save on fuel costs , vehicle use costs , and power costs .

the labor cost savings , however , may not be high .

h.r .

2309 , as amended , does provide usps the authority — six months after enactment of the bill — to request from the prc an advisory opinion on a move to five - day delivery .

ninety days after an advisory opinion would be issued , usps would be authorized to eliminate saturday delivery — regardless of the content of prc's advisory opinion .

in 1977 , the president's commission on postal service did not endorse a move to five - day delivery , but stated that the possibility of such a transition should be revisited if mail volume continued to shrink .

a primary concern related to a move to five - day delivery has been the ability of usps to provide services of the same quality on a five - day schedule that is currently offered on a six - day schedule .

mail volume has dropped significantly in recent years , largely because of the economic downturn and the increasing use of electronic mail and electronic bill - paying options .

usps projects that mail volume will continue to decline .

as then - postmaster general potter stated in his march 18 , 2010 , congressional testimony , with a decline in volume comes a decline in the number of mail pieces delivered on each of the six current delivery days .

if mail volume continues to decline , concerns about overwhelming volumes of mail needing delivery on the remaining delivery days may be mitigated .

congress may choose to remove the six - day delivery provision from appropriation legislation and grant usps greater flexibility to eliminate delivery days if the service finds such action to be beneficial economically .

such flexibility would save usps money in employee pay and fuel costs .

the action , however , may prompt fewer people to use usps services and instead to opt for private companies to deliver their mail .

in addition , certain mail customers rely on six - day delivery to receive vital mail or packages , like baby formula , prescription drugs , or social security checks .

slower receipt of such items may cause additional stresses to populations that are already vulnerable , like the aged , the poor , or those who live in remote areas .

a january 30 , 2009 , washington post article , reported that william burrus , then - president of the american postal workers union , said the union would "vigorously resist any legislative attempt to slash the number of days of delivery. .

mr. burrus reportedly said that a five - day delivery schedule "would stretch to three days when the additional day is combined with sunday and a monday holiday .

such delays will drive essential mail to private carriers , who will continue to deliver seven days a week. .

the prc's advisory opinion on six - day delivery found that the delivery of 25% of first class mail and priority mail would be affected by eliminating saturday delivery .

and most of that mail would be "delayed by two calendar days. .

usps's most recent proposal involves eliminating saturday home and business delivery while maintaining saturday window service at usps post offices .

if a postal patron , therefore , needed to receive mail or a package on a day without delivery service , usps would be able to provide such services at a usps location .

this option could increase the workload for employees staffing post office locations on saturdays because they would have to have access to all mail and packages that would have previously been delivered to homes and businesses on that day .

service at post offices , therefore , may be slower on saturdays because employees may need more time to locate these pieces of mail or packages .

lines at these locations may also be longer than normal because of increased use of the post office to access mail and packages as well as the increased time employees may need to locate the items .

in addition , postal customers who , for medical or other reasons , are unable to leave their homes may not be able to access saturday postal services .

window service , however , might assuage concerns from most customers who would seek access to mail or parcels that normally would have been delivered on the sixth delivery day .

usps suggested to the prc that customers who would like to receive saturday mail delivery services could do so by renting a post office box or using express mail .

usps told the prc that it is considering extending its post office hours on saturdays to allow those with post office boxes to retrieve their mail .

usps also indicated that it has no near - term intentions to raise saturday delivery costs for express mail .

were congress to reduce the number of usps delivery days , it might then choose to determine which day of service to eliminate .

previous studies have recommended the elimination of saturday delivery because it was the most cost effective option .

many businesses that are closed on saturdays would be unaffected by the elimination of saturday delivery .

usps has also stated that elimination of wednesday delivery could be a possibility .

if saturday delivery were eliminated , on weeks that have friday or monday holidays , deliveries would not occur for three consecutive days .

alternatively , as noted in the 1980 task force study , if wednesday delivery were eliminated , many businesses that would not be affected by the elimination of saturday delivery would be affected by the change .

in its march 2010 report on five - day delivery , usps said it seeks to eliminate saturday delivery because "[i]t has the week's lowest daily volume , and more than a third of u.s. businesses are closed on saturday. .

congress may choose to keep all six delivery days , ensuring continued usps service levels .

congress may choose to permit usps to eliminate saturday delivery because it is the day with the lowest mail volume .

congress may also choose to suggest the elimination of wednesday delivery to eliminate the possibility of weeks in which postal consumers do not receive mail delivery for three consecutive days .

congress could choose to adopt delivery practices similar to canada post , and have six - day delivery only at specified , mail - heavy times of the year .

congress could opt to delegate authority to usps to shift from six - to five - day delivery as mail volume fluctuates throughout the year .

this option would allow usps the ability to adjust to macroeconomic and seasonal influences that affect mail volume .

this delegation of authority , however , may cause confusion for usps customers who may be unaware of service changes and who rely on consistent usps delivery services .

congress could grant usps flexibility to charge more for saturday delivery services , as is done in new zealand .

such action may allow usps to operate with a streamlined weekend delivery staff , thereby eliminating work hours and saving overhead costs .

this option , however , could negatively affect poorer members of the public who rely on saturday delivery for prescriptions , monthly stipends , or other mail or parcels .

many of the other methods foreign countries have used to bridge their mail services' economic gaps — like contracting out carrier service — would be difficult to apply in the united states .

union contracts , geographic vastness , and other variables may make usps's economic situation unique .

