a flu pandemic is a worldwide epidemic of an influenza virus .

as such , the united states' response to a flu pandemic would have both international and domestic components .

additionally , the domestic response effort would depend upon contributions from every governmental level ( local , state , tribal , and federal ) , non - governmental organizations , and the private sector .

this report will focus largely on the role of the department of defense ( dod ) in supporting the nation's domestic response effort , although it will also touch on dod's international role .

a dod analysis of the implementation plan identified 31 tasks which were assigned primarily to dod and 83 which were assigned to other agencies with dod in a supporting role .

of the tasks assigned primarily to dod , most were related to one of these four objectives: assisting in disease surveillance assisting partner nations , particularly through military - to - military assistance protecting and treating us forces and dependents providing support to civil authorities in the united states each of these general objectives is discussed in more detail below .

although the term "reserves" is often used as a generic term to refer to all members of the seven individual reserve components , there is an important distinction between the five reserve components which are purely federal entities ( the army reserve , navy reserve , marine corps reserve , air force reserve , and coast guard reserve ) and the two reserve components which are both federal and state entities ( the army national guard and the air national guard ) .

in this context , the purely federal reserve components are sometimes referred to collectively as the reserves , while the dual federal / state reserve components are referred to collectively as the national guard .

the reserves are of comparatively recent origin , having all been established in the 20 th century .

they were organized under congress' constitutional authority "to raise and support armies" and "to provide and maintain a navy. .

the national guard has a much longer historical pedigree .

it is descended from the colonial era militia which existed prior to the adoption of the constitution .

the constitution does , however , contain provisions that recognize the existence of the militia and that give the federal government a certain amount of control over it .

unlike the reserves , which are exclusively federal organizations , the national guard is usually both a state and a federal organization .

the national guard of the united states is made up of 54 separate national guard organizations: one for each state , and one each for puerto rico , guam , the u.s. virgin islands , and the district of columbia .

while the district of columbia national guard is an exclusively federal organization and operates under federal control at all times , the other 53 national guards operate as state or territorial organizations most of the time .

in this capacity , each of these 53 organizations is identified by its state or territorial name ( eg , the california national guard or the puerto rico national guard ) , and is controlled by its respective governor .

due to their dual federal and state role , national guardsmen can be called to duty in several different ways , which will be discussed later in this report .

current dod plans do not anticipate mobilizing the reserves to respond to a flu pandemic .

however , these plans could be modified if circumstances warranted ( for example , if the severity of the pandemic significantly exceeded dod's planning assumptions ) .

members of the federal reserves are always activated under title 10 of the u.s. code .

therefore , they always operate under the control of the president , receive federal pay and benefits , and are subject to the posse comitatus act in the same way that active duty military personnel are .

there are a number of statutory authorities that can be used to activate members of the reserves , but the one most likely to be used in a flu pandemic would be 10 usc 12302 .

this authority may be used "in time of national emergency declared by the president...or when otherwise authorized by law," and permits the president to involuntarily activate up to one million members of the ready reserve for up to 24 consecutive months .

national guard personnel would almost certainly be involved in state efforts to respond to a flu pandemic as members of their state militia under the control of their governor .

current dod plans do not anticipate calling the national guard into federal service to respond to a flu pandemic .

however , as with the case of the federal reserves , these plans could be modified if circumstances warranted it .

dod policy guidelines currently specify that , if reserve component medical personnel are required to respond to a flu pandemic , the military services are to "use [federal] reserve forces first , leaving national guard forces to be available to meet their state - based missions. .

members of the national guard can be activated under state law , under title 32 of the u.s. code , and under title 10 of the u.s. code .

depending on which authority it used , the duty status of national guard members is characterized as state active duty , title 32 status , and title 10 status .

a brief discussion of each status is provided below .

normally , the national guard operates under the control of state and territorial governors .

as part of a state - level response to a flu pandemic , governors could order their national guard personnel to perform full - time duty under state law .

this is commonly referred to as "state active duty. .

in this state capacity , national guard personnel operate under the control of their governor , are paid according to state law , can assist civil authorities in a wide variety of tasks , and are not subject to the restrictions of the posse comitatus act ( that is , they can perform law enforcement functions ) .

another way in which national guard personnel can be activated and remain under the control of their governor is under the authority of 32 u.s.c .

502 ( f ) .

this provision of federal law provides that "a member of the national guard may...without his consent , but with the pay and allowances provided by law...be ordered to perform training or other duty in addition to [inactive duty for training or annual training]. .

the advantage of using this authority is that the national guard personnel called will receive federal pay and benefits and are entitled to certain legal protections as though they were in federal service , but they remain under the control of their governor and are therefore not subject to the restrictions of the posse comitatus act .

this is the provision of law which was used to provide federal pay and benefits to the national guard personnel who provided security at many of the nation's airports in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 .

it has also been used to respond to major disasters such as hurricane katrina in 2005 .

national guard personnel can also be activated in a purely federal status .

the authorities used to do this include all of the title 10 authorities discussed in footnote 50 .

when in this federal status , national guard personnel serve under the control of the president , receive federal pay and benefits , and are subject to the posse comitatus act in the same way that active duty military personnel are .

national guard personnel can also be called into federal service under 10 usc 331-335 and 12406 .

if called up under one of these authorities , national guard personnel would operate under the control of the president , receive federal pay and benefits , and could perform law enforcement duties .

when considering the federal activation of the reserves and national guard , one important consideration is the impact this would have on state , local , or tribal response efforts that are already ongoing .

for example , the activation of reserve and national guard medical personnel may pull them out of local hospitals where they are already engaged in the response effort , thereby undermining state and local response efforts .

such activations are a particular concern with respect to national guard personnel , who often constitute a large portion of a state's emergency response force .

another important factor to consider when federalizing national guard forces is the impact of the posse comitatus act .

while they remain in a state status ( either state active duty or title 32 status ) , national guard personnel are not covered by the act and therefore are a valuable tool for state governors in maintaining public order .

federalization of the national guard generally brings them under the restrictions of the act and thereby limits their utility for law enforcement purposes .

