since the breakdown of the six - party talks over verification issues in december 2008 , north korea has carried out a series of increasingly provocative acts that have challenged the obama administration and the world community .

in january and february , north korea presented the newly inaugurated obama administration with a tough set of negotiating positions .

north korea reportedly did not respond to subsequent overtures by the united states to restart talks .

on april 5 , 2009 , north korea launched a long - range ballistic missile , the taepo dong 2 , over japan , but failed to achieve a complete test of the system or place a satellite into orbit .

this test led to united nations security council ( unsc ) condemnation .

in response , north korea said it would abandon the six - party talks , restart its nuclear facilities and conduct a nuclear test .

it asked international and u.s. inspectors to leave the country .

on may 25 , 2009 , north korea conducted an underground nuclear explosion .

in response , the unsc on june 12 unanimously passed res .

1874 , which puts in place a series of sanctions on north korea's arms sales , luxury goods , and financial transactions related to its weapons programs and calls upon states to inspect north korean vessels suspected of carrying such shipments .

the resolution does allow for shipments of food and nonmilitary goods .

as was the case with an earlier resolution , 1718 , that was passed in october 2006 after north korea's first nuclear test , res .

1874 seeks to curb financial benefits that go to north korea's regime and its weapons program .

this report summarizes and analyzes resolution 1874 .

in summary , the economic effect of resolution 1874 is not likely to be great unless china cooperates extensively and goes beyond the requirements of the resolution and / or the specific financial sanctions cause a ripple effect that causes financial institutions to avoid being "tainted" by handling any dprk transaction .

in june 2009 , the obama administration formed an interagency team to coordinate sanctions efforts against north korea with other nations .

the team is led by philip s. goldberg , a former ambassador to bolivia , and consists of representatives from the state department , the white house , the national security agency , the treasury department , and others .

 ( see " implementation of sanctions " below. ) .

many observers cited the designation of a high - level coordinator as a way the united states could produce more success in implementing res .

1874 than was had in implementing its predecessor .

in february 2010 , ambassador goldberg also took over as assistant secretary of the state department's bureau of intelligence and research ( inr ) .

he will continue in his role as coordinator for implementation of unsc resolution 1874 on north korea .

the obama administration faces several key decisions regarding the u.s. role in enforcing resolution 1874 and applying new u.s. sanctions against north korea .

the administration faces a decision on how assertive to be in confronting north korean ship traffic to attempt searches .

it also faces a decision on the u.s. role in enforcing the ban on wmd - related north korean financial transactions .

u.s. officials have said that the obama administration is emphasizing the resolution's call on states to deny financial services to north korea , especially access to foreign banks by north korean trading companies .

administration officials also have said that they are considering reinstating north korea on the u.s. list of state sponsors of terrorism ; the bush administration removed north korea from the list in october 2008 .

finally , the administration may have to calculate the degree of pressure to apply to china if beijing does little to enforce the security council sanctions , as was the case following resolution 1718 .

the hyundai economic research institute of south korea has estimated that if u.n. members enforce the sanctions in resolution 1874 against north korea , north korea could lose between $1.5 billion and $3.7 billion .

other estimates place the loss close to $4 billion .

however , resolution 1874 does not make enforcement of sanctions mandatory but instead "calls on" u.n. members to take enforcement steps .

if sanctions are to have this kind of impact , several key countries will have act forcefully and will have to interpret the sanctions language of the resolution liberally .

there appear to be four key areas of sanctions enforcement .

unsc resolution 1874 tightens , expands , and adds to many of the existing restrictions that were included in unsc resolution 1718 , which the security council unanimously passed on october 14 , 2006 , five days after north korea's first nuclear test .

as with resolution 1874 , resolution 1718 was passed in the hope that it would curb financial inflows that went to north korea's regime and its weapons programs , while imposing minimal humanitarian hardships on the broader north korean population .

less than three weeks after the unsc passed resolution 1718 , north korea announced it would return to the six - party talks that it had been boycotting for nearly a year .

the announcement came after secret meetings with u.s. and chinese officials .

while it is possible that kim jong - il's government planned to quickly return to the talks after its nuclear test , it is also possible that the speedy passage and unanimous support of 1718 spurred the regime's decision .

however , most analysts consider resolution 1718 ineffective in economically penalizing north korea .

the coverage of the provisions was relatively limited , provisions enforcing transparency on sanctioning countries were relatively weak , military enforcement options were not included in the resolution , and there was no defined list of the prohibited products .

instead , creating the lists was left to individual countries , who then reported them to the u.n. sanctions committee .

this administrative feature of the sanctions regime allowed countries to avoid or soften implementation of the resolution .

china and south korea appeared to soften implementation with north korea's decision to return to the six - party talks .

neither country , for instance , published detailed lists of the luxury goods they planned to sanction .

together , the two accounted for 61% and 75% of dprk trade in 2006 and 2007 , respectively .

there is strong evidence that china did not rigorously implement the resolution's provisions .

according to an analysis by the peterson institute's marcus noland , for instance , it appears that exports from china increased after 2006 .

in 2007 , north korea - china trade in general increased by 13% , followed by a 41% increase in 2008 .

in those years , chinese exports to north korea rose by 13% and 46% , respectively .

while this rise in overall trade is not necessarily indicative of an increase in luxury goods shipments , it appears to indicate that the sanctions either had no or little deterrent effect on chinese enterprises' normal commerce with their north korean counterparts .

even more damaging , informed sources have told crs that most of the north korean trading companies and banks sanctioned by the security council continued to operate in china at the end of 2009 .

as for south korea , in the aftermath of north korea's test , it halted humanitarian assistance .

food aid shipments from seoul dropped from 400,000 in 2005 to 100,000 in 2006 .

however , overall trade between the koreas jumped by 33% in the calendar year after resolution 1718 was adopted .

much of this increased trade was due to the expansion of the kaesong industrial complex ( kic ) , a facility in north korea in which south korean manufacturers employ north korean workers .

the north korean government derives tens of millions of dollars from the complex , from rental fees and the portion of the workers' wages it collects .

