federal policymakers are debating a range of potential initiatives for reducing atmospheric carbon dioxide ( co 2 ) emissions from u.s. energy sources .

legislative proposals would seek to limit u.s. co 2 emissions to specific ( historical ) levels through emissions caps , carbon taxes , or other regulatory mechanisms .

many of these proposals dictate or anticipate a declining long - term trajectory for annual u.s. carbon emissions .

the obama administration proposes cutting u.s. greenhouse gas emissions , including co 2 emissions , 14% from 2005 levels by 2020 .

the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r .

2454 ) , which is viewed as the most widely discussed such legislative proposal in congress , would set a more aggressive goal of reducing u.s. greenhouse gas emissions 17% below 2005 levels by 2020 .

other proposals to reduce u.s. carbon emissions to specific levels are found in the cap and dividend act of 2009 ( h.r .

1862 ) , the clean environment and stable energy market act of 2009 ( h.r .

1683 ) , the america's energy security trust fund act of 2009 ( h.r .

1337 ) , and the safe markets development act of 2009 ( h.r .

1666 ) .

an overarching policy issue which arises from carbon control proposals is how the co 2 reduction targets could be achieved .

numerous analysts have been examining this question and have identified specific measures to reach particular targets — especially in the electricity industry , which is responsible for nearly 40% of u.s. carbon emissions .

in the electricity sector , these measures typically include some combination of energy efficiency , renewable energy , nuclear power , advanced fossil - fuel power generation , carbon capture and sequestration , plug - in hybrid electric vehicles , and distributed energy resources .

key among these is end - use energy efficiency , which is viewed by many as the measure with the greatest potential to reduce co 2 emissions quickly and at relatively low cost .

according to secretary of energy steven chu , "energy efficiency , energy conservation are where the greatest gains will be. .

residential and commercial buildings , especially existing stock , are considered a particularly rich target for electricity efficiency improvements , as the two sectors combined account for 40% of primary energy consumption in the united states .

h.r .

2454 contains key sections promoting electricity efficiency in buildings as a means of reaching the bill's carbon emissions targets .

but increasing the efficiency of buildings is not a new priority in the united states .

indeed , congress has recognized the benefits of electricity efficiency in buildings , and the challenges of capturing those benefits , since the energy policy and conservation act of 1975 ( p.l .

94-163 ) .

to date , federal initiatives in building energy efficiency have been somewhat effective , but not as much as they would need to be to achieve the steep co 2 reductions anticipated under h.r .

2454 .

it is widely believed that much greater electricity savings are available through additional building efficiency improvements .

however , analysts have identified a number of critical socio - economic and policy barriers which have historically limited the impact of federal and state building efficiency programs .

this report describes those barriers , the degree to which federal law has addressed them , and their implications for meeting future u.s. carbon reduction targets .

although this report focuses on electricity efficiency in buildings , there are other opportunities for energy efficiency related to buildings that may also offer significant opportunities for atmospheric co 2 reductions .

these include improved energy efficiency in transportation ( to and from buildings ) , reducing direct use of fossil fuels in buildings , and reducing energy use or carbon emissions associated with building materials and construction ( eg , steel and concrete ) .

analysis of some of these options is provided in crs report r40147 , issues in green building and the federal response: an introduction , by [author name scrubbed] .

the term "energy efficiency" can mean different things in different contexts .

for the purposes of this report , "energy efficiency" means that an energy conversion device , such as a household appliance or an elevator , uses less energy while providing the same level of service for a building ( eg , cooling , lighting , motor drive ) .

efficiency improves when the device undergoes a technical modification , or through the use of certain design changes such as better insulation , thermal windows , improved ventilation , and solar orientation .

the energy - saving result of an efficiency increase is referred to as "energy conservation. .

given the set of critical barriers identified in the lock - in report — prepared at the behest of congress — it seems logical to review federal building efficiency policies in the context of these barriers .

in particular , a review of the lock - in analysis invites the question: how have federal statutes on building efficiency addressed the critical barriers in the lock - in report ? .

to explore this question , crs has categorized building efficiency provisions in key federal statutes according to the six critical barriers discussed above .

in performing this analysis , we reviewed the original statutory language and , in some cases , associated committee reports to determine the legislative intent of statutory provisions that were relevant to energy efficiency in buildings .

based upon this review , we judged which provisions appeared to address at least some part of the critical lock - in barriers as described in the report .

statutory provisions clearly addressing more than one barrier category were identified with the multiple barriers .

table 2 summarizes the exercise , identifying with an "x" in the appropriate columns , whether the key federal statutes contain provisions aligned with critical efficiency barriers .

note that such categorization can be subjective , and some provisions address more than one barrier , so the inclusion of certain provisions in one category versus another could be debated .

note also that provisions for largely unrestricted grants to state - run building efficiency programs could not be specifically categorized and , therefore , were excluded from the analysis .

despite these caveats , table 2 offers a number of key insights about the trajectory of congressional policy promoting energy - efficient buildings over the last 35 years , as discussed below .

a detailed version of this table , listing specific sections from each statute that are relevant to this analysis , is provided in the appendix ( table a - 1 ) .

to date , the impact of federal efficiency initiatives in terms of energy savings has been well below its technical potential — but not for lack of attention from legislators .

congress has had an interest in improving the energy efficiency of buildings in the united states for over three decades .

recent concerns about the contribution of power plant fuel combustion to atmospheric co 2 , and therefore to global warming , have lent a new urgency to building efficiency considerations .

looking back on federal efficiency statutes in the context of the lock - in report , it appears that congressional policies since 1975 have been focused persistently on the critical barriers of industry structure , imperfect information , and high first costs .

congress has a history of addressing technical risk , too , by encouraging technology demonstration , although this issue appears to have been a lower priority over the last few years — perhaps due to the imperative of accelerating the implementation of well - demonstrated efficiency measures .

in successive statutes , congress has attempted to "push the envelope" in these areas through ever tighter efficiency standards , new financial incentives , and other measures .

for these barriers , policy debates revolve more around the aggressiveness of federal actions and the details of programs rather than whether congress should intervene .

congress also has a history of addressing unfavorable fiscal policies among utilities .

until 2009 , this history could be characterized as a single significant , but largely ineffective , attempt to advance efficiency - oriented utility rates under p.l .

102-486 .

rate provisions in p.l .

111-5 , however , are another significant attempt to lower rate barriers , although it will be at least a few years before congress will be able to gauge whether this statute will be more successful than the one passed in 1992 .

so , in this case as well , congress has long recognized the significance of the rate barrier to building efficiency .

it seems simply to have been harder to develop and enact consensus policies to address it .

that utility rate reform has been complicated should come as no surprise due to the regulatory primacy of the states on utility retail rate matters and the often controversial economic implications of decoupled rates .

congressional treatment of market risks seems to differ from its treatment of the other critical barriers .

market risks , especially energy price risks , seem to have received relatively little policy attention from congress to date .

one might argue that first cost incentives , like efficient equipment rebates , implicitly address energy price volatility by making up for the risk premium that volatility imposes on the financing of efficiency investments .

but congress does not appear to have incorporated this perspective in its statutory provisions , so even though market risks and incentive levels could be linked in this way , important questions remain about the nature of this linkage and its importance in end - user investment decisions .

given the importance commercial building owners and operators seem to place on this issue , congress may consider a more direct examination of market risk issues in the context of building efficiency investment and the policy options available in response .

what these policy options may be is an open question , as few analysts have devoted significant attention to the issue .

statutes promoting an alaska natural gas pipeline or synthetic fuel plants offer possible examples of energy market risk mitigation policies , but there may be other , potentially more appropriate ones .

some analysts suggest that policies establishing federal energy efficiency resource standards , which would require utilities to achieve specified levels of energy efficiency in their service territories , could be an effective means of promoting efficiency investments in the face of the barriers discussed in this report .

the save american energy act ( h.r .

889 ) and the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( h.r .

2454 § 101 ) are prominent examples of such legislation currently under debate .

in setting efficiency performance targets for utilities , however , such policies may not necessarily target specific efficiency barriers as identified in the lock - in report .

utilities bearing more responsibility for efficiency improvements among their customers might , therefore , face the same barriers that the federal government does now , with no new mechanisms to overcome them .

the utilities could choose to seek new rate structures to promote efficiency , but such actions would require the consent of state regulators , already required to consider such rates as a condition of receiving federal energy grants under p.l .

111-5 .

so it is unclear if , and how , federal energy efficiency resource standards would do more to overcome the lock - in barriers than existing congressional initiatives .

the discussion above offers some perspective , albeit only qualitative , on the implications of congressional building efficiency policies for meeting u.s. carbon reduction targets .

carbon control studies that project electricity efficiency savings on the order of 5% to 10% over a 20-year time frame appear consistent with u.s. conservation program experience , and may be aided by any future costs of co 2 emissions if they are reflected in electricity prices .

achieving efficiency improvements substantially above these levels , however , will likely require aggressive and effective policies to overcome all critical barriers to investment in building efficiency .

using the "critical" barriers from the congressionally mandated lock - in report as a guide , it appears that significant policy gaps remain with respect to utility fiscal policies and market risks .

to the extent that these barriers continue to impede private investment in building efficiency measures , they may reduce the likelihood of achieving federal targets for carbon control associated with efficiency .

therefore , policymakers may benefit from a complete and integrated understanding of the full set of barriers to building efficiency and the range of carbon outcomes they imply .

see table a - 1 on the following page .

