the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) is the major federal statute for the education of children with disabilities .

idea both authorizes federal funding for special education and related services and , for states that accept these funds , sets out principles under which special education and related services are to be provided .

the requirements are detailed , especially when the regulatory interpretations are considered .

the major principles include requirements that states and school districts make available a free appropriate public education ( fape ) to all children with disabilities , generally between the ages of 3 and 21 .

states and school districts identify , locate , and evaluate all children with disabilities , regardless of the severity of their disability , to determine which children are eligible for special education and related services .

each child receiving services has an individual education program ( iep ) spelling out the specific special education and related services to be provided to meet his or her needs .

the parent must be a partner in planning and overseeing the child's special education and related services as a member of the iep team .

"to the maximum extent appropriate," children with disabilities must be educated with children who are not disabled ; and states and school districts provide procedural safeguards to children with disabilities and their parents , including a right to a due process hearing , the right to appeal to federal district court and , in some cases , the right to receive attorneys' fees .

idea was originally enacted in 1975 in response to judicial decisions holding that when states provide an education for children without disabilities , they must also provide an education for children with disabilities .

idea has been the subject of numerous reauthorizations ; the most recent reauthorization was p.l .

108-446 in 2004 .

p.l .

108-446 included specific authorizations for appropriations through 2011 .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 , p.l .

111-5 , includes supplemental appropriations for idea .

congress is currently beginning the process of identifying potential issues for the next reauthorization .

this report examines the major provisions of idea and the legal issues that have arisen .

idea requires that in order to receive funds under the statute , a state must submit a plan to the secretary of education indicating that a state has certain policies and procedures in effect .

among these is the requirement that all children with disabilities and who are in need of special education , are identified , located , and evaluated .

this requirement is referred to as child find .

although this requirement has not been heavily litigated , the ninth circuit held in compton unified school district v. addison that a school district who failed to evaluate a ninth grader who failed all her classes , colored with crayons and played with dolls in class failed to meet idea's child find requirement and that such a failure could be the subject of a due process complaint .

although the supreme court has not yet made a determination regarding whether the case will be heard , the court did ask the department of justice for its views on the issue .

the issue as presented to the court is whether the parent of a child with a disability has a right to a due process hearing alleging negligence because of school officials' failure to arrange an educational program for the child , or if due process suits are only allowed when the school district makes an intentional decision .

after a child has been identified as a child with a disability under idea , an individualized education team is formed to write an individualized education program for the child .

idea contains detailed requirements for the iep .

the iep must include a statement of the child's present levels of academic achievement and functional performance , a statement of measurable annual goals , a description of how these goals are to be met , a statement of the special education and related services to be provided , and an explanation of the extent to which the child is to be educated with children without disabilities .

since the iep is the way fape is implemented , it is a key component of idea and has been the subject of numerous judicial decisions .

generally , these cases have adopted a two - part inquiry: first , the court determines whether idea's procedures have been complied with ; second , the court ascertains whether the iep is reasonably calculated to provide the child with educational benefits .

idea's requirement of a free appropriate public education is the cornerstone of the act , and one of the components of fape is the requirement for related services .

fape is defined in part as requiring "special education and related services. .

related services are defined as meaning transportation , and such developmental , corrective , and other supportive services ( including speech - language pathology and audiology services , interpreting services , psychological services , physical and occupational therapy , recreation , including therapeutic recreation , social work services , school nurse services designed to enable a child with a disability to receive a free appropriate public education as described in the individualized education program of the child , counseling services , including rehabilitation counseling , orientation and mobility services , and medical services , except that such medical services shall be for diagnostic and evaluation purposed only ) as may be required to assist a child with a disability to benefit from special education , and includes the early identification and assessment of disabling conditions in children .

two supreme court decisions under idea have involved the concept of related services , and both have involved the issue of what is a medical service .

in irving independent school district v. tatro , the court examined the case of an eight - year - old girl with spina bifida who required clean intermittent catheterization ( cic ) , and held that the school must provide the service .

the court ruled that services affecting both the medical and educational needs of a child must be provided under idea if ( 1 ) the child has a disability so as to require special education , ( 2 ) the service is necessary to help a child with a disability benefit from special education , and ( 3 ) a nurse or other qualified person who is not a physician can provide the service .

services that could be provided outside the school day would not need to be provided .

tatro drew a bright line between services that had to be provided by a doctor and those that could be provided by a person who was not a physician .

however , after tatro , some courts of appeals did not apply this bright line but used other factors , such as the nature and extent of services .

this set the stage for another supreme court decision in 1999 , cedar rapids community school district v. garret f .

garret f. involved a child who was paralyzed from the neck down as a result of a motorcycle accident when he was four years old .

since the child was ventilator dependent , he required substantial services including providing suction on his tracheotomy tube and manually pumping air through an air bag when suction is being provided .

the school denied the parents' request for services and proposed a test for related services in which the outcome would depend on a series of factors , such as whether the care was continuous and the cost of the services .

the court rejected this proposed test and used the same reasoning it had used in tatro , finding that the medical services exclusion from the definition was limited to the services of a physician or a hospital .

this holding , the court stated , was in keeping with the overarching purpose of idea "to open the door of public education to all qualified children. .

the 2004 reauthorization dealt with this issue by establishing risk pools for high - need children with disabilities .

states are permitted to reserve 10% of the funds reserved for other state activities ( or 1% to 1.05% of the overall state grant ) to establish and maintain a risk pool to assist local educational agencies ( leas ) serving high - need children with disabilities .

idea provides that when the behavior of a child with a disability impedes the child's learning or the learning of others , the iep team must consider "the use of positive behavioral interventions and supports , and other strategies , to address that behavior. .

nothing in idea specifically addresses the use of seclusion and restraints , and the department of education has stated that "[w]hile idea emphasizes the use of positive behavioral interventions and supports to address behavior that impedes learning , idea does not flatly prohibit the use of mechanical restraints or other aversive behavioral techniques for children with disabilities. .

the department also noted that state law may address whether restraints may be used and , if restraints are allowed , the "critical inquiry is whether the use of such restraints or techniques can be implemented consistent with the child's iep and the requirement that iep teams consider the use of positive behavioral interventions and supports when the child's behavior impedes the child's learning or that of others. .

the supreme court has not specifically addressed the use of seclusion or restraints under idea ; however , in honig v. doe , the court examined idea's requirements for children who exhibited violent or inappropriate behavior , and held that a suspension longer than 10 days violated idea's "stay - put" provision .

in honig , the court observed that this decision "does not leave educators hamstrung" and that educators may utilize "normal procedures" which "may include the use of study carrels , timeouts , detention , or the restriction of privileges" as well as a 10-day suspension .

several lower courts have dealt more specifically with this issue .

representative miller introduced legislation , h.r .

1381 , 112 th congress , on april 6 , 2011 , to establish minimum safety standards in schools to prevent and reduce the inappropriate use of restraint and seclusion .

similar legislation passed the house in the 111 th congress and a bill was also introduced in the senate .

although the original version of idea , p.l .

94-142 , contained no specific provision for attorneys' fees , prevailing parties used section 505 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 , or section 1988 of the civil rights attorneys' fees award act , to seek fees .

however , the supreme court in smith v. robinson held that the only remedies for prevailing parties under idea were those contained in that statute .

the statute was described as "a comprehensive scheme set up by congress to aid the states in complying with their constitutional obligations to provide public education for handicapped children. .

the court further noted that allowing the use of other statutes to provide for attorneys' fees would "be inconsistent with congress' carefully tailored scheme. .

the court's decision in smith v. robinson was controversial .

in response , congress in 1986 enacted the handicapped children's protection act , which provided for attorneys' fees under idea .

these provisions were amended in 1997 .

the p.l .

105-17 amendments allowed the reduction of attorneys' fees if the attorney representing the parents did not provide the lea with timely and specific information about the child and the basis of the dispute , and specifically excluded the payment of attorneys' fees for most individualized education plan ( iep ) meetings .

the 2004 idea reauthorization , p.l .

108-446 , kept many of the previous provisions on attorneys' fees but also made several additions .

these include allowing attorneys' fees for the state educational agency ( sea ) or the local educational agency ( lea ) against the parent or the parent's attorney in certain situations .

the fifth circuit found that the award of attorneys' fees for the lea was permissible against a lawyer who refused to accept all offered relief and who used stonewalling tactics ; however , the mere fact that the parents do not prevail in court does not make the parents' action frivolous .

although there is no specific provision allowing a court to award prevailing parents expert witness fees , the language regarding attorneys' fees had been interpreted by some lower courts to allow such an award .

idea's statutory language states in relevant part , "in any action or proceeding brought under this section , the court , in its discretion , may award reasonable attorneys' fees as part of the costs — ( i ) to a prevailing party who is the parent of a child with a disability. .

the parents in arlington central school district v. murphy argued that the language on costs encompassed the payment of expert witness fees .

to support this argument , they pointed to the legislative history of the handicapped children's protection act , which stated that "[t]he conferees intend that the term 'attorneys' fees as part of the costs' include reasonable expenses and fees of expert witnesses. .

the supreme court , in a decision written by justice alito , held that idea does not authorize prevailing parents to recover fees they have paid to experts .

the majority opinion first observed that the holding was "guided by the fact that congress enacted the idea pursuant to the spending clause. .

this was seen as significant because if congress attaches conditions to a state's acceptance of funds , the conditions must be unambiguous and provide clear notice .

the majority concluded that idea's statutory language did not provide this clear notice and that the legislative history was unconvincing and "simply not enough" under these circumstances .

h.r .

1208 and s. 613 were introduced in the 112 th congress to amend idea to include the fees of expert witnesses .

they specifically provided that "the term 'attorneys' fees' shall include the fees of expert witnesses , including the reasonable costs of any test or evaluation necessary for the preparation of the parent or guardian's case in the action or proceeding. .

