an "inherently governmental function" is one that , as a matter of law and policy , must be performed by federal government employees and cannot be contracted out because it is "intimately related to the public interest. .

concerned that the existence of multiple and / or inconsistent definitions of "inherently governmental functions" might be partly responsible for the alleged contracting out of inherently governmental functions by the department of defense ( dod ) and other agencies , the 110 th congress enacted legislation ( p.l .

110-417 ) requiring the office of management and budget ( omb ) to develop a "single consistent definition" of "inherently governmental functions. .

this definition is to "ensure that the head of each ... agency is able to identify each position within that department or agency that exercises an inherently governmental function. .

in response , on march 31 , 2010 , omb , through the office of federal procurement policy , issued a proposed policy letter which would adopt the fair act definition as the single definition .

this report provides background , issues , and options for congress on defining inherently governmental functions within the context of dod operations .

it situates contemporary debates over which functions are inherently governmental within the context of the broader debate about the proper roles of the public and private sectors , surveys existing definitions of "inherently governmental functions" within federal law and policy , and discusses issues and options for congress in redefining inherently governmental functions or otherwise ensuring that the executive branch's categorization of functions corresponds to the definition of inherently governmental functions .

the report focuses upon dod because of the specific functions that it performs ; its prominent role in federal contracting ; its unique workforce , which consists of military and civilian personnel ; and recent allegations that dod , among other agencies , has improperly contracted out inherently governmental functions .

the current debate over which functions are inherently governmental is part of a larger debate about the proper role of the federal government vis - à - vis the private sector that is as old as the republic itself .

all government functions can arguably be divided into three categories: those that must be performed by government employees , those that should be performed by government employees , and those suitable for private sector performance .

however , the size and content of these categories have fluctuated throughout american history .

the "must" category has arguably experienced the least fluctuation , whereas the "should" and "private" categories have significantly increased or diminished over time with changes in administrations or even within administrations ( eg , moving from peacetime to war ) .

the "background" section surveys the history of this public / private debate , focusing particularly upon how it has played out in the context of federal contracting .

the debate over dod functions generally corresponds to the overall public / private debate ; however , it sometimes reflects unique aspects of dod or its procurement system .

first , because dod has two distinct workforces , military and civilian , capable of performing functions , dod must determine which workforce will perform functions in the "must" or "should" categories .

where functions in the "must" category are concerned , dod has to determine whether it matters which dod employees , military or civilian , perform the function .

similarly , where functions in the "should category" are concerned , dod must determine not only whether the function should be performed in - house or by the private sector , but also which workforce will perform functions deemed appropriate for in - house performance .

second , dod relies upon ammunition and armaments in its operations , items which some commentators at various periods of time have thought should be manufactured by defense agencies in arsenals or navy shipyards , for example , instead of by the private sector .

the arguments for in - house manufacturing of dod materiels have varied over the years , but have included the claim that manufacturing of weapons is an inherently governmental function and thus falls within the "must" category .

however , such arguments appear to confuse considerations of national defense policy ( i.e. , the security of having an in - house supply of important products ) , which might argue for placing the function in the "should" category , with functions "intimately related to the public interest. .

third , the federal government has consistently maintained two parallel acquisition systems , civilian and defense , wherein the rules for dod are not always identical to those for the rest of the federal government .

two main definitions of inherently governmental functions currently exist within federal law and policy .

one is a statutory definition , enacted as part of the federal activities inventory reform ( fair ) act of 1998 .

this definition states that an inherently governmental function is "a function so intimately related to the public interest as to require performance by federal government employees. .

the other is a policy - oriented definition contained in office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 76 .

this definition states that an inherently governmental activity is "an activity that is so intimately related to the public interest as to mandate performance by government personnel. .

other statutes and regulations that define inherently governmental functions do so either by reproducing the language of the fair act or omb circular a - 76 , or by incorporating the definitions of the fair act or omb circular a - 76 by reference .

the federal acquisition regulation ( far ) is a prime example of this .

the far does not provide a unique definition of inherently governmental functions .

rather , it incorporates the definition of omb circular a - 76 by reference for purposes of subpart 7.3 , which focuses upon "contractor versus government performance," and it reproduces this definition in its own definitions section for purposes of subpart 7.5 , which identifies "inherently governmental functions. .

in addition to these definitions , there are numerous statutory , regulatory , and policy provisions designating specific functions as inherently governmental or commercial .

these provisions also help establish the meaning of "inherently governmental functions" by specifying what is — and is not — included within that category .

similarly , while not offering their own definitions of inherently governmental functions , the government accountability office ( gao ) and the federal courts have tests for identifying inherently governmental functions that they use in designating specific functions as inherently governmental or commercial .

this section surveys the current definitions of inherently governmental functions , as well as the functions that have been designated as inherently governmental or commercial by statute , regulation , policy , or gao or judicial decision .

it addresses ( 1 ) statutory definitions and declarations ; ( 2 ) policy - based definitions and declarations ; ( 3 ) definitions and declarations from administrative law , including gao decisions ; and ( 4 ) designations in federal court decisions .

the 110 th congress required the office of management and budget ( omb ) to review existing definitions of inherently governmental functions and "develop a single consistent definition" of inherently governmental functions by october 14 , 2009 .

congress did so , in part , because of its concern that federal agencies may have recently contracted out inherently governmental functions due to the existence of multiple and / or inconsistent definitions of this term .

this section provides an overview of major policy and legal issues that could be raised by amending the existing definitions of "inherently governmental functions," either in response to omb's proposal or otherwise , as well as by other options that congress could employ to prevent alleged contracting out of inherently governmental functions .

one option for congress would be to enact no new legislation addressing the definition of inherently governmental functions or the classification of specific functions as inherently governmental until changes required under existing legislation or proposed by the obama administration have been fully implemented .

the 110 th and 111 th congresses have enacted several statutes that address contracting out in general or inherently governmental functions in particular .

in addition to the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fy2009 , which required omb to "develop a single consistent definition" of inherently governmental functions , the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 , prohibited agencies from conducting new public - private competitions under omb circular a - 76 through september 30 , 2009 .

this moratorium on public - private competitions was effectively extended beyond fy2009 by provisions in subsequent appropriations acts that require agencies to complete certain studies prior to conducting such competitions .

other enacted legislation requires the secretary of defense to include in the annual defense manpower requirements report a "summary of the replacement during the preceding fiscal year of contract workyears providing support to major department of defense headquarters activities with military end strength or civilian full - time equivalents , including an estimate of the number of contract workyears associated with the replacement of contracts performing inherently governmental or exempt functions" ; grants the department of defense authority to use appropriated funds available for the purchase of contract services that meet requirements anticipated to continue for five or more years to compensate civilian employees for performing the same requirements and calls for the promulgation of regulations ensuring that the department uses this authority to "build government capabilities that are needed to perform inherently governmental functions , functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions , and other critical functions" ; classifies specific functions as inherently governmental ; requires the secretary of defense to develop guidance related to personal service contracts establishing clear distinctions between dod employees and the employees of dod contractors ; expresses the sense of congress that security operations for the protection of resources ( including people , information , equipment , and supplies ) in uncontrolled or unpredictable high - threat environments should ordinarily be performed by members of the armed forces if they will be performed in highly hazardous public areas where the risks are uncertain and could reasonably be expected to require deadly force and requires that regulations to be issued under section 862 ( a ) of the national defense authorization act for fy2008 ensure that private security contractors are not authorized to perform inherently governmental functions in areas of combat operations ; requires the administrator for federal procurement policy to develop and issue a standard policy to prevent personal conflicts of interest by contractor employees performing acquisitions functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions ; expresses congress's sense that interrogation of enemy prisoners of war , civilian internees , retained persons , other detainees , terrorists , or criminals captured , confined , or detained during or in the aftermath of hostilities is an inherently governmental function and cannot appropriately be transferred to private sector contractors ; requires dod to develop guidelines and procedures to ensure that dod considers using dod civilian employees to perform new or currently contracted - out functions that are closely associated with the performance of inherently governmental functions , among other things ; requires dod to ensure that dod's acquisition workforce is of the appropriate size and skill level to accomplish inherently governmental functions related to the acquisition of major systems and defines a "lead system integrator" as "a prime contractor under a contract for the procurement of services the primary purpose of which is to perform acquisition functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions with respect to the development or production of a major system" ; requires the commission on wartime contracting to make specific recommendations regarding , among other things , the process for determining which functions are inherently governmental in contingency operations , including whether providing security in an area of combat operations is inherently governmental ; and requires omb to develop an inventory to track contracts that , among other things , involve inherently governmental functions .

many of these changes have not yet been fully implemented .

similarly , the obama administration has recently signaled its commitment to have more functions , in general , performed by the federal government and to ensure that inherently governmental functions , in particular , are not improperly contracted out .

some commentators attributed the alleged contracting out of inherently governmental functions during the george w. bush administration , in part , to president bush's "management agenda," which prominently featured a competitive sourcing initiative .

the obama administration , in contrast , apparently intends to in - source , as a matter of policy .

members of the administration have signaled their belief that contractors have performed inherently governmental functions , and that too many functions were contracted out in prior administrations .

additionally , omb released guidance concerning "managing the multi - sector workforce" in july 2009 that cautions against "overreliance on contractors" and instructs agencies to ensure that functions which are "critical" but not "inherently governmental" be performed only with federal employees to the extent required to retain control of the agency mission and operations .

however , once the agency has "sufficient internal capacity" to control its mission and operations , such "essential functions" can be performed by either contractor or governmental personnel , as can functions that are "essential" but not "inherently governmental. .

executive agencies have also made some plans for in - house performance of two functions — acquisitions work and provision of security services — whose performance by contractors has been of particular concern to congress .

such changes in policy may suggest that the executive branch is no longer likely to contract out functions that some allege are inherently governmental .

waiting to see whether implementation of previously enacted legislation and / or the change in administration brings the desired changes in agencies' treatment of specific functions ( eg , performance in - house as opposed to contracting out ) is one option for congress .

prior changes in the law , coupled with the change in administration , might suffice to realize congress's intent without resorting to more extensive changes in the law that could inadvertently limit the options of future administrations .

for example , even without any statutory requirement to do so , the department of homeland security ( dhs ) recently announced that it would review all newly awarded or renewed dhs contracts for services in excess of $1 million "to ensure that proposed contract awards do not include inherently government functions or impact core functions that must be performed by federal employees. .

alternatively , congress might decide that additional oversight or further statutory changes are immediately necessary to support current executive branch policy initiatives or ensure that future administrations do not have the opportunity to contract out allegedly inherently governmental functions before congress can check them .

one common theme in the recent literature on inherently governmental functions is that there are numerous and / or inconsistent definitions of inherently governmental functions within federal law and policy .

for example , in its report on the duncan hunter national defense authorization act for fy2009 , the house of representatives noted that the task of determining which functions must be performed by government employees is made even more difficult by the lack of a single definition and accompanying guidance on what constitutes an "inherently governmental function. .

currently , the federal acquisition regulation defines that term in multiple places , the office of management and budget circular a - 76 also defines the term , and there is yet another definition in the federal activities inventory reform act ( p.l .

105-270 ) .

there is also the additional dod - specific definition of [functions] "closely associated with inherently governmental functions. .

similarly , in its report changing the culture of pentagon contracting , the new america foundation noted that the phrase "inherently governmental functions" appears 15 times in the united states code "without a clear or consistent definition. .

commentators raising this point appear to be suggesting that agencies would not contract out allegedly inherently governmental functions if ( 1 ) they did not have to determine which definition applied in particular cases and / or ( 2 ) they had clear definitions to guide their decision making in particular cases .

despite being pervasive , however , such concerns about multiple or inconsistent definitions of inherently governmental functions may be overstated given that there are only two main definitions of inherently governmental functions in federal law and policy .

moreover , these two definitions are arguably compatible , as table 1 and appendix g illustrate .

in fact , the definitions differ in only a few words , although the materials accompanying the definitions diverge to a greater degree .

the fair act defines an inherently governmental function as "a function that is so intimately related to the public interest as to require performance by federal government employees," while omb circular a - 76 defines an inherently governmental activity as an "activity that is so intimately related to the public interest as to mandate performance by government personnel. .

the differences between "activity" and "function," "require" and "mandate," and "government personnel" and "federal government employees" are arguably not legally or operationally significant .

that there is such apparent compatibility between these definitions should not be surprising , given the history of the three main documents establishing federal law and policy on inherently governmental functions .

the fair act was intended to encourage agencies to at least consider outsourcing their commercial functions under the policies and processes of omb circular a - 76 .

omb circular a - 76 was , in turn , amended in 1999 to bring it into conformity with the fair act , and much of omb circular a - 76 was later incorporated into the far .

other commentators have suggested using another phrase instead of inherently governmental functions , such as "core functions," "mission essential functions," or "critical government functions. .

commentators making this proposal often do not clarify whether this substitution is largely semantic , with agencies to be prohibited from contracting out core functions , for example , in the same way that they are currently prohibited from contracting out inherently governmental ones , or whether the substitution is intended to shift the debate from questions of law ( i.e. , what may be contracted out ? ) .

to questions of policy ( i.e. , which of the functions that may lawfully be contracted out should be contracted out ? ) .

proposals of the latter sort are not definitional and are discussed in the section on " focusing on questions of contracting policy " below .

proposals of the former sort — to replace inherently governmental functions with another phrase that defines which functions agencies may lawfully contract out — would seem to be premised on the belief that agencies will more easily and accurately ascertain which functions they must perform in - house if they can consider specific functions in relation to a defined word or phrase that more clearly expresses the grounds for their decision making .

that is , while agency officials may have difficulty determining which functions are inherently governmental because "inherently governmental" is an abstract - sounding concept , core or mission essential or critical functions may be easier to recognize because their very names make clear the basis for recognizing them .

by its name , a "core function" would seem to be one central to an agency's activities ; a mission essential function , one necessary for the successful accomplishment of a task ; and a critical function , one that could have harmful consequences if not performed .

all of the terms suggested as definitional replacements for "inherently governmental functions" could also potentially connote a broader set of functions than those encompassed by the term inherently governmental functions , especially under its current definition .

the range of mission essential functions , for example , could include any function necessary for the completion of a task , not just those functions that must be performed by government employees because they are "intimately related to the public interest. .

translating directions from a foreign language into english could be mission essential ( eg , necessary in order for commanders to get troops from point a to point b ) without being inherently governmental ( eg , if the troops were on a routine patrol in friendly territory ) .

replacing "inherently governmental functions" with one of these terms could thus expand the range of functions exempt from contracting out , which might also constitute a short - term solution to any alleged over - reliance on contractors .

however , this approach would not necessarily address which functions government employees must perform because they are in the public interest .

moreover , tying functions more closely to agency operations than to the public interest could result in situations where a function is categorized differently by different agencies .

for example , translators would not necessarily be mission essential for the interior department , although they might be for the state department .

similarly , translators could be essential for some dod missions , but not for others .

the correction of long - standing errors in agencies' unsustainable procurements ( clean - up ) act of 2009 ( s. 924 , 111 th congress ) would effectively diminish agencies' ability to contract out inherently governmental functions , among others , by defining other categories of functions related to inherently governmental ones and precluding agencies from contracting out these functions .

s. 924 would adopt the far's definition of functions closely associated with inherently governmental functions and create its own definition of mission essential functions .

this definition includes "functions that , although neither necessarily inherently governmental nor necessarily closely related to an inherently governmental function , are nevertheless considered by executive agency officials to be more appropriate for performance by federal employees. .

it then would require heads of executive agencies to "ensure that inherently governmental functions , functions closely related to inherently governmental functions , and mission - essential functions are performed by federal employees. .

such a proposal would , among other things , ensure that allegedly inherently governmental functions are effectively shielded from potential contracting out by "insulating" them within additional layers of functions that could not be contracted out .

executive branch categorizations of particular functions would have less significance under this proposal than under the current law , where functions may be contracted out provided that the contracting agency determines that they are not inherently governmental .

provision of security services in combat zones is one function that might be more easily kept in - house under the clean - up act than under existing law .

under existing law , dod contracted out such services after finding they were not inherently governmental , although some members of congress contend that they are inherently governmental functions or functions approaching inherently governmental .

under the clean - up act , however , dod would have to find that these functions are not inherently governmental , closely related to inherently governmental , or mission essential in order to contract them out .

the two additional categories into which functions might fall , which would keep them from being contracted out , could increase the likelihood of certain functions being performed in - house .

for example , while it may seem plausible , at least to some , that private security contractors do not perform inherently governmental functions , it could seem less plausible that their functions are neither closely associated with inherently governmental functions nor mission essential .

such a change would be a significant one , given that agencies currently may generally contract out functions that they do not find to be inherently governmental .

the change might , however , serve only to shift the functions about which disagreements arise .

rather than disagreements over the categorization of functions as inherently governmental , congress and federal agencies might find themselves in disagreements over the categorization of functions as mission essential .

moreover , such disagreements might have to be resolved by the legislative or political process given the limits on standing to challenge agencies' contracting determinations and the political question doctrine .

another option , not widely discussed , would be to define terms within the existing definition of inherently governmental functions .

the existing definition of inherently governmental functions could , perhaps , be made clearer by establishing the meaning of key terms under it .

statutes could prescribe what it means for a function to be "intimately related to the public interest" or "performed by the federal government," for example .

defining "performance by the federal government," in particular , could potentially help remove the distinction between performing and assisting with inherently governmental functions that characterizes gao opinions and executive branch discussions of inherently governmental functions .

for example , in its consideration of the irs's proposed private debt collection program — which was one of the most prominent non - dod examples of an agency contracting out allegedly inherently governmental functions — gao distinguished between collection of taxes , which is inherently governmental , and assisting in collecting taxes by locating and contacting taxpayers to remind them of their tax liability and suggest payment methods , which is not inherently governmental .

any definitional changes , along the lines suggested above or otherwise , may be of limited effectiveness in ensuring that executive branch agencies do not contract out functions that some members of congress or commentators believe are inherently governmental .

this is , in large part , because many functions are not patently inherently governmental or commercial , as figure 1 illustrates .

the potential effectiveness of definitional changes is also limited by the fact that any definition — of inherently governmental functions or some other construct — would be applied in specific circumstances by executive branch officials , who might not classify functions in the same way that congress or third - parties would classify them .

for example , dod determined that private security contractors would not be performing inherently governmental functions under the existing law .

some members of congress disagreed , however , as is evidenced by their enactment of legislation expressing the sense of congress that "security operations for the protection of resources ... in uncontrolled or unpredictable high - threat environments should ordinarily be performed by members of the armed forces. .

congress has attempted to address alleged deficiencies in agencies' application of the definitions of inherently governmental functions in several ways .

the 110 th congress required the commission on wartime contracting to include in its report recommendations on the process for determining which functions are inherently governmental in contingency operations , including whether providing security in an area of combat operations is inherently governmental .

the 110 th congress , as well as other congresses , also enacted legislation classifying particular functions as inherently governmental .

congress could also require agencies to provide mandatory training for their contracting officers , in particular , on what constitutes an inherently governmental function .

or congress could provide agencies with lists of functions that are inherently governmental , or potentially suitable for contracting out , like the lists found in the far or formerly contained in omb circular a - 76 .

none of these approaches is likely to prevent the recurrence of future inter - branch differences of opinion in the classification of particular functions , however .

the recommendations of the commission on wartime contracting will be context - specific , and while they might adequately guide dod in the near future in similar situations , they may not be sufficient to guide decision making by other agencies , in the future , or in dissimilar situations .

enactment of legislation classifying particular functions as inherently governmental is necessarily ad hoc , and often possible only after agencies have already engaged in allegedly improper contracting for performance of inherently governmental functions .

mandatory training for agency officials could cost money , and it would be hard to ensure that the persons providing the training would categorize specific functions in the same way that some members of congress or commentators would .

these trainers would be employees of or working for the executive branch , which has its own interests in asserting its constitutional and statutory prerogatives in the realm of contracting .

no listing of functions could be comprehensive , and even if the list covered all functions currently of concern to congress , problems may arise in the future related to the performance of functions not presently at issue .

some current disputes over the alleged contracting out of inherently governmental functions during the bush administration were arguably exacerbated by the fact that agencies categorize functions as inherently governmental or commercial without knowing all the details about how specific contracts will be performed in specific settings that often later prompt commentators to allege the functions were inherently governmental and should never have been contracted out to begin with .

had blackwater employees not been involved in several shooting incidents in iraq , which were unanticipated at the time the state department entered the contracts with blackwater , the debate over whether private security contractors perform inherently governmental functions might not have ensued .

prohibiting agencies from contracting out specific functions , or from using appropriated funds to contract out specific functions , would also serve to ensure that certain allegedly inherently governmental functions are not contracted out .

section 730 of the consolidated appropriations act for fy2008 , for example , specifies that [n]one of the funds made available in this act may be used to study , complete a study of , or enter into a contract with a private party to carry out , without specific authorization in a subsequent act of congress , a competitive sourcing activity of the secretary of agriculture , including support personnel of the department of agriculture , relating to rural development or farm loan programs .

such approaches do not require any changes in the definition of inherently governmental functions , and they remove all possible questions about whether the executive branch will categorize a function as congress might wish .

these approaches are probably best utilized as tailored responses to specific concerns , however , because they are reactive and potentially time - limited .

congress generally uses these approaches on an ad hoc basis in response to agencies' contracting out , or proposed contracting out , of specific functions .

moreover , if included in an appropriations bill , such prohibitions could be limited to specific agencies or time periods .

prohibitions in a dod appropriations bill would not necessarily apply to the department of state , for example , and prohibitions could be limited to funds covered by the appropriation , or automatically carried over to future appropriations bills long after the situation prompting the prohibition has otherwise been resolved .

a more general prohibition on the use of the omb circular a - 76 process , such as was in place through september 30 , 2009 , might seem helpful in preventing the contracting out of inherently governmental functions because it addresses all contracting out under omb circular a - 76 .

however , such an approach is arguably both over - inclusive and under - inclusive .

it is over - inclusive in the sense that prohibiting agencies' contracting out under omb circular a - 76 encompasses all functions performed by the government , not just those that are allegedly inherently governmental .

omb circular a - 76 articulates the competitive process that agencies are to use in source selection whenever they consider contracting with private sector sources for the performance of commercial activities performed by government employees .

it thus potentially applies to contracts for functions that are generally not considered to be inherently governmental ( eg , custodial services ) , as well as to those for functions that some might argue are inherently governmental ( eg , acquisitions - related functions ) .

a general prohibition on the use of the a - 76 process is also under - inclusive in the sense that a - 76 addresses only commercial functions performed by government employees .

it does not apply to new functions , which have not been performed by government employees , nor does it provide a mechanism for "insourcing," or determining whether government employees or contractors should perform functions currently performed by contractors .

such a prohibition may also generate opposition from trade groups if it appears designed to protect government employees at the expense of contractor employees .

some commentators have suggested that congress could potentially make agencies less prone to contract out allegedly inherently governmental functions , or other functions , by addressing structural factors that may lead agencies to rely on contractors instead of military personnel or civil servants .

"personnel ceilings" have been identified as one such factor .

a personnel ceiling establishes the maximum number of positions that may be budgeted in a job category or for all personnel in an organization .

although dod is prohibited from converting a function performed by dod civilian personnel to contractor performance to circumvent a personnel ceiling , it is otherwise subject to ceilings on the number of civilian employees and military personnel .

it may also hire contractors without engaging in public - private competitions under omb circular a - 76 when converting functions from military to dod civilian performance if the director of the local human resources office determinates that civilian employees cannot be hired .

some commentators have suggested that dod relied on contractors to perform certain functions , most notably acquisition functions , in part because of the operation of such personnel ceilings .

recently enacted or introduced legislation removed or would remove personnel ceilings imposed by the executive branch , as well as certain congressionally imposed ceilings on the number of dod personnel .

however , such legislation does not address congressionally imposed ceilings outside dod , or troop needs in situations where dod civilian personnel cannot be substituted for military ones and there are insufficient volunteers for the military .

however , complete removal of personnel ceilings is not possible because of limits on the use of appropriated funds and , arguably , would not comport with some members' desire to keep agencies within their budgets .

another factor involves the ease of hiring and firing government personnel .

because of the procedural requirements for hiring new federal employees , as well as the procedural protections ensuring that federal employees are not improperly dismissed , agencies can experience difficulties matching their existing personnel to the functions they need to perform when there are sudden changes in their missions .

an unanticipated need for workers to perform a new function , or the actual or anticipated ending of a particular mission , poses particular problems .

this factor may become less salient over time , however , as congress has given , or is considering giving , agencies expedited or other hiring authorities , and agencies have begun creating some term - limited positions for federal employees .

congress receives some information about agencies' contracting decisions under the fair act , but this information may be insufficient to enable congress to adequately ascertain which functions agencies may be improperly contracting out .

under the fair act , agencies must compile annual lists of all activities they perform that are not inherently governmental and make these lists available to congress and the public .

however , such lists include only functions that agencies currently perform , not new functions , and the listings may not provide congress or the public with enough information to ascertain whether a listed function is , in fact , commercial , as figure 2 illustrates .

moreover , under the fair act , agencies' lists are not directed to any specific committee ( s ) of congress , nor is there an established procedure for congressional review of or response to the lists once they are received .

this is not to say that congress and its members cannot or do not exercise their oversight functions in response to specific items on agencies' fair act inventories .

it does , however , mean that congressional involvement with fair act inventories is ad hoc , not systemic , which could limit congress's ability to provide effective oversight of contracting out under the fair act .

systemic congressional involvement in the omb circular a - 76 process is equally limited .

omb circular a - 76 focuses primarily upon public notice , as figure 3 illustrates ; notice to congress is mentioned only as an accompaniment to public notice .

congress has recently considered several proposals that would increase the information about agencies' contracting decisions available to congress and / or the public .

the clean - up act , for example , would require that the chief acquisition officer of each agency , or his or her equivalent , certify that each function to be performed under an agency service contract ( including task or delivery orders and exercises of options ) is not inherently governmental , closely related to inherently governmental , or mission essential .

in addition , agency heads would have to report to the head of omb annually on each contract , with the report being posted on the internet and notice of the report's availability being published in the federal register .

the hope is , apparently , that increased congressional or public awareness of agencies' decisions may diminish the likelihood that an agency will improperly classify as commercial an activity that is arguably inherently governmental .

with increased awareness of potentially problematic decisions , congress could exercise oversight or enact legislation .

however , oversight may be insufficient to get an agency to change its classification of a particular function , especially in the short term , and enacting legislation can take time .

another option for congress would be to shift its focus from questions of contracting law to questions of contracting policy , or from discussions of whether specific functions are inherently governmental to discussions of which of the functions that are not inherently governmental should be performed in - house .

the current discussions regarding the definition of inherently governmental functions , or whether certain functions are inherently governmental , do not address what should be done with those functions which are not inherently governmental .

agencies are presently answering these questions on an ad hoc basis , without appreciable congressional guidance , in part because the only government - wide authorities on contracting out were designed for different purposes and focus upon contracting out of commercial functions .

the fair act focuses upon listings of commercial functions that could be lawfully contracted out , while omb circular a - 76 focuses upon how to determine whether government employees or the private sector will perform specific commercial functions .

no legislation , regulation , or policy document systematically addresses how agencies should determine which of the non - inherently governmental functions they perform should be performed in - house because of concerns related to transparency , accountability , employment policy , or related issues , although commentators have proposed some such frameworks .

figure 4 illustrates one possible model for separating questions of contract law from those of contract policy , while figure 5 illustrates one model for deciding questions of contracting policy .

the need for "balance" and "reasonableness" in agencies' use of contractors , as well as their need to "maintain agency capability to perform core functions" have been particularly noted .

however , discussions of "balance" and "reasonableness" can have two different focal points .

while the focus is often on the perceived overuse of contracting out , there are those who believe that the problem is under - use of the private sector .

the freedom from government competition act of 2009 , for example , takes the latter view .

the cost of performing functions is assessed as part of the a - 76 process , although there have been some concerns about how accurately this process reflects the costs of either performance in - house or by contractors .

congress has arguably recently begun to pay increased attention to questions of contract policy .

sections 3 and 11 of the clean up act , for example , encourage executive branch agencies to pursue business process engineering , "even if such efforts reduce or increase the need for federal employees or contractors. .

business process engineering is , however , more concerned with cost - savings in operations than it is with decision making as to who performs specific functions .

congress could take additional actions to focus attention on questions of contracting policy by , among other things , holding hearings at which agencies can present and discuss their developing frameworks for deciding questions of contracting policy , mandating that executive branch officials develop a framework for deciding questions of contracting policy , or legislatively establishing such a framework to be used by executive branch officials .

a focus on contracting policy may also allow congress to better address related questions , such as the management and oversight of contractors' work , that often get caught up in the debate over inherently governmental functions , but are arguably separate from it .

for example , some commentators seem to desire the expansion of the category of inherently governmental functions because there have been problems with contractor performance under specific contracts and classifying a function as inherently governmental ensures that a contractor cannot lawfully perform that function .

however , while it may be tempting to conflate "shall" and "should" and categorize all functions as inherently governmental whenever there are any possible grounds for saying that the government "should" perform them , such an approach could constrain the options of future administrations and avoids the question of which functions must be performed by the government in every case .

a function that should be performed by the government could potentially be contracted out in an emergency if it cannot be performed in - house .

the same would not be true of an inherently governmental function .

appendix a .

examples of congressional and executive branch interactions in defining inherently governmental functions during the 1980s some illustrations of congress's responses to attempts by the reagan and george h.w .

bush administrations to contract out certain functions during the 1980s may help to clarify the give - and - take in the current debate over the public and private sectors and contracting out .

during this period , congress frequently used the appropriations rider to counter contracting - out decisions .

an appropriations rider places conditions — generally in the form of language specifying that "no funds shall be used for" — on the outsourcing of a particular type of function or on outsourcing in general .

alternatively , an appropriations rider might impose conditions that must be met before funds can be expended ( eg , a report to congress ) .

this type of legislation is easily tailored to particular concerns , but is generally only effective for the period of the appropriation .

appropriations riders general prohibitions on contracting out an example of a general prohibition on contracting out was contained in the further continuing appropriations act for fy1983 , which provided that none of the funds appropriated under the act for the general services administration ( gsa ) could be obligated or expended to contract out any service performed by gsa employees .

another example of a general prohibition was contained in the national aeronautics and space administration authorization act for fy1989 , which prohibited the use of funds authorized by the act to contract out any function currently performed by federal employees at the kansas city national weather service training center .

prohibitions on contracting out specific functions the 1984 appropriation for gsa illustrates a more specific type of restriction on contracting out .

the continuing resolution for fy1984 specified that no funds could be expended by gsa to contract out any guard , elevator operator , messenger , or custodian functions performed by gsa employees .

however , the act granted an exception for certain services contracted out to sheltered workshops employing the "severely handicapped. .

another example of a prohibition on contracting out specific functions can be found in the treasury , postal service and general government appropriations act for fy1989 , which prohibited use of any funds made available under the act to contract out positions at the bureau of engraving and printing police force .

requiring agencies to meet certain conditions prior to contracting out there were also many instances where congress required agencies to meet certain conditions before they could use appropriated funds to implement any outsourcing decision .

the departments of commerce , justice , and state , the judiciary and related agencies appropriation act for fy1989 , for example , specified that none of the funds provided under the act could be obligated , or expended through a reprogramming of funds , to contract out any function or activity performed by federal employees without first notifying the appropriations committees of both houses of congress .

the department of defense appropriations act for fy1989 similarly prohibited the use of funds appropriated by the act for contracting out any activity performed by the defense personnel support center in philadelphia unless the appropriations committees of both houses of congress received advance notice .

specifying procedures for contracting out another approach was to limit agencies' discretion by prescribing how particular agencies should approach their outsourcing decisions .

congress used this approach to address both contracting out generally and contracting out of specific functions .

for example , congress sometimes enacted statutes setting out the criteria that an agency must use in making outsourcing determinations , the procedure it must follow in any public / private cost comparisons , definitions of key terms ( eg , "inherently governmental functions" ) , penalties for violations , and any specific or generic exemptions .

chapter 146 of title 10 of the united states code , which governs dod contracting for performance of civilian commercial or industrial functions , illustrates this type of legislation .

chapter 146 has provisions ( 1 ) specifying the studies and reports that dod must perform before converting a function ; ( 2 ) defining and exempting "core functions ; " ( 3 ) listing the requirements for conducting cost comparisons involving retirement costs ; and ( 4 ) listing specifically exempted functions .

interestingly , chapter 146 was not enacted as one statute , but resulted from several provisions enacted during the 1980s , as the following chronology illustrates .

departme nt of d efense authorization act for fy 1980 .

this act prohibited dod from converting , during that fiscal year , any commercial or industrial function of dod performed by dod personnel as of november 9 , 1979 , to performance by a contractor unless the secretary of defense notified congress .

two types of notification were required .

first , the secretary was to notify congress of any decision to study possible conversion and certify that the government in - house cost calculation for the function was based on an estimate of the most efficient and cost - effective organization for in - house performance .

then , if a decision to convert the function was ultimately made , the secretary had to report ( 1 ) the economic impact on the employees affected , the community , and the federal government ; ( 2 ) the effects of the conversion on the military mission of the function ; and ( 3 ) the amount of the private bid for performance of the function , the cost if the function were continued in - house , and any costs or expenditures the government would incur because of the contract .

the act also prohibited , during the fiscal year , any conversion to circumvent civilian personnel ceilings .

the act exempted funds appropriated for any fiscal year for dod research , development , testing , or evaluation , or procurement or production related thereto , unless the funds were obligated or expended for operation or support of installations or equipment used for research and development , including maintenance support for laboratories , operation and maintenance of test ranges , or maintenance of test aircraft and ships .

departme nt of defense authorization act for fy 1981 .

this act contained restrictions on contracting out that were nearly identical to those included in the dod authorization for fy1980 , but made these restrictions permanent law with an effective date of october 1 , 1980 .

the act prohibited converting any commercial or industrial function of dod performed by dod personnel on october 1 , 1980 , to performance by a private contractor unless the secretary of defense provided the following information to congress in a timely manner: ( 1 ) notice of any decision to study possible conversion ; ( 2 ) a detailed summary comparing the cost of dod personnel performing the function and performance by a private contractor and demonstrating that privatization of the function would result in cost savings to the government over the life of the contract ; ( 3 ) certification that the government's in - house cost calculation for the function was based on an estimate of the most efficient and cost - effective organization for in - house performance ; ( 4 ) a report on the economic impact of the proposed contract on the employees affected , the community , and the federal government ; ( 5 ) the effects of the conversion on the military mission of the function ; and ( 6 ) the amount of the private bid for performance of the function , the cost if the function were to be continued in - house , and any cost or expenditure which the government would incur because of the contract .

if dod decided to convert the function after these studies were completed , the secretary of defense had to report this decision to congress .

the effective date of this provision was october 1 , 1980 .

the act also prohibited conversion to circumvent civilian personnel ceilings .

department of defense authorization act for fy 1983 .

this act amended the 1981 authorization for dod so that the foregoing prohibitions applied only to functions performed by civilian employees of dod , as opposed to dod personnel .

it exempted functions performed by 10 or fewer dod civilian employees , but prohibited modification , reorganization , or division of functions to take advantage of this exemption .

the amendment also provided that the restrictions of the act should not apply during war or declared national emergencies .

the effective date of this amendment was october 1 , 1982 .

the act also specifically prohibited use of any funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization to contract out firefighting or security - guard functions at any military facility except for the renewal of existing contracts .

the act also placed a six - month moratorium on use of any funds appropriated under this authorization for new studies of the benefits or feasibility of contracting out functions performed by dod civilian employees except for custodial , laundry , refuse collection , grounds maintenance , food service and preparation , and base transportation functions .

the six - month period ran from october 1 , 1982 , to march 31 , 1983 .

department of defense author ization act for fy 198 4 .

this act continued for two years the prohibition on contracting out dod firefighting and security - guard functions that had been initiated in the dod authorization for fy1983 .

the extended prohibition did not apply to contracts to be performed outside the united states , situations where the use of military personnel would affect unit readiness , contracts to be carried out on government - owned but privately operated installations , or renewal of existing contracts .

department of defense authorizat ion act for fy 1985 .

this act required the secretary of defense to identify logistics activities that are essential to the national defense .

the act prohibited contacting out these activities unless the secretary provided congress with a "waiver" stating that the activity was no longer required for national defense , as well as the criteria used in granting the waiver .

departmen t of defense authorization act for fy 1986 .

this act declared that certain functions of dod should be deemed logistics activities essential to the national defense under section 307 of p.l .

98-525 .

these functions were depot - level maintenance of mission essential materiel at certain facilities of the army , navy , marines , air force , defense logistics agency , and defense mapping agency .

codifying restrictions from appropriations riders as the notes under many of the foregoing provisions indicate , numerous limitations were codified late in the 99 th congress and or in the 100 th congress .

the national defense authorization act for fy1987 , for example , codified the prohibition on contracting out dod firefighting functions that had been initiated in the dod authorization for fy1983 .

however , this prohibition did not apply to contracts performed outside the united states , situations where use of military personnel affected unit readiness , contracts performed on government - owned but privately operated installations , or renewal of existing contracts .

the prohibition on contracting out security - guard functions was continued for one year with the same exceptions as for firefighter functions .

also exempted from this prohibition were contracts for security - guard services when the requirement for the services arose after the effective date of the act and the secretary of defense determined that the functions could be contracted out without adversely affecting installation security , safety , or readiness .

the act also codified the general policy on contracting out noted earlier , ( i.e. , that dod should contract out any function not prohibited by law if it would be provided at a lower cost — including any cost differential required by law , executive order , or regulation — by the private sector ) .

guidelines were provided for determining if money would be saved by contracting out .

the national defense authorization act for fy1988 and 1989 similarly made permanent the prohibition on contracting out security - guard functions at dod facilities , with the same exemptions as apply to firefighter functions .

permanent laws in addition to appropriations riders , congress also enacted permanent laws to limit outsourcing .

for example , the veterans' compensation , education , and employment amendments of 1982 prohibited contracting out medical care provided by what was then the veterans administration ( va ) .

if the va determined that an activity was not a direct patient care activity , or an activity incident to direct patient care , it could contract out the activity provided that the then - administrator of the va made two determinations after conducting a study required by the act .

first , the administrator of the va had to determine that ( 1 ) the costs to the government ( including the costs of the study ) would be lower by 15% or more than the costs of in - house performance and ( 2 ) the quality or quantity of health care services would be maintained or enhanced by the contract .

the comprehensive omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1986 similarly required the national oceanic and atmospheric administration to notify the president of the senate ; the speaker of the house ; the senate committee on commerce , science , and transportation ; the house committee on merchant marine and fisheries ; and the house committee on science and technology at least 30 days before awarding any contract for the performance of a commercial activity as defined in omb circular a - 76 .

the notice had to include a description of the contract , a comparison of the costs of and services provided by contracting out or in - house performance , and an assessment of the benefits to the federal government of proceeding with the proposed contract .

the sikes act extension and amendments authorized the secretary of defense to enter into cooperative plans with the secretary of the interior and state agencies for the development , maintenance , and coordination of wildlife , fish , and game conservation and rehabilitation on military reservations .

the implementation and enforcement of these plans was specifically exempted from omb circular a - 76 and priority was given to federal and state agencies .

this exemption did not apply to existing contracts , but did cover renewals of existing contracts .

appendix b .

factors used in determining whether a function is inherently governmental under omb circular a - 76 appendix c. functions performed by military personnel as classified by dodi 1100.22 appendix d. functions performed by dod civilian employees as classified by dodi 1100.22 appendix e. inherently governmental functions and functions approaching inherently governmental as classified by the far appendix f. functions recognized as inherently governmental or commercial by the gao appendix g. side - by - side comparison of the definitions of inherently governmental functions from the fair act and omb circular a - 7 .

