national governments throughout the world have offered prizes to encourage innovation since at least the late 1700s .

for example , napoleon's government offered a 12,000 franc prize for technologies that would enhance the preservation of food to better feed advancing military troops .

this lead to the process of preserving food in bottles , which shortly thereafter led to the process of canned foods , and then broad use by consumers .

in the united states , congress authorized most of today's federally - funded innovation inducement prizes beginning with the 108 th congress ( 2003 ) .

the purpose of this report is to gain a better understanding of these prizes to provide guidance for members of congress who are interested in creating new prizes , modifying current prize programs , or increasing oversight of current prizes .

this report discusses the status of current federally - funded innovation inducement prizes , addresses the different types of prizes , analyzes when prizes may be appropriate and effective , and summarizes assessments that have been made of their effectiveness .

the report also provides the lessons that may be learned from completed competitions , and policy options for those members of congress interested in taking action regarding federally - funded innovation inducement prizes .

the report concludes with an overview of 111 th congressional activities regarding prizes .

this report does not discuss prizes funded by non - federal organizations nor does it discuss recognition prizes that reward past accomplishments other than to distinguish them from innovation inducement prizes ( see discussion of this issue in the following section , " what are the different kinds of prizes ? .

" ) .

philanthropic organizations , industry , governments , and nongovernmental organizations offer many different kinds of prizes with a variety of objectives to reward accomplishments in science and technology ( s&t ) .

some prizes , such as the nobel prizes and u.s. national medal of science and national medal of technology , reward past accomplishments and do not have a specific scientific or technological goal .

these have been called "recognition prizes. .

other prizes , called "innovation inducement prizes," are designed to attain scientific and technical goals not yet reached , often in response to perceived market failures .

objectives of these prizes include both technological and non - technological goals: identify new or unorthodox ideas or approaches to particular challenges ; demonstrate the feasibility or potential of particular technologies ; promote development and diffusion of specific technologies ; address intractable or neglected societal challenges ; and educate the public about the excitement and usefulness of research and innovation .

this report focuses upon federally - funded "innovation inducement" prizes that have these goals .

the scientific and technological goals for prizes include the full spectrum of research , development , testing , demonstration , and deployment .

they are an alternative to more traditional ways of achieving societal objectives with science and technology such as grants , contracts , fees , patents , and human or physical infrastructure investments that some think are too costly , risk - averse , and bureaucratic .

some believe that prizes , if designed well , can enhance the ability of science and technology to solve societal problems , by reaching a wider community of problem solvers , encouraging risk - taking , and focusing the attention of policymakers , entrepreneurs , the public , and researchers on the goals of an innovation program .

concerns about prizes are that they may inhibit the exchange of information among researchers and innovators due to the very nature of competitions , be challenging to design and finance , and result in duplicative work which may not be the best use of limited intellectual and financial resources .

prizes differ in their intentions , objectives , sources of funding , competition mechanisms , reward structures , and other variables .

there is also a wide spectrum of participants in prize competitions from individual citizens with and without scientific or technical expertise , school districts , governments , universities and other nonprofit organizations , and small and large companies .

the prizes themselves may take the form of recognition and publicity , cash , marketing monopolies , or other means .

some experts view the non - compensation portion of prizes as important , and sometimes more important , than the potential financial reward .

from a competitor standpoint , key considerations are the degree of flexibility in the competition rules , and the financial and nonfinancial risks and incentives .

the following federal agencies have science and technology ( s&t ) programs that conduct prize competitions: the department of energy ( doe ) , the department of defense ( dod ) including the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) , the department of health and human services' ( hhs ) biomedical advanced research and development authority ( barda ) , and the national aeronautics and space administration ( nasa ) .

each of these agencies have the statutory authority to offer prizes .

table 1 provides an initial overview , and the text that follows provides more in - depth information .

members of congress interested in federally - funded innovation inducement prizes may wish to create new prizes , or modify or increase oversight of current prize programs .

in discussing possible options , policymakers may wish to receive comments from the current or potential administering agency , and stakeholders in that prize including participants in the competition , sponsors of those competitors , organizations that partner with the agencies in the administration of a prize , and the users of the competition results from both a technological and educational perspective .

this section describes the activities in the 111 th congress regarding federally - funded innovation inducement prizes .

in the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , congress indicated that funds for announced , authorized prizes at nasa shall remain available , without fiscal year limitation , until the prize is claimed or the offer is withdrawn .

during the fy2010 appropriations process , nasa , requested $4.0 million for its centennial challenges program .

no funding was provided in fy2009 .

in h.rept .

111-149 , the house recommended not providing this funding due to "affordability considerations. .

several members of congress have also introduced legislation in the 111 th congress that would establish prizes on several science and engineering topics .

each of these is described below .

h.r .

41 would provide for federal research , development , demonstration , and commercial application activities to enable the development of farms that are net producers of both food and energy , and for other purposes .

it would direct the secretary of energy to enter into an arrangement with the national academy of sciences to evaluate the feasibility of a prize and best practices award programs as tools to promote self - powered farms and , if feasible , make recommendations for carrying out such programs .

the voting integrity and verification act of 2009 ( s. 48 ) would require the director of the national institute of standards and technology ( nist ) to establish a program to award cash prizes competitively to eligible persons that advance the research , development , demonstration , and application of voting systems specifically designed to enhance accessibility and provide independence for persons with disabilities during the voting process .

the new manhattan project for energy independence act ( h.r .

513 ) would award a prize for the development and manufacturing of energy technologies that meet a number of economic , technical , and societal criteria including a plug - in hybrid vehicle , alternative fuel vehicle , electric vehicle , hydrogen fuel cell vehicle , or other alternative technology vehicle ; an energy efficient residential or commercial building ; a large scale solar thermal power plant or solar photovoltaic power plant ; biofuels ; carbon capture and storage system for a large scale coal - burning power plant ; validated process for remediation of radioactive waste ; or sustainable nuclear fusion reaction .

the doe would administer a prize program with monetary awards to advance the research , development , demonstration , and commercial application necessary to achieve these goals with a prize for each .

other goals include broad participation by researchers , large and small businesses , institutions of higher education , and any other qualified applicants , including veterans .

in developing the prize , doe is to consult with other federal agencies , including nsf ; and may consult with other experts such as private organizations , including professional societies , industry associations , and the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering .

the nanotechnology innovation and prize competition act of 2009 ( s. 596 ) directs the secretary of commerce , through the nist director to establish a program to award prizes for achievement in the applications of nanotechnology for: ( 1 ) improvement of the environment , consistent with twelve principles of green chemistry of the environmental protection agency ( epa ) ; ( 2 ) development of alternative energy that has the potential to lessen the dependence of the united states on fossil fuels ; ( 3 ) improvement of human health , consistent with regulations promulgated by the food and drug administration ( fda ) ; and ( 4 ) development of consumer products .

the bill would appoint a board to oversee the program and require it to submit an annual report to congress .

it provides the board with the option of contracting with a private organization to administer the prize .

that board could either make a financial award to the first competitor to meet criteria established by the board , or recognize individuals for superlative achievement in one or more of these nanotechnology applications and recommend to the secretary of commerce that the president award the national technology and innovation medal ( which would not have a financial award ) .

the cybersecurity act of 2009 ( s. 773 ) would require the nist director to establish cybersecurity competitions and challenges with cash prizes to attract , identify , evaluate , and recruit talented individuals for the federal information technology workforce , and stimulate innovation in basic and applied cybersecurity research , technology development , and prototype demonstration that have the potential for application to the federal information technology activities of the federal government .

the program would target its competitions and challenges to different groups including high school students , undergraduate students , graduate students , and academic and research institutions .

competition topics are to be developed by the nist director based on consultations with organizations both within and outside the federal government , and may establish advisory committees to provide additional guidance .

to carry out this program , $15 million would be authorized to be appropriated to nist for each of fy2010 through fy2014 .

the new options petroleum energy conservation act of 2009 ( h.r .

1794 ) would require that the secretary of energy establish a program to award a $1 billion prize to the first automobile manufacturer incorporated in the united states to manufacture and sell in the united states 60,000 midsized sedan automobiles that operate on gasoline and can travel 100 miles per gallon .

