the united states is a party to numerous security agreements with other nations .

the topics covered , along with the significance of the obligations imposed upon agreement parties , may vary .

some international security agreements entered by the united states , such as those obliging parties to come to the defense of another in the event of an attack , involve substantial commitments and have traditionally been entered as treaties , ratified with the advice and consent of the senate .

other agreements dealing with more technical matters , such as military basing rights or the application of a host country's laws to u.s. forces stationed within , are entered more routinely and usually take a form other than treaty .

regardless of the form of a security arrangement , congress has several tools which enable it to exercise oversight regarding the negotiation , form , conclusion , and implementation of the agreement by the united states .

this report begins by providing a general background as to the types of international agreements that are binding upon the united states , as well as considerations affecting whether they take the form of a treaty or an executive agreement .

next , the report examines historical precedents , with specific attention paid to past agreements entered with afghanistan , iraq , germany , japan , south korea , and the philippines .

finally , the report discusses the oversight role that congress exercises with respect to entering and implementing international agreements involving the united states .

under u.s. law , a legally binding international agreement can be entered into pursuant to either a treaty or an executive agreement .

the constitution allocates primary responsibility for entering such agreements to the executive branch , but congress also plays an essential role .

first , in order for a treaty ( but not an executive agreement ) to become the "law of the land," the senate must provide its advice and consent to treaty ratification by a two - thirds majority .

alternatively , congress may authorize congressional - executive agreements .

many treaties and executive agreements are not "self - executing," meaning that in order for them to take effect domestically , implementing legislation is required to provide u.s. bodies with the authority necessary to enforce and comply with the agreements' provisions .

while some executive agreements do not require congressional approval , adherence to them may nonetheless be dependent upon congress appropriating necessary funds or authorizing the activities to be carried out ( where compliance with the agreement would contravene some statutory provision ) .

the following sections provide a general overview of the categories of security agreements entered into by the united states of a legally binding nature .

such categories of security agreements predominantly take the form of a treaty , while others typically take the form of an executive agreement .

congress has several tools at its disposal to exercise oversight regarding the negotiation , conclusion , and implementation of international security agreements entered by the united states .

one manner in which congress exercises oversight of international agreements is via notification requirements .

obviously , in cases where an agreement requires action from one or both houses of congress to take effect , notification is a requisite .

before a treaty may become binding u.s. law , the president must submit it to the senate for its advice and consent .

likewise , the executive must inform congress when it seeks to conclude an executive agreement that requires congressional authorization and / or implementing legislation to become u.s. law , so that appropriate legislation may be considered .

while constitutional considerations necessitate congressional notification in many circumstances , it has historically been more difficult for congress to keep informed regarding international agreements or pledges made by the executive that did not require additional legislative action to take effect — that is , sole executive agreements and executive agreements made pursuant to a treaty .

additionally , even in cases where congressional action is necessary for an agreement to take effect , the executive has sometimes opted not to inform congress about an agreement until it has already been drafted and signed by the parties .

in response to these concerns , congress has enacted legislation and the state department has implemented regulations to ensure that congress is informed of the conclusion ( and in some cases , the negotiation ) of legally binding international agreements .

the case - zablocki act was enacted in 1972 in response to congressional concern that a number of secret agreements had been entered by the executive imposing significant commitments upon the united states .

it is the primary statutory mechanism used to ensure that congress is informed of international agreements entered by the united states .

pursuant to the act , all executive agreements are required to be transmitted to congress within 60 days of their entry into force .

if the president deems the immediate public disclosure of an agreement to be prejudicial to national security , the agreement may instead be transmitted to the house committee on foreign affairs and the senate committee on foreign relations .

the president is also required to annually submit a report regarding international agreements that were transmitted after the expiration of the 60-day period , describing the reasons for the delay .

although the case - zablocki act originally only imposed reporting requirements with respect to executive agreements that had entered into force , the act was amended in 2004 to ensure that congress was regularly notified regarding the status of signed agreements which have yet to enter force , as well .

the secretary of state is required to annually report to congress a list of executive agreements which ( 1 ) have not been or are not proposed to be published in the united states treaties and other international agreements compilation and ( 2 ) the united states has "signed , proclaimed , or with reference to which any other final formality has been executed , or that has been extended or otherwise modified , during the preceding calendar year. .

the case - zablocki act does not define what sort of arrangements constitute "international agreements" falling under its purview , though the legislative history suggests that congress "did not want to be inundated with trivia ... [but wished] to have transmitted all agreements of any significance. .

in its implementing regulations , the state department has established criteria for determining whether an arrangement constitutes a legally binding "international agreement" requiring congressional notification .

these include the identity of the parties , and whether they intended to create a legally binding agreement ; the significance of the agreed - upon arrangement , with "[m]inor or trivial undertakings , even if couched in legal language and form," not considered to fall under the purview of the case - zablocki act ; the specificity of the arrangement ; the necessity that the arrangement constitute an agreement by two or more parties ; and the form of the arrangement , to the extent that it helps to determine whether the parties intended to enter a legally binding agreement .

the state department's circular 175 procedure also contemplates that congress will be notified of developments in the negotiation of "significant" international agreements .

specifically , department regulations provide that with the advice and assistance of the assistant secretary for legislative affairs , the appropriate congressional leaders and committees are advised of the intention to negotiate significant new international agreements , consulted concerning such agreements , and kept informed of developments affecting them , including especially whether any legislation is considered necessary or desirable for the implementation of the new treaty or agreement .

in addition to the case - zablocki act , congress has on occasion enacted legislation designed to ensure that it remains informed about existing u.s. security arrangements .

section 1457 of the national defense authorization act for fy1991 ( p.l .

101-510 ) requires the president to submit an annual report to specified congressional committees regarding "united states security arrangements with , and commitments to , other nations. .

the report , produced in classified and unclassified form , is to be submitted by february 1 each year to the committee on armed services and the committee on foreign relations of the senate , and the committee on armed services and the committee on foreign affairs of the house of representatives .

in addition to legally binding security arrangements or commitments ( eg , mutual defense treaties and pre - positioning agreements ) , the report must describe non - binding commitments , such as expressed u.s. policy formulated by the executive branch .

it must also include , among other things , "[a]n assessment of the need to continue , modify , or discontinue each of those arrangements and commitments in view of the changing international security situation. .

although reports were submitted to the appropriate committees pursuant to this statutory requirement in 1991 and 1992 , it does not appear that any subsequent reports have been issued .

the federal reports elimination and sunset act of 1995 ( sunset act , p.l .

104-66 ) terminated many reporting requirements existing prior to its enactment .

the act eliminated or modified several specific reporting requirements , and also generally terminated any reporting requirement that had been listed in house doc .

103-7 , unless such a requirement was specifically exempted .

however , the reporting requirement contained in section 1457 of the fy1991 national defense authorization act was neither specifically terminated by the sunset act nor listed in house doc .

103-7 .

moreover , congress has twice amended section 1457 after the enactment of the sunset act , in 1996 and 1999 .

accordingly , it does not appear that this requirement has been terminated .

state department regulations requiring consultation with congress regarding significant international agreements may provide a means for congressional oversight as to the negotiation of security arrangements .

one of the stated objectives of the circular 175 procedure is to ensure that "timely and appropriate consultation is had with congressional leaders and committees on treaties and other international agreements. .

to that end , state department regulations contemplate congressional consultation regarding the conduct of negotiations to secure significant international agreements .

circular 175 procedures may also provide for congressional consultation concerning the form that a legally binding international agreement should take .

when there is question as to whether an international agreement should be entered as a treaty or an executive agreement , the matter is first brought to the attention of the state department's legal adviser for treaty affairs .

if the assistant legal adviser for treaty affairs believes the issue to be "a serious one that may warrant formal congressional consultation," consultations are to be held with appropriate congressional leaders and committees .

state department regulations specify that "every practicable effort will be made to identify such questions at the earliest possible date so that consultations may be completed in sufficient time to avoid last minute consideration. .

perhaps the clearest example of congressional oversight in the agreement - making context is through its consideration of treaties and congressional - executive agreements .

for a treaty to become binding u.s. law , it must first be approved by a two - thirds majority in the senate .

the senate may , in considering a treaty , condition its consent on certain reservations , declarations , and understandings concerning treaty application .

for example , it may make its acceptance contingent upon the treaty being interpreted as requiring implementing legislation to take effect , or condition approval on an amended version of the treaty being accepted by other treaty parties .

if accepted , these reservations , declarations , and understandings may limit and / or define u.s. obligations under the treaty .

as previously discussed , a congressional - executive agreement requires congressional authorization via a statute passed by both houses of congress .

here , too , approval may be conditional .

congress may opt to authorize only certain types of agreements , or may choose to approve only some provisions of a particular agreement .

in authorizing an agreement , congress may impose additional statutory requirements upon the executive ( eg , reporting requirements ) .

congress may also include a statutory deadline for its authorization of an agreement to begin or expire .

because sole executive agreements do not require congressional authorization to take effect , they need not be approved by congress to become binding , at least as a matter of international law .

nonetheless , as discussed earlier , congress may limit the effect of a sole executive agreement through a subsequent legislative enactment or through the conditioning of appropriations necessary for the agreement's commitment to be implemented .

similar measures could also be taken to limit or condition u.s. adherence to a non - binding security arrangement .

congress may exercise oversight regarding international agreements via legislation implementing the agreements' requirements .

certain international treaties or executive agreements are considered "self - executing," meaning that they have the force of law without the need for subsequent congressional action .

however , many other treaties and agreements are not considered self - executing , and are understood to require implementing legislation to take effect , as enforcing u.s. agencies otherwise lack authority to conduct the actions required to ensure compliance with the international agreement .

treaties and executive agreements have , in part or in whole , been found to be non - self - executing for at least three reasons: ( 1 ) implementing legislation is constitutionally required ; ( 2 ) the senate , in giving consent to a treaty , or congress , by resolution , requires implementing legislation for the agreement to be given force ; or ( 3 ) the agreement manifests an intention that it shall not become effective as domestic law without the enactment of implementing legislation .

until implementing legislation is enacted , existing domestic law concerning a matter covered by an international agreement that is not self - executing remains unchanged and is controlling law in the united states .

however , when a treaty is ratified or an executive agreement is entered , the united states acquires obligations under international law and may be in default of those obligations unless implementing legislation is enacted .

perhaps for this reason , congress typically appropriates funds necessary to carry out u.s. obligations under international agreements .

after an international agreement has taken effect , congress may still exercise oversight over executive implementation .

it may require the executive to submit information to congress or congressional committees regarding u.s. implementation of its international commitments .

it may enact new legislation that modifies or repudiates u.s. adherence or implementation of an international agreement .

it may limit or prohibit appropriations necessary for the executive to implement the provisions of the agreement , or condition such appropriations upon the executive implementing the agreement in a particular manner .

