the federal government loses both individual and corporate income tax revenue from the shifting of profits and income into low - tax countries .

the revenue losses from this tax avoidance and evasion are difficult to estimate , but some have suggested that the annual cost of offshore tax abuses may be around $100 billion per year .

international tax avoidance can arise from wealthy individual investors and from large multinational corporations ; it can reflect both legal and illegal actions .

tax avoidance is sometimes used to refer to a legal reduction in taxes , whereas evasion refers to tax reductions that are illegal .

both types are discussed in this report , although the dividing line is not entirely clear .

a multinational firm that constructs a factory in a low - tax jurisdiction rather than in the united states to take advantage of low foreign corporate tax rates is engaged in avoidance , whereas a u.s. citizen who sets up a secret bank account in the caribbean and does not report the interest income is engaged in evasion .

there are , however , many activities , particularly by corporations , that are often referred to as avoidance but could be classified as evasion .

one example is transfer pricing , where firms charge low prices for sales to low - tax affiliates but pay high prices for purchases from them .

if these prices , which are supposed to be at arms - length , are set at an artificial level , then this activity might be viewed by some as evasion , even if such pricing is not overturned in court because evidence to establish pricing is not available .

most of the international tax reduction of individuals reflects evasion , and this amount has been estimated to range from about $40 billion to about $70 billion a year .

this evasion has occurred in part because the united states does not withhold tax on many types of passive income ( such as interest ) paid to foreign entities ; if u.s. individuals can channel their investments through a foreign entity and do not report the holdings of these assets on their tax returns , they evade a tax that they are legally required to pay .

in addition , individuals investing in foreign assets may not report income from these assets .

in 2010 , congress enacted the foreign account tax compliance act ( fatca ) , which has recently become effective and requires foreign financial institutions to report information on asset holders or be subject to a 30% withholding rate .

its consequences for evasion have yet to be determined .

corporate tax reductions arising from profit shifting also have been estimated .

as discussed below , estimates of the revenue losses from corporate profit shifting vary substantially , ranging from about $10 billion to about $90 billion , or even higher .

this activity appears to have increased substantially in recent years .

in addition to differentiating between individual and corporate activities , and evasion and avoidance , there are also variations in the features used to characterize tax havens .

some restrictive definitions would limit tax havens to those countries that , in addition to having low or non - existent tax rates on some types of income , also have such other characteristics as the lack of transparency , bank secrecy and the lack of information sharing , and requiring little or no economic activity for an entity to obtain legal status .

a definition incorporating compounding factors such as these was used by the organization for economic development and cooperation ( oecd ) in their 2000 tax shelter initiative .

others , particularly economists , might characterize as a tax haven any low - tax country with a goal of attracting capital , or simply any country that has low or non - existent taxes .

this report addresses tax havens in their broader sense as well as in their narrower sense .

although international tax avoidance can be differentiated by whether it is associated with individuals or corporations , whether it is illegal evasion or legal avoidance , and whether it arises in a tax haven narrowly defined or broadly defined , it can also be characterized by what measures might be taken to reduce this loss .

in general , revenue losses from individual taxes are more likely to be associated with evasion and more likely to be associated with narrowly defined tax havens , while corporate tax avoidance occurs in both narrowly and broadly defined tax havens and can arise from either legal avoidance or illegal evasion .

evasion is often a problem of lack of information , and remedies may include resources for enforcement , along with incentives and sanctions designed to increase information sharing , and possibly a move towards greater withholding .

avoidance may be more likely to be remedied with changes in the tax code .

several legislative proposals have been advanced that address international tax issues .

president obama has proposed several international corporate tax revisions which relate to multinational corporations , including profit shifting , as well as individual tax evasion .

some of the provisions relating to multinationals had earlier been included in a bill introduced in the 110 th congress by chairman rangel of the ways and means committee ( h.r .

3970 ) .

major revisions to corporate international tax rules were also included in s. 3018 , a general tax reform act introduced by senators wyden and gregg in the 111 th congress , and a similar bill , s. 727 , introduced by senators wyden and coats in the 112 th congress .

this bill had provisions to tax foreign source income currently , which could have limited the benefits from corporate profit shifting .

in the 113 th congress , h.r .

694 ( representative schakowsky ) and s. 250 ( senator sanders ) , also would have eliminated deferral .

former ways and means chairman dave camp has proposed a lower corporate rate combined with a move to a territorial tax system ( which would exempt foreign source income ) .

his bill , h.r .

1 ( a general tax reform bill ) , was introduced in the 113 th congress .

because a territorial tax could increase the scope for profit shifting , the proposal contains detailed provisions to address these issues .

a territorial tax proposal with anti - abuse provisions has also been introduced by senator enzi ( s. 2091 , 112 th congress ) .

the senate permanent subcommittee on investigations has been engaged in international tax investigations since 2001 , holding hearings and proposing legislation .

in the 111 th congress , the stop tax haven abuse act , s. 506 , was introduced by the chairman of that committee , senator levin , with a companion bill , h.r .

1265 , introduced by representative doggett .

the senate finance committee also has circulated draft proposals addressing individual tax evasion issues .

a number of these anti - evasion provisions ( including provisions in president obama's earlier budget outlines ) were adopted in the hiring incentives to restore employment ( hire ) act , p.l .

111-147 .

subsequently , revised versions of the stop tax haven abuse act have been introduced .

the permanent subcommittee also released a study of profit shifting by multinationals in preparation for a hearing on september 20 , 2012 .

the first section of this report reviews what countries might be considered tax havens , including a discussion of the organization for economic development and cooperation ( oecd ) initiatives and lists .

the next two sections discuss , in turn , the corporate profit - shifting mechanisms and evidence on the existence and magnitude of profit - shifting activity .

the following two sections provide the same analysis for individual tax evasion .

the report concludes with overviews of alternative policy options , a summary of legislation enacted in the 111 th congress , and a summary of specific legislative proposals .

there is no precise definition of a tax haven .

the oecd initially defined the following features of tax havens: no or low taxes , lack of effective exchange of information , lack of transparency , and no requirement of substantial activity .

other lists have been developed in legislative proposals and by researchers .

also , a number of other jurisdictions have been identified as having tax haven characteristics .

u.s. multinationals are not taxed on income earned by foreign subsidiaries until it is repatriated to the u.s. parent as dividends , although some passive and related company income that is easily shifted is taxed currently under anti - abuse rules referred to as subpart f. ( foreign affiliates or subsidiaries that are majority owned u.s. owned are referred to as controlled foreign corporations , or cfcs , and many of these related firms are wholly owned. ) .

taxes on income that is repatriated ( or , less commonly , earned by branches and taxed currently ) are allowed a credit for foreign income taxes paid .

 ( a part of a parent company treated as a branch is not a separate entity for tax purposes , and all income is part of the parent's income. ) .

foreign tax credits are limited to the amount of tax imposed by the united states , so that they , in theory , cannot offset taxes on domestic income .

this limit is imposed on an overall basis , allowing excess credits in high - tax countries to offset u.s. tax liability on income earned in low - tax countries , although separate limits apply to passive and active income .

other countries either employ this system of deferral and credit or , more commonly , exempt income earned in foreign jurisdictions .

most countries have some form of anti - abuse rules similar to subpart f. if a firm can shift profits to a low - tax jurisdiction from a high - tax one , its taxes will be reduced without affecting other aspects of the company .

tax differences also affect real economic activity , which in turn affects revenues , but it is this artificial shifting of profits that is the focus of this report .

because the united states taxes all income earned in its borders as well as imposing a residual tax on income earned abroad by u.s. persons , tax avoidance relates both to u.s. parent companies shifting profits abroad to low - tax jurisdictions and the shifting of profits out of the united states by foreign parents of u.s. subsidiaries .

in the case of u.s. multinationals , one study suggested that about half the difference between profitability in low - tax and high - tax countries , which could arise from artificial income shifting , was due to transfers of intellectual property ( or intangibles ) and most of the rest through the allocation of debt .

however , a study examining import and export prices suggests a very large effect of transfer pricing in goods ( as discussed below ) .

some evidence of the importance of intellectual property can also be found from the types of firms that repatriated profits abroad following a temporary tax reduction enacted in 2004 ; one - third of the repatriations were in the pharmaceutical and medicine industry and almost 20% in the computer and electronic equipment industry .

this section examines the evidence on the existence and magnitude of profit shifting and the techniques that are most likely to contribute to it .

individual evasion of taxes may take different forms , and they are all facilitated by the growing international financial globalization and ease of making transactions on the internet .

individuals can purchase foreign investments directly ( outside the united states ) , such as stocks and bonds , or put money in foreign bank accounts and simply not report the income ( although it is subject to tax under u.s. tax law ) .

there has been little or no withholding information on individual taxpayers for this type of action .

they could also use structures such as trusts or shell corporations to evade tax on investments , including investments made in the united states , which may take advantage of u.s. tax laws that exempt interest income and capital gains of non - residents from u.s. tax .

rather than using withholding or information collection the united states has largely relied in the past on the qualified intermediary ( qi ) program where beneficial owners are not revealed .

to the extent any information gathering from other countries is done it is through bilateral information exchanges rather than multilateral information sharing .

the european union had developed a multilateral agreement but the united states does not participate .

new developments in information exchange may affect individual tax evasion both in the united states and abroad .

in 2010 , congress enacted the foreign account tax compliance act ( fatca ) as part of the hiring incentives to restore employment act ( hire ; p.l .

111-147 ) .

fatca recently become effective and requires foreign financial institutions to report information on asset holders or be subject to a 30% withholding rate .

its effectiveness is yet to be determined , although revenue projections when enacted did not predict a significant effect .

more recently , 51 other countries signed a multi - lateral information exchange agreement that set reporting standards which should eventually lead to fuller exchange of tax information by most countries .

a number of different approaches have been used to estimate corporate tax avoidance , however , all of these approaches rely on data reported on assets and income .

for individual evasion , estimates are much more difficult because the initial basis of the estimate is the amount of assets held abroad whose income is not reported to the tax authorities .

in addition to this estimate , the expected rate of return and tax rate are needed to estimate the revenue cost .

joseph guttentag and avi - yonah estimate a value of $50 billion in individual tax evasion , based on an estimate of holdings by high net worth individuals invested outside the united states at $1.5 trillion .

using a rate of return of 10% and a tax rate of approximately one - third , they obtain an estimate of $50 billion .

they also summarize two other estimates in 2002 of $40 billion for the international tax gap by the irs and $70 billion by an irs consultant .

to the extent that the earnings are interest , the 10% rate of return may be too high , while if it is dividends and capital gains , the tax rate is too high .

using a tax rate of 15% ( currently applicable to capital gains and dividends ) would lead to about $23 billion .

in the case of equity investments , if a third of the return is in dividends and half of capital gains is never realized , the tax rate would be 10% or about $15 billion assuming the 10% return .

during 2002 and beginning in 2011 , however , the tax rate on capital gains and dividends is 20% , indicating a loss of $20 billion rather than $15 billion .

for interest , since investors can earn tax free returns in the neighborhood of 4% to 5% on domestic state and local bonds , to yield a 5% after - tax return at a 35% tax rate would require a pretax yield of about 7.7% .

the estimate would then be $40 billion .

the tax justice network has estimated a worldwide revenue loss for all countries of $255 billion from individual tax evasion , basically using a 7.5% return and a 30% tax rate .

these assumptions would be consistent with a $33 billion loss for the united states using the $1.5 trillion figure .

their worldwide numbers are consistent with $11 trillion in offshore wealth .

their more recent estimates place wealth at $21 trillion to $32 trillion , which would double or triple these estimates .

thus the cost for the united states could be much larger approaching $100 billion .

zucman estimates $1.2 trillion in u.s. financial wealth abroad based on anomalies in investment data , with an estimated tax loss of $36 billion in 2013 .

there is no way to know whether the high - profile cases of prosecuting individuals , tax amnesty , or the imminent arrival of fatca might have reduced these amounts of wealth .

because much of the corporate tax revenue loss arises from activities that either are legal or appear to be so , it is difficult to address these issues other than with changes in the tax law .

outcomes would likely be better if there is international cooperation .

currently , the possibilities for international cooperation appear to play a bigger role in options for dealing with individual evasion than with corporate avoidance .

several of the issues addressed below , such as hybrid entities and instruments , transfer pricing for intangibles , and debt also have been considered in the oecd action plan on base erosion and profit shifting .

most of the options for addressing individual evasion involve more information reporting and additional enforcement .

there are options that would involve fundamental changes in the law , such as shifting from a residence to a source basis for passive income .

that is , the united states would tax this passive income earned in its borders , just as is the case for corporate and other active income .

this change involves , however , many other economic and efficiency effects that are probably not desirable .

the remainder of the proposals discussed here do not involve any fundamental changes in the tax itself , but rather focus on administration and enforcement .

the options discussed below are drawn from many sources , including academics and practitioners , organizations , and the internal revenue service , and contained in legislative proposals ; citations to these sources are provided at this point and legislative proposals are summarized in the next section .

subsequent sections explain proposals that were adopted in the hire act , p.l .

111-147 .

three bills enacted in 2011 contain provisions relating to international compliance: the hire act , the affordable care act , and p.l .

111-226 .

this section summarizes current legislative proposals that are designed to address or have consequences for international tax evasion and avoidance .

as noted above , most foreign provisions in h.r .

4213 were included in the act , p.l .

111-226 .

below are two provisions , one specifically a foreign provision and one related to foreign tax issues , that were not included .

dividends and interest are generally sourced depending on the residence of the payor , whereas payments for services are sourced to the country where the service is performed .

the treatment of guarantee fees is unclear , depending on whether compared to interest or services .

sourcing these payments like services allows u.s. subsidiaries of foreign firms to make deductible payments that reduce u.s. income without paying the withholding tax ( as they would with interest ) .

this provision treats these fees the same as interest: sourced to the residence of the payor .

payments by foreign persons are also u.s. source if allocable to income effectively connected with u.s. business .

treasury is to identify other transactions that are in the nature of guarantees .

this proposal is estimated to raise $2.025 billion over 10 years .

the boot - within - gain revisions are generally applicable to domestic as well as foreign activities but have implications for international transactions .

when a person or firm sells stock and uses the proceeds to purchase other stocks , capital gain is recognized to the extent that the sales price of the stock exceeds the basis of that stock ( typically what was originally paid for it ) .

in general , a gain is not recognized in exchanges of stock in corporate reorganizations .

if the exchange includes cash or property ( boot ) , gain is recognized to the extent of the boot .

if the boot is more than the gain , all of the boot will not be taxed .

however , if the boot is considered equivalent to a dividend , it will be taxed in full .

one of the rules that allows the payment not to be considered as a dividend is a termination of interest ( liquidation ) .

check - the - box rules permit a transaction to be considered a liquidation for u.s. purposes ( i.e. , a disregarded entity ) but not for foreign purposes .

thus , one foreign subsidiary of a u.s. firm can pay cash to the u.s. parent for stock in another foreign subsidiary of the u.s. firm without the transactions being viewed as a dividend repatriation , thereby potentially reducing u.s. tax .

in addition , two u.s. subsidiaries of a foreign parent can engage in a similar transaction without generating a u.s. withholding tax on the dividend .

if the foreign parent does not have a treaty eliminating the tax , this treatment reduces u.s. taxes .

this revision would treat payments in these cases as a dividend .

this provision was included in the president's budget proposals and estimated to raise $3.6 billion from fy2015 to fy2024 .

president obama's international proposals include several proposals that relate to multinational corporations: allocation of deductions and credits , a restriction on use of foreign tax credits when associated income is not recognized , and a restriction on check - the - box .

they also include proposals addressing individual tax evasion .

international provisions have been presented in each budget .

one provision in the first ( fy2010 ) budget ending check - the - box was dropped in subsequent budgets .

otherwise , provisions were continued and expanded over time .

overall , these provisions are projected to raise $276 billion for fy2015-fy2024 as presented in the current fy2015 budget .

the provisions are discussed in the order in which they are presented unless otherwise noted , because revenue effects depend on that order .

the budget also proposes additional resources for the irs for international enforcement .

in addition to budget proposals , president obama presented a separate corporate tax reform proposal that included international provisions .

this proposal included five elements: the allocation of interest for deferred income ( discussed below ) , a tax on excess intangibles ( discussed below ) , a minimum tax on foreign source income in low tax countries , disallowing a deduction for the cost of moving abroad , and providing a 20% credit for costs of moving an operation from abroad to the united states .

some of the president's proposals have been adopted .

two provisions relating to foreign tax credits were enacted in p.l .

111-226 ( foreign tax credits and reverse hybrids , and the 80 / 20 rule ) .

the hire act ( p.l .

111-147 ) included a provision treating equity swaps and other dividend equivalent payments as dividends ; the other foreign compliance provisions were , in most cases , also in the president's .

these provisions are not listed below .

the remainder of this section summarizes provisions in the president's budget proposals .

the most significant provision in the fy2010 budget , based on revenue gain , is a revision directed at hybrid entities and check - the - box .

this provision requires that a corporation cannot disregard a subsidiary corporation unless it is incorporated in the same jurisdiction .

this rule does not apply to the parent and its first level subsidiary .

thus , a u.s. parent with a subsidiary in a low tax country could treat that subsidiary as a branch ( disregard it as a separate entity ) .

the subsidiary in the low - tax country , however , could not treat its own high - tax country subsidiary as a disregarded entity .

this provision was included in the fy2010 proposals , where it was projected to raise $86.5 billion for fy2010-fy2019 .

it was not included in later budgets .

two of these proposals would allocate deductions and credits , so as to deny those benefits until income is repatriated .

this approach was included in a tax reform bill introduced by chairman rangel of the ways and means committee in 2007 ( h.r .

3970 ) .

a portion of overall deductions , such as interest , that reflect the share of foreign deferred income , would be disallowed until the income is repatriated .

the foreign tax credit allocation rule would allow credits for the share of foreign taxes paid that is equal to the share of foreign source income repatriated , a provision the discussion of the proposals refers to as pooling .

disallowed deductions and credits would be carried forward .

the proposal specifically excludes deductions for research and experimentation from the allocation rule .

the fy2011 and subsequent budget proposals were narrower and limited to interest deductions ; they also included a different set of allocation rules .

the revenue gain for fy2015-fy2024 was $43.2 billion for the limit on interest deductions and $74.6 billion for the foreign tax credit pooling .

this provision , which did not appear in the 2010 budget proposal but appeared in subsequent budgets , would treat excess returns in a low - tax country on intangibles transferred to it from the united states as subpart f income ( subject to current taxation ) and in a separate foreign tax credit basket ( so that other foreign taxes could not offset u.s. taxes due on the excess returns ) .

this provision is projected to raise $26.0 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

the proposal would clarify several rules that are relevant to the transfer of intangibles .

first , it would clarify that intangibles include workforce in place , goodwill , and going concern value .

second , it would allow the irs commission to aggregate intangibles if that leads to a more appropriate value .

finally , it would clarify that intangibles are valued at their highest and best as it would be by a willing buyer and seller with reasonable knowledge of the relevant facts .

this provision is projected to raise $2.7 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

u.s. insurance companies can reduce taxes by purchasing reinsurance from foreign affiliates , with a deduction of the premiums by the u.s. firm but no tax on the income of the foreign affiliate .

this provision would disallow these deductions for reinsurance premiums when they are more than 50% of the basic premiums received .

this provision was not in the fy2010 budget ; it is projected to raise $7.5 billion in revenue for fy2015-fy2024 .

the proposal would allocate interest deductions among related firms that consolidate financial reporting , based on the share of earnings of each firm .

this provision is projected to raise $48.6 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

the plan includes a proposal to require that distributions that are characterized as reorganizations but are in the nature of a dividend repatriation are subject to tax .

this issue arises within the framework of an exchange of stock on the one hand for stock and property ( called boot ) and rules that provide the minimum of gain be based on the boot or overall gain .

this proposal was projected to raise $297 million from fy2010 to fy2019 .

the 2011 budget includes a broader provision regarding to boot within gain that covers domestic transactions as well , and such a provision is also included in h.r .

4213 .

this provision would restrict foreign tax credits for taxes paid where there is an income tax that is paid in part to receive a benefit ( i.e. , the firm is paying a tax in a dual capacity ) to the amount that would be paid if the taxpayer were not a dual - capacity taxpayer .

this provision typically relates to taxes being substituted for royalties in oil - producing countries ; there is a provision that it will not abrogate any existing treaties .

this provision was projected to raise $10.4 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

this provision , first appearing in the fy2013 budget outline , would require gain on sale of a partnership interest to be treated as income effectively connected to u.s. business ( and thus taxable ) to the extent of the transferor partner's effective connected income .

it is projected to raise $2.8 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

this provision , first appearing in the fy2013 budget outline , would address a mechanism to avoid treatment of a payment as a dividend ( but rather a reduction in basis ) when a foreign corporation funds the payment from a separate related foreign corporation .

it is projected to raise $3.5 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

this provision , first appearing in the fy2013 budget outline , extends rules limiting the ability of firms to increase foreign tax credits for certain asset acquisitions .

it is projected to raise $1 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

this provision first appears in the fy2013 budget outline .

current law allows a foreign tax credit for dividends paid or deemed paid or certain transactions .

this provision reduces foreign tax credits for any action that reduces earnings and profits , since a reduction in earnings and profits will ultimately reduce the potential amount of dividends .

it is projected to raise $0.4 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

the proposal would create a new category of subpart f income , foreign base company digital income .

it would include income of a controlled foreign company ( cfc ) from the lease or sale of a digital copyrighted article or from the provision of a digital service developed by a related party .

it is projected to raise $11.7 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

among income included in subpart f and subject to current taxation is foreign base company sales income , income from a purchase and resale by a related corporation of property manufactured outside the cfc's jurisdiction and sold outside that jurisdiction .

this provision expands that treatment to property manufactured outside of , but on behalf of , the firm .

this provision is projected to raise $24.6 billion from fy2015-fy2024 .

the proposal would disallow deductions for interest and royalty payments made to related parties under hybrid arrangements in which the income is not taxed in the other jurisdiction .

it is projected to raise $0.9 billion in fy2015-fy2024 .

subpart f , which imposes tax on easily manipulated income , has a same - country exception so that it generally does not apply to payments between related firms organized in the same country under the presumption that there is a tax payment and deduction at the same tax rate .

however , in the case of a foreign reverse hybrid , where the firm is viewed as a corporation by the united states but a partnership by the foreign country , the u.s. corporation is not seen as a distinct entity and not subject to tax .

the proposal would provide that the exception to subpart f not apply in these cases .

this provision is projected to raise $1.3 billion for fy2025-fy2024 .

this provision would allow u.s. firms that merge with other firms and establish a foreign headquarters ( invert ) to be treated as u.s. firms as long as the u.s. firm's shareholders retain more that 50% ownership ( the current level is 80% ) .

the proposal would also disallow inversions if the new firm has substantial business activities in the united states and is primarily managed and controlled in the united states .

in addition , the proposal would extend the inversion rules now covering corporations and partnerships with a trade or business to all partnerships .

this provision is projected to raise $17 billion for fy2015-fy2024 .

the president's proposals included a number of provisions relating to individual evasion , including reporting of information , withholding , and various penalties .

overall these provisions were projected to raise revenues of $8.7 billion from fy2010 to fy2019 in the fy2010 budget and $5.4 billion from fy2011-fy2021 in the fy2011 budget .

most of these provisions , or some version of them , were adopted in the hire act , including increased reporting on foreign accounts ( withholding and information on u.s. beneficial owners ) .

the remaining provisions are summarized below .

these provisions were not in subsequent budgets .

u.s. persons' financial intermediaries and qualified intermediaries would be required to report financial transfers .

u.s. persons and qualified intermediaries would be required to report the formation or establishment of a foreign entity .

the floor is $10,000 in the fy2010 budget proposal , but $50,000 in the fy2011 proposal .

the hire act required individuals who are required to file an fbar ( foreign bank and financial account reports ) to report this information on the tax return if the amount in the account is $50,000 or more , a provision similar to the fy2011 budget proposal .

the fy2010 proposal had a lower floor of $10,000 .

the fy2010 proposal contains a number of provisions that provide evidentiary presumptions ( shifts in the burden of proof ) in civil and administrative cases .

if an individual has a foreign account it is presumed to be large enough to require filing an fbar .

if a person has an account of over $200,000 it is presumed that failure to file is willful ( which opens the possibility of criminal as well as higher civil penalties ) .

if a payment subject to withholding is made to a foreign person on an fdap , the presumption is that that person is not eligible for withholding .

the statute of limitations for cross - border transactions is extended from three to six years with no floor in the fy2010 budget proposal ; in the hire act and the fy2011 budget , it applies to instances where more than $5,000 of income is omitted .

major revisions to corporate international tax rules are also included in s. 3018 , a general tax reform act introduced by senators wyden and gregg in the 111 th congress , and a similar bill , s. 727 , introduced by senators wyden and coats in the 112 th congress .

as part of revenue to finance a lower tax rate , this bill eliminates deferral of tax on foreign source income ( taxes income currently ) which should largely eliminate any benefits of profit shifting , since income would be taxed in any case .

it also imposes a per country foreign tax credit limit .

these proposals would shift from the current system of deferral to a territorial tax , where no tax would be imposed on active dividends of foreign subsidiaries .

moving to a territorial tax increases the benefits for profit shifting to low - tax jurisdictions because there is never an issue of subsequent taxation , as is the case with deferral .

the camp proposal would combine a territorial tax with a lower corporate tax rate , whereas s. 2091 is a stand - alone territorial tax provision .

both contain provisions to limit the scope of profit shifting , although it is not clear how effective they would be .

the camp proposal would limit the amount of borrowing by the u.s. parent and impose one of three anti - base - erosion options , two directed at intangible income .

option a is similar to a proposal made by president obama in his budget proposals that would tax excess earnings on intangibles ( in excess of 150% of costs ) in low - tax jurisdictions as subpart f. the inclusion would be phased out between a 10% and a 15% rate .

option b would tax income that is subject to an effective foreign tax rate below 10% unless it qualifies for a home country exception .

the home country exception applies when a firm conducts an active trade or business in the home country , has a fixed place of business , and serves the local market .

option c would tax all foreign income from intangibles ( whether earnings by the foreign subsidiary or royalty payments ) but allow a deduction for 40% , resulting in a tax rate of 15% at a 25% statutory tax rate .

option c was adopted for the final tax reform bill , h.r .

1 , which also lowered the u.s. corporate tax rate to 25% .

s. 2091 does not have provisions restricting borrowing .

its anti - base - erosion provisions are a version of option b in the camp proposal along with a version of the first part of option c would be included .

income in countries with tax rates of half or less than the u.s. rate ( 17.5% ) would be subject to tax .

however , operations that conduct an active business , with employees and officers that contribute substantially , would be excepted except to the extent the income is intangible income of the cfc .

the cfc's intangible income would be subpart f income .

these rules provide more scope for exemption as compared to the rules in the discussion draft which would require exempt income to carry out activities serving the home country market .

the bill also includes the first part of option c , allowing a 17.5% tax rate on intangible income ( such as royalties ) earned by a domestic corporation .

intangible income would be placed in a separate foreign tax credit basket .

this bill was introduced in the 111 th congress by senator carl levin ( s. 506 ) and by representative lloyd doggett ( h.r .

1265 ) .

some of the provisions or related provisions in the bills were included in the hire act .

provisions in the stop tax haven abuse that are addressed in the hire act ( p.l .

111-147 ) include burden of proof ( section 101 ) , statute of limitations ( section 104 ) , information reporting on u.s. beneficiaries of foreign accounts ( section 105 ) , trust abuses ( section 106 ) , treatment of dividend equivalents ( section 108 ) , and passive foreign investment corporations ( pfics ; section 109 ) .

in addition , the health reform legislation , p.l .

111-148 , included the economic substance doctrine .

the original bill's provisions are summarized below , followed by summaries of bills from the 112 th , 113 th , and 114 th congresses .

section 101 would provide a burden of proof change .

it would require the taxpayer involved in offshore secrecy jurisdictions to produce evidence , based on the presumption that the taxpayer is in control , that funds or other property are not taxable income , and that the account is not large enough to trigger a reporting threshold .

 ( the bill also addresses securities law issues. ) .

this section also contains the list of 34 tax haven jurisdictions taken from irs court filings , and provides treasury with the authority to add or remove jurisdictions .

an important standard for being excluded from the list is an effective , and automatic , exchange of information .

section 102 would expand the provisions in the patriot act of 2001 , which gave treasury the authority to require domestic financial institutions to take special measures ( including providing information and prohibiting transactions ) with respect to foreign jurisdictions relating to money laundering to cover instances of impeding u.s. tax enforcement .

section 103 would require a publicly traded corporation or one with gross assets of $50 million or more whose management and control occurs primarily in the united states to be treated as a u.s. company .

this provision is directed at shell corporations , including hedge funds and investment management businesses , set up in jurisdictions such as the cayman islands .

it would not apply to subsidiaries of u.s. corporations simply because some decisions are made at the parent headquarters , but would still apply to shell subsidiaries .

section 104 would extend the limit on audit periods from three years to six years for offshore jurisdictions with secrecy laws .

section 105 would require u.s. financial institutions and brokers to file 1099 forms for any foreign account when they know the beneficial owner is a u.s. person .

it would also require these institutions to report to the irs when they set up offshore accounts and entities .

section 106 addresses potential trust abuses .

foreign trusts have employed liaisons called trust protectors as a way for shielding u.s. taxpayers exercising control over the trust ; the legislation provides that any powers held by a trust protector would be attributed to the trust grantor .

it also provides that any u.s. person benefitting from a trust is treated as a beneficiary even if not named in the trust instrument , that future or contingent beneficiaries are treated as current ones , and that loans of assets and property as well as cash or security are treated as trust distributions .

section 107 addresses legal opinions , stating that an activity is more likely than not to survive challenge by the irs , which are used to shield taxpayers from large penalties .

the legislation provides that a legal opinion of this nature would not apply in an offshore secrecy jurisdiction , providing exceptions to protect legitimate operations .

section 108 would prevent dividend equivalents from escaping the dividend withholding tax .

section 109 addresses reporting by pfics by codifying proposed regulations regarding pfic reporting by direct or indirect shareholders who are u.s. persons , and also requiring reporting by u.s. persons who directly or indirectly cause the pfic to be formed or sent or receive assets .

some of the sections of title ii of the bill affect securities law rather than tax issues .

some provisions are tax - related , however .

section 204 addresses an irs john doe summons where the irs does not know the names of taxpayers and now must ask courts for permission to serve the summons .

this section provides that in any case involving offshore secret accounts , the court is to presume tax compliance is at issue , to relieve the irs of the obligation when the only records sought are u.s. bank records , and to allow them to issue john doe summonses for large investigative projects without addressing each set of summonses separately .

section 205 would address issues relating to the foreign bank and financial account report ( fbar ) requirement for a person controlling a foreign financial account of over $10,000 .

this is an additional rule from the requirement to report this information on the tax return , and irs is now charged with enforcing this fbar requirement .

this provision would amend tax disclosure rules to more easily permit irs to use tax data , change the penalty to refer to the highest average in the account during a year ( and not on a specific day ) , and allow irs access to information on suspicious activity reports ( sar ) .

the last title of the bill relates to abusive tax shelters , and contains several provisions .

it would strengthen penalties , prohibit the patenting of tax shelters , require development of an examination procedure so that bank regulators could detect questionable tax activities , disallow fees contingent on tax savings for tax shelters , remove communication barriers between enforcement agencies , codify regulations and make it clear that prohibition of disclosure by tax preparers does not prevent congressional subpoenas , and provide standards for tax shelter opinion letters .

it would also codify the economic substance doctrine , to require both an objective and subjective test for economic substance .

section 101 would extend the sanctions for money laundering to impeding tax enforcement ( similar to previous provision in section 102 ) .

section 102 would strengthen and clarify fatca ( foreign account tax compliance act , adopted as part of the hire act ) in a variety of ways , including additional burden of proof requirements , expand the types of accounts that need to be disclosed , and other revisions .

section 103 is similar to section 103 in the previous bill .

section 104 is similar to section 105 of the previous bill .

section 105 would require credit default swap ( cds ) payments sent from the united states to be sourced as u.s. income and subject to tax .

section 106 would treat funds deposited in u.s. accounts as u.s. source income subject to tax .

some of the sections in the next title do not relate to taxes .

those that do include section 201 would require multinational corporations to provide the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) with country by country information .

section 202 would provide a penalty up to $1 million for hiding offshore stock holdings .

section 205 is similar to section 204 in the previous bill .

section 206 is similar to section 205 in the previous bill .

the final title of the bill relates to abusive tax shelters and is similar to provisions in the previous legislation .

h.r .

1554 , introduced by representative doggett , is similar to the stop tax haven abuse act in the 112 th congress .

s. 1533 , introduced by senator levin , and h.r .

3666 , introduced by representatives delauro and doggett , differ in some respects from h.r .

1554 .

the first two major sections of these bills are the same as the previous bill ( sections 101-105 ) and sections 201 , 202 , 205 , and 206 .

the final section of the bills , entitled "ending corporate offshore tax avoidance," contains substantive changes in the treatment of multinationals , similar to some of those that have been included in the president's proposals ( discussed above ) .

they include the allocation of expenses and foreign tax credit pooling , treatment of income from intangibles to low - taxed affiliates as subpart f income , limitations on income shifting through intangible property transfers , a repeal of check - the - box rules for certain foreign entities and cfc look - through rules , and allocations of interest deductions .

representative doggett and senator whitehouse announced introduction of a stop tax haven abuse act in january 2014 .

the bill is similar to s. 1533 and h.r .

3666 , although the interest allocation is broader and an additional section introduces the changes in treatment of inversions in the president's budget ( such as treating any merger with a foreign firm in which u.s. shareholders maintain majority interests as a u.s. firm ) .

a draft of this proposal was circulated on march 12 , 2009 , and has been discussed by sullivan .

several of its proposals were included in the hire act ( statute of limitations , requiring fbar information to be filed with the tax return , increasing trust penalties to a minimum of $10,000 , expanding the definition of distributions , and increasing the penalties for underpayments associated with foreign accounts ) .

it would require entities transferring funds offshore to report to the irs the amount , destination , and account information .

publicly traded companies would be excluded .

the statute of limitations would be extended from three to six years for tax returns that report or should have reported certain international transactions .

it would require the foreign bank and financial account report ( fbar ) to be filed with the tax returns .

tax preparers would be required to ask due diligence questions to determine whether an fbar should be filed .

the foreign trust failure - to - file penalty would be increased to a $10,000 minimum and the definition of property considered to be a distribution for foreign trusts would be expanded , and would include artwork and jewelry .

fines and penalties on payments attributable to certain offshore transactions would be doubled .

a provision in the heroes earnings assistance and relief tax act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-245 ) would be modified to require offshore entities that hire workers under a government contract be treated as american employers by establishing a rule that any individual who performs at least 100 hours of service a month is an employee and not an independent contractor .

this proposal , introduced by chairman leahy of the senate judiciary committee , included a provision to apply the international money laundering statute to tax evasion , and set aside funds for the justice department to pursue financial fraud , including funds to the tax division .

it had been passed by the senate .

the house version of the bill , h.r .

1748 , and the enacted law , p.l .

111-21 , did not include the tax provision but did include additional funds .

this proposal ( introduced as s. 569 in the 111 th congress ) would establish uniform requirements for states relating to the disclosure of beneficial owners of corporations and limited liability companies , including updating and maintenance of information after terminating , imposing additional requirements for those not u.s. citizens or permanent residents , providing penalties , and updating of such disclosures .

it also authorizes a study of requirements of partnerships , trusts , and other legal entities .

this bill is relevant , among other things , to issues raised about the use of states as international tax havens .

a number of bills introduced in the 113 th congress would have made a variety of changes in the tax law affecting the treatment of foreign source income .

h.r .

694 ( representative schakowsky ) and s. 250 ( senator sanders ) would have made fundamental changes similar in some respects to the wyden - coats bill: treat firms managed and controlled in the united states as domestic firms , repeal deferral , impose a per country foreign tax credit limit , and limit credits for dual capacity tax payers .

h.r .

3793 ( representative maffei ) and s. 1844 ( senator shaheen ) would adopt the management and control provision .

h.r .

1555 ( representative doggett ) also would adopt this provision , as well as repeal the look - through rule for royalties and certain intangible income and adopt the boot - within - gain provision discussed above .

after the problem of firms inverting via merger became prominent , bills that incorporated the president's proposal to treat as domestic firms mergers with u.s. firms and other provisions included h.r .

4679 ( representative levin ) , s. 2360 ( senator levin ) , h.r .

4985 ( representative van hollen ) , and s. 2489 ( senator walsh ) .

h.r .

5338 also included the management and control provision , and s. 2489 also included allocation of income provisions .

s. 268 ( senator levin ) is a bill that includes many of the provisions of the various stop tax havens abuse legislation but not the fundamental law changes of the sanders bill ( s. 250 ) .

