several tax options have been proposed to provide financing for health care reform .

president obama initially proposed restricting itemized deductions for high - income taxpayers , along with some narrower provisions for other reforms or to reduce the tax gap .

on may 20 , 2009 , the senate finance committee provided a list of options for health - related tax provisions .

they include modifying the tax exclusion for employer - provided health care ( by capping it , limiting it by income , or replacing it with a deduction or credit ) , revising other tax provisions relating to health care , increasing taxes on alcoholic beverages , and imposing an excise tax on non - diet sweetened beverages .

individuals testifying at a may 12 , 2009 , round - table discussion have also proposed a number of other options .

the house ways and means committee has proposed financing the reform largely through a surtax on high - income individuals , which was passed by the house on november 14 , 2009 ( h.r .

3962 ) , and reflected legislation that the three house committees with jurisdiction have reported out ( h.r .

3200 ) .

the senate finance committee reported s. 1796 relying in part on an excise tax on insurers for high - cost plans ; the bill passed by the senate on december 24 , 2009 , h.r .

3590 , largely reflects the revenue - raising provisions in that plan .

president obama proposed a new compromise proposal , which generally uses h.r .

3590 as a starting point , but offers several changes to the revenue provisions of this bill .

the president's proposal would delay the effective date for the tax on high - cost employer plans proposed in h.r .

3590 from 2013 to 2018 and raise the exemption threshold for this tax to $27,500 for families and $10,200 for individuals .

in addition , the new plan offered by the administration would broaden h.r .

3590 's proposed increase of the medicare hospital insurance ( hi ) tax for high - income households by adding a tax on unearned income at a 3.8% rate .

on march 22 , 2010 , the house passed the senate proposal , h.r .

3590 , and h.r .

4872 .

the president is signed h.r .

3590 ( p.l .

111-148 ) on march 23 ; h.r .

4872 was approved by the house and senate on march 25 and signed by the president ( p.l .

111-152 ) on march 30 .

detailed revenue estimates of the three versions ( the house bill , the senate bill , and the senate bill with the reconciliation modifications , the enacted bill ) are in the appendix .

the tax proposals differ in their effects on behavior and where the burden falls in the income distribution .

although most taxes rise with income in absolute amounts , the burden relative to income may fall more heavily on higher - income taxpayers ( a progressive change ) , about equally on all taxpayers ( a proportional change ) , or more heavily on lower - income taxpayers ( a regressive change ) .

for instance , the limit on itemized deductions increases taxes for high - income taxpayers ( roughly the top 2% ) and is a highly progressive change ; similarly , the tax on high adjusted gross incomes largely affects the top 1% .

the burden of limiting health - related income and payroll - tax exclusions tends to increase taxes as a percent of income proportionally more in the middle income brackets , with smaller effects at both the low and high ends of the income distribution .

excise taxes tend to be regressive and fall more heavily on lower - income classes .

note that the distributional analysis in this report refers only to the financing mechanism and not to the distributional effects of the entire health care reform proposals , as the health care benefits are likely to favor lower - income families .

thus even with a regressive revenue source , the overall proposal might redistribute in favor of lower - income individuals .

after a brief summary of the provisions adopted , this report reviews the revenue raisers proposed in the house and senate bills and by president obama .

other financing proposals are presented including earlier proposals made by the obama administration and those introduced in earlier congressional work .

the final sections discuss other proposals suggested by the round - table discussion participants .

the most important revenue raiser in the final legislation is the increased medicare tax ( an additional 0.9% of wage income and a 3.8% tax on investment income ) , which accounts for 48% of the revenue over fy2010-fy2019 .

the next largest revenue raisers are also health related: the fee on health insurance providers ( 14% ) , the "cadillac" tax on employer health insurance premiums above certain levels ( 7% ) , and the fee on branded drugs ( 6% ) .

the next largest provision over the 10-year period is the cellulosic biofuel credit ( 5% ) , followed by another health provisions ( fees on medical devices , also 5% ) , and then by a non - health tax compliance provision , the information reporting of payments over $600 by firms ( 4% ) .

altogether these account for about 90% of revenues .

the shares change somewhat over time , because some provisions are delayed and some expire .

in 2019 , the medicare tax is 44% of the total , but the cadillac tax is 22% .

health insurance fees are the same share ( 14% ) , the drug fee falls to 3% , and the biofuel provision has expired .

the shares reflecting fees on medical devices and corporate reporting are , respectively , 4% and 3% .

a list of provisions enacted by the new law and their revenue effects can be found in the last column of table a - 1 .

a more extensive discussion of individual provisions can be found in the proposals discussed in the remainder of this report .

on july 14 , 2009 , the house ways and means committee announced several revenue - and tax - related provisions to fund health care reform , with the centerpiece being a tax on high - income individuals .

by october 2009 , the three committees with jurisdiction over the bill had reported out legislation , the america's affordable health choices act of 2009 ( h.r .

3200 ) .

more recently , most of the provisions of h.r .

3200 were included in the affordable health care for america act , h.r .

3962 , which included some modifications to proposals in h.r .

3200 along with new proposals .

h.r .

3962 was passed on november 14 , 2009 .

this section of the report first summarizes the initial provisions and then explains the modifications .

the main modifications involve a revision to the surtax on high - income taxpayers and adding some additional revenue raisers .

in the initial proposal to fund health care reform in h.r .

3200 , which resulted in $583.1 billion for fy2010-fy2014 as estimated by the joint committee on taxation , $543.9 billion would be generated by a surtax on individual taxpayers .

this surtax was to be imposed on adjusted gross income ( not taxable income ) and would have been 1% on income from $350,000 to $500,000 , 1.5% on income from $500,000 to $1 million , and 5.4% on income over $1 million .

the 1% and 1.5% rates would have doubled in 2013 unless a certain amount of savings occurs in health programs ; they could also be eliminated .

the income levels are for married couples ; singles would have the tax imposed at income levels that are 80% of those for married couples .

the initial house proposal also included a provision , raising $8 billion , to conform the definition of medical expenses for health savings accounts and similar accounts to those for itemized deductions for health care ( a provision also discussed in the senate finance committee's review ) .

 ( this provision is now estimated to raise $5 billion. ) .

the plan also included three revenue raisers related to international taxation and tax evasion .

a delay in the revised allocation of interest for the foreign tax credit ( a provision that increases the amount of allowable foreign tax credits ) would raise $26.1 billion over 10 years .

a provision relating to the use of treaties to avoid u.s. tax would raise $7.5 billion , and a provision to codify the economic substance doctrine ( again to deal with tax sheltering by corporations ) would raise $3.6 billion .

the proposal also had a provision to expand the definition of dependents for certain health - related tax purposes , which costs $4 billion .

the most recent revenue raisers included in h.r .

3962 imposed only the 5.4% surtax on incomes more than $1 million for joint returns but imposed the tax on single taxpayers at half the income level ( $500,000 ) , raising $460.5 billion over the fy2010-fy2014 period .

h.r .

3962 also includes the three revenue raisers related to international taxation and tax evasion introduced in h.r .

3200 .

a delay in the revised allocation of interest for the foreign tax credit was originally in h.r .

3200 and projected to raise $26 billion ; this provision was included in other legislation and the current repeal provision is projected to raise $6.0 billion .

the provision relating to the use of treaties to avoid u.s. tax is the same .

the economic substance doctrine provision was modified to include penalties for underpayments and is estimated to raise $5.7 billion and the conforming of the definition of medical expenses estimate was $5.0 billion .

in addition , h.r .

3962 has some additional restrictions on health related tax provisions: it would limit health flexible spending arrangements in cafeteria plans to $2,500 , indexed to inflation ( $13.3 billion ) ; increase the penalty for nonqualified distributions from health savings accounts to 20% ( $1.3 billion ) ; and disallow the deduction for subsidies related to medicare part d ( $3.0 billion ) .

it would also impose a 2.5% excise tax on the first taxable sale of medical devices ( i.e. , not at the retail level ) ( $20.0 billion ) .

the plan also requires information reporting on payments to corporations ( $17.1 billion ) .

 ( currently , firms are required to report payments of more than $600 to unincorporated businesses ; this change would extend the requirement to corporations , which would increase third party reporting and tax compliance. ) .

there would be a small loss ( $4 billion ) for extending certain health benefits for spouses and dependents and a small gain ( $2.0 billion ) for fees on insured and self - insured health plans imposed on a per participant basis at a rate that raises a fixed amount of revenue .

there is also a provision to exclude indian tribe health benefits from gross income that has a negligible cost .

the proposal for the tax on the sale of medical devices and a number of other provisions is also included in the senate finance committee proposal and the legislation under consideration , discussed below in " the senate proposal " section , but in a different form .

several provisions that were included in the finance committee bill and added in the final version of h.r .

3962 are discussed below in the section on the senate bill .

the following subsections discuss some of the major proposals in the house bill .

the senate finance committee reported s. 1796 , america's healthy future act of 2009 .

out of $381 billion of revenues over the 2010-2019 period , the largest provision is $201.4 billion of gain from a 40% excise tax on health coverage in excess of $8,000 for singles and $21,000 for families .

this provision was scaled back somewhat in h.r .

3590 , passed by the senate ; overall , the bill raises $398.1 billion , with $148.9 billion raised from a provision imposing a 40% excise tax on health coverage in excess of $8,500 for singles and $23,000 for families .

h.r .

3590 also reduced the fee on medical devices and introduced additional provisions — one of them , an increase in the payroll tax for hospital insurance ( hi ) for high - income earnings , was the second - largest revenue raiser , while the others ( a 10% excise tax on indoor tanning facilities and a change in the treatment of blue cross ) raised smaller amounts of revenue .

h.r .

3590 also included a temporary fee on insured and self - insured plans , liberalized the adoption credit , and excluded assistance provided to participants in state student loan repayment programs for certain health professionals .

except for a provision requiring information reporting for corporations ( also in the house bill , raising $17.1 billion ) , the revenue raisers relate to health tax provisions or health issues .

the plan has a number of provisions that are in the house bill: to conform the definition of medical expenses for health savings accounts and similar accounts to those for itemized deductions for health care ( $5 billion ) ; limit health flexible spending arrangements in cafeteria plans to $2,500 , but indexed to inflation ( $14.6 billion ) ; increase the penalty for nonqualified distributions from health savings accounts to 20% ( $1.3 billion ) ; and disallow the deduction for subsidies related to medicare part d ( $5.4 billion ) .

the proposal contains a provision discussed in the options but not in the house bill to raise the 7.5% of adjusted gross income floor for itemized deductions for medical costs to 10% ( $15.2 billion ) .

it also limits deductions for remuneration to officers , employees , directors , and service provided of health insurance providers to $500,000 per year ( $0.6 billion ) and restricts current tax benefits to blue cross ( $0.4 billion ) .

as in the house bill , there is also a provision to exclude indian tribe health benefits from gross income that has a negligible cost .

the proposal includes a fee on manufacturers and importers of medical devices ( $19.2 billion ) and a larger fee on health insurance providers ( $59.6 billion ) than the house bill .

it also imposes a fee on manufacturers and importers of branded drugs ( $22.2 billion ) and an excise tax of 10% on indoor tanning facilities ( $2.7 billion ) .

the plan also includes a fee on insured and self - insured health plans ( $2.6 billion ) expiring after september 31 , 2019 .

another important revenue raising provision is an additional 0.9% hi payroll tax on wages in excess of $200,000 for singles and $250,000 for joint returns projected to raise $86.8 billion .

this tax is the medicare part of payroll taxes .

the plan also has three provisions that have a negligible cost: additional requirements for community benefits for non - profit hospitals , employer reporting on the w - 2 of the value of health benefits , and a safe harbor for nondiscrimination rules in cafeteria plans for small employers .

it has some revenue losing provisions: a qualifying therapeutic discovery project credit ( a cost of $0.9 billion ) , an exclusion of funds provided to participants in state student loan repayment programs for certain health professionals ( a cost of $0.1 billion ) , and a provision making the adoption tax credit refundable , increasing the qualifying expense threshold , and extending the credit through 2011 ( a cost of $2.2 billion ) .

two sections below discuss the excise tax on health insurance coverage and the fees on drugs , medical devices , health insurance providers , the excise tax on cosmetic procedures , and the increased hi tax .

on february 22 , 2010 , the obama administration released a new compromise proposal , which uses h.r .

3590 as a starting point , but offers several modifications to the revenue provisions of this bill .

in particular , this new proposal adopts the tax on high - cost health insurance plans included in the senate - passed h.r .

3590 , but delays the effective date of this provision from 2013 to 2018 .

the president's proposal also modifies this proposed high - cost plan tax by raising the exemption amount to $27,500 for families and to $10,200 for individuals .

to make up for the revenue lost by these proposed changes to h.r .

3590 's tax on high - cost plans , the administration's proposal would broaden the medicare hi tax for high - income taxpayers .

specifically , the president's proposal adopts the revenue provision offered in h.r .

3590 that imposes a 0.9% increase on the hi tax rate to 2.35% for married couples earning more than $250,000 and individuals earning more than $200,000 .

but in addition , the president's plan would also implement a 2.9% assessment on income from interest , dividends , annuities , royalties , and other unearned income for married couples earning more than $250,000 or individuals earning more than $200,000 .

the president's compromise proposal also includes two revenue provisions contained in the house - passed h.r .

3962 .

first , the administration's plan would clarify that certain liquid byproducts derived from paper or pulp processing ( known as "black liquor" ) are not eligible for a cellulosic biofuel tax credit provided for under current law .

secondly , the president's proposal would seek to codify the economic substance doctrine .

the reduction and delay in the tax on high - cost insurance reduces the fy2010-fy2019 revenue from $148.9 billion to $32 billion .

the additional medicare tax on high - income taxpayers' investment income increases the revenue gain from $86.8 billion to $210.2 billion .

the medicare tax on investment income is set at 3.8% .

on march 22 , 2010 , the house passed the senate bill , h.r .

3590 , and the president is expected to sign the bill on march 23 .

the house also passed h.r .

4872 , and the senate is now considering that legislation .

a wide variety of other income tax provisions could potentially be used to provide additional revenues , including rate increases , widening the rate brackets , expanding the base , or increasing the tax rate on favored income items , such as dividends and capital gains .

burman , for example , suggests reducing the indexing of the rate brackets to the consumer price index ( cpi ) minus 1% rather than the cpi .

the justification for this revision is that the cpi overstates the cost of living change because it does not account for the shift in the composition of spending to those items with smaller relative price increases .

this proposal is estimated to raise $8 billion in 2010 and $50 billion in 2019 .

it also has the advantage of growing over time , which may be helpful in financing a growing health care plan .

shea suggested increasing the capital gains tax , taxing carried interest ( certain earnings of investment fund managers ) as ordinary income , reforming international tax enforcement , and repealing lifo ( last - in , first - out inventories ) .

revenue estimates for a number of these items are contained in the treasury's "greenbook": raising tax rates on capital gains and dividends would raise about $5 billion , carried interest would initially raise about $3 billion , and lifo repeal would raise about $6 billion .

the revenue raised from international reforms depends on the nature of the changes , but international provisions in the president's proposal in total raise more than $20 billion .

another source of revenue would be increases in payroll taxes , either by raising the rates or raising the earnings ceiling .

burman estimates that an increase in both the employee and the employer share of payroll taxes would raise about $100 billion in revenue per year .

he also estimates that eliminating the social security earnings cap would raise $84 billion .

in the latter case , some of the savings would eventually be offset by benefit increases unless the earnings were decoupled from benefits .

another possibility for raising revenue is to turn to an entirely new revenue source .

burman , for example , proposed a 10% value added tax ( vat ) , which would raise $600 billion .

another option for an additional revenue source is a carbon tax or the auction revenue from a cap and trade carbon emissions permit system .

the vat , in addition , would be a new tax with all of the administrative compliance problems associated with such a tax .

if very large sources of revenue are not desired , it might not be worth the administration and compliance costs .

it would also be difficult to put into place quickly and would involve a number of transition and other problems .

the carbon tax or cap and trade would also be difficult to put into place and would involve other important program issues that need to be settled .

as with excise taxes , these taxes would be regressive .

 table a - 1 provides a comparative list of all revenue provisions and revenue - related reform proposals currently included in h.r .

3962 and h.r .

3590 .

the final column shows the provisions enacted into law in p.l .

111-148 and p.l .

111-152 .

