on may 26 , 2009 , president obama nominated judge sonia sotomayor of the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit to fill the supreme court seat that was vacated by retiring justice david souter .

on august 6 , the senate confirmed justice sotomayor by a vote of 68-31 , and she was sworn in on august 8 .

judge sotomayor had served on the second circuit since 1998 .

before her appointment to the second circuit , she served as a federal district court judge for the u.s. district court for the southern district of new york .

prior to her role on the federal bench , she worked as a prosecutor and spent several years as an attorney in private practice .

this report analyzes selected cases authored by judge sotomayor during her tenure on the second circuit , including majority , concurring , and dissenting opinions in areas of legal significance .

in some instances , it also discusses an opinion authored by judge sotomayor while she was a district court judge or a per curia m ( "by the court" ) opinion for which judge sotomayor served on the panel of judges that ruled in the case .

overall , judge sotomayor's opinions defy easy categorization along ideological lines .

in particular areas , a general substantive approach may be discerned .

for example , her appellate court opinions in cases involving suits by individuals with disabilities could be seen as appearing to favor plaintiffs' claims , and in various areas of international concern , she could be said to have shown a tendency to make the second circuit available to plaintiffs unless circuit precedent and the political branches have indicated otherwise .

general characteristics of her approach to the judicial role are more easily identified .

perhaps the most consistent characteristic of judge sotomayor's approach as an appellate judge could be described as an adherence to the doctrine of stare decisis ( i.e. , the upholding of past judicial precedents ) .

this characteristic would be in line with the judicial philosophy of justice souter , who often displayed special respect for upholding past precedent .

another characteristic of judge sotomayor's opinions could be described as a meticulous evaluation of the particular facts at issue in a case , which may inform whether past judicial precedents from the circuit are applicable .

her approach to statutory interpretation seems similarly nuanced .

she tends to adhere to the plain meaning of the text but , in the face of ambiguous language , appears willing to consider the intent and purpose of a statute .

judge sotomayor's opinions also display her apparent dislike for situations in which the court oversteps the role called for by the procedural posture of a case .

for example , in a dissenting opinion in a fourth amendment case , issued in may 2009 , she wrote that the court had overstepped its role by delving into the facts in a case involving review of a denial of a motion for summary judgment .

while many of her judicial approaches may be enduring , some shifts in her legal conclusions may naturally arise because of the difference in the roles of a circuit court judge versus a supreme court justice .

whereas circuit court decisions are often bound by relevant supreme court precedents , the supreme court more often considers issues of "first impression" ( i.e. , issues for which no relevant precedent governs the outcome ) .

in addition , supreme court justices have greater control over their docket than do circuit court judges , and they review cases originating in state and federal courts throughout the nation .

in contrast , as a judge on the second circuit , judge sotomayor typically reviewed cases that originated in federal courts in vermont , new york , and connecticut .

the jurisdictional area and the nature of the second circuit affects the range of subjects in which judge sotomayor has had an opportunity to author opinions as an appellate judge .

for example , because only one of the states in the second circuit's area authorizes the death penalty , she has not has been called upon to review a case involving a death sentence .

nonetheless , during her more than a decade on the second circuit , she wrote opinions in many issue areas that were of interest to the senate during its deliberations .

the following discussion analyzes pertinent opinions authored by judge sotomayor in several of these areas .

the first amendment of the constitution provides that "congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech , or of the press.... " as a supreme court justice , judge sotomayor will help to decide at least one potentially significant free speech case in this term .

the supreme court has agreed to hear argument in a case that will evaluate the constitutionality of a federal law that criminalizes depictions of animal cruelty .

one of the questions before the court will be whether to recognize depictions such as those covered by the statute as a category of speech that is exempt from first amendment protection .

this may be significant because the supreme court has not created a new category of exempted speech for over 25 years .

judge sotomayor's decisions interpreting the free speech clause do not appear to be considered particularly controversial .

to the extent that a pattern can be discerned , some might point to a meticulous recitation of the facts and her application of precedent from the supreme court or the second circuit to those facts .

consequently , it does not appear possible to discern a particular ideology from her opinions or to determine whether she would favor a more or less expansive application of the free speech clause of the first amendment .

for example , in center for reproductive law and policy v. bush , judge sotomayor , writing for the second circuit , dismissed a first amendment challenge to the "mexico city policy," which restricted foreign non - governmental family planning organizations in receipt of u.s. funds from providing or promoting abortions .

the center for reproductive law and policy ( "clrp" ) argued that the policy restricted its first amendment right to communicate with foreign non - governmental family planning organizations that fell under these prohibitions .

judge sotomayor applied second circuit precedent that had dismissed a nearly identical challenge to the policy and found that the mexico city policy did not prevent the clrp from exercising its first amendment rights .

on the other hand , in u.s. v. quattrone , in another opinion authored by judge sotomayor , the second circuit overturned a gag rule placed upon the press by the district court .

sotomayor noted that the gag order was a prior restraint and that such speech suppression is among the least tolerated forms of suppression under the first amendment .

applying supreme court precedent articulated in nebraska press association v. stuart , sotomayor held that the district court had not sufficiently justified the gag order and thus overturned it .

another case analyzing the constitutionality of a prior restraint was doe v. mukasey .

judge sotomayor was part of a unanimous three - judge panel that declared portions of the usa patriot act unconstitutional .

the case considered provisions of the act that prohibited recipients of national security letters ( nsls ) from disclosing the fact that they had received the letters , an issue on which the supreme court has yet to speak directly .

the panel , therefore , applied supreme court precedent related to prior restraints articulated in freedman v. maryland .

the panel , however , appeared to do so with attention to supreme court decisions that indicate courts owe a higher degree of deference to the executive branch in matters of national security .

in freedman , the supreme court held that , in general , where an expression is conditioned on government permission , three procedural protections are needed to guard against impermissible censorship: ( 1 ) restraint prior to judicial review must be only for "a specified brief period" ; ( 2 ) any further restraint prior to a final judicial determination must be limited to "the shortest fixed period compatible with sound judicial resolution" ; and ( 3 ) the burden of going to court to suppress speech and the burden of proof in court must be placed on the government .

the second circuit was able to construe most of the provisions at issue to avoid constitutional difficulties related to the first two requirements .

however , the panel found that one of the provisions of the act contradicted freedman 's third requirement regarding the burden of bringing an action .

another provision of the act treated certification on the part of government officials that the disclosure might endanger national security or interfere with diplomatic relations as conclusive evidence to sustain the government's burden of proof .

the panel held that a certification was not enough to meet the burden of proof standard set out in freedman .

the panel , therefore , partially invalidated the provisions at issue , but did not find the provisions to be unconstitutional in their entirety .

instead , the panel remanded the case to allow the government the opportunity to comply with the proper constitutional standards .

in her first term , 2009-10 , justice sotomayor will participate in the review of salazar v. buono , a case appealed from the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit .

in salazar , a visitor to the mojave national preserve challenged the display of a large latin cross that is located on land within the preserve .

on several occasions in recent years , congress has taken action to avoid removal of the cross and avoid establishment clause claims against the display of the cross on federal property , including authorizing a land transfer of the small area of land on which the cross is located within the preserve to a private entity .

the case presents two questions for the court to consider: ( 1 ) whether a visitor to the preserve has standing to challenge the display if he has no objection to a public cross display but rather challenges the prohibition on other religious displays on the land ; and ( 2 ) whether the land transfer was a valid method to cure the potential establishment clause violation posed by a religious display on public land .

while on the second circuit , sotomayor authored few opinions related to religious freedom , and her opinions in the area did not appear controversial .

on june 26 , 2008 , the supreme court issued its decision in district of columbia v. heller , holding by a 5-4 vote that the second amendment protects an individual right to possess a firearm , unconnected to service in a militia , and protects the right to use that firearm for traditional lawful purposes such as self - defense within the home .

in heller , the court affirmed a lower court's holding that declared three provisions of the district of columbia's firearms control regulation act unconstitutional .

although the court did an extensive analysis of the second amendment to interpret the meaning of the second amendment , the decision left unanswered many questions of significant constitutional magnitude , including the standard of scrutiny that should be applied to laws regulating the possession and use of firearms , and whether the second amendment applies to the states .

it is the latter issue which has been most commented upon by lower courts in post - heller cases .

over 100 years ago , the court held in united states v. cruikshank ( and reaffirmed in presser v. illinois ) that the second amendment does not act as a constraint upon state law .

both of these decisions , however , were decided prior to the advent of modern incorporation principles .

the court in heller briefly commented upon the issue of incorporation stating , "[w]ith respect to cruikshank's continuing validity on incorporation , a question not presented by this case , we note that cruikshank also said that the first amendment did not apply against the states and did not engage in the sort of fourteenth amendment inquiry required by our later cases. .

it further noted that subsequent supreme court cases had reaffirmed the holding that the second amendment applies only to the federal government .

while these statements could be viewed as indicating that the court would continue with this precedent , it could also be interpreted as indicating that the court would support the application of modern incorporation doctrine principles to the second amendment .

since the heller decision , three federal appellate circuits have addressed whether the second amendment applies to the states .

the first decision to address this issue was a three - judge per curiam opinion by the second circuit in maloney v. rice , in which judge sotomayor was one of the judges .

in maloney , the plaintiff sought a declaration that a new york penal law that punishes the possession of nunchukas was unconstitutional .

on appeal , the plaintiff argued that the state statutory ban violates the second amendment because it infringes on his right to keep and bear arms .

here , the court , citing presser v. illinois , held that the state law did not violate the second amendment because "it is settled law ... that the second amendment applies only to limitations the federal government seeks to impose on this right. .

the court noted that , although heller might have questioned the continuing validity of this principle , supreme court precedent directs them to follow presser because "[w]here , as here , a supreme court precedent 'has direct application in a case , yet appears to rest on reasons rejected in some other line of decisions , the court of appeals should follow the case which directly controls , leaving to the supreme court the prerogative of overruling its own decisions.' .

after the second circuit decision , the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit in nordyke v. king held the opposite and concluded that the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment incorporates the second amendment and applied it against the states and local governments .

the court stated that there are three doctrinal ways the second amendment could apply to the states: ( 1 ) direct application ; ( 2 ) incorporation by the privileges and immunities clause of the fourteenth amendment , or ( 3 ) incorporation by the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment .

the court held that it was precluded from finding incorporation through the first two options and embarked on an analysis under the due process clause by determining whether the right under the second amendment is "deeply rooted in this nation's history and tradition. .

after engaging in an historical analysis of the right during the founding era , the post - revolutionary years , and the post - civil war era , the court concluded that the second amendment was incorporated because "the crucial role [of this] deeply rooted right ... compels us to recognize that it is indeed fundamental [and] necessary to the anglo - american conception of the ordered liberty that we have inherited. .

on june 2 , 2009 , the united states court of appeals for the seventh circuit issued its decision in nationa l rifle ass'n of america v. city of chicago and village of oak park .

here , the seventh circuit followed the second circuit and also held that the second amendment does not apply to the states .

like the second circuit , the seventh circuit stated that the supreme court's decisions in cruikshank , presser , and miller still control as they have direct application in the case .

the court noted that , although heller questioned cruikshank , this "[did] not license inferior courts to go their own ways... .

if a court of appeals may strike off on its own , this not only undermines the uniformity of national law but also may compel the justices to grant certiorari before they think the question ripe for decision. .

in the 2009-10 term , judge sotomayor will participate in the review of an upcoming case that involves the commerce clause and necessary and proper clause of article i of the u.s. constitution .

in the case , the court will consider the constitutionality of a federal statute which can be used to place "sexually dangerous" persons in long - term civil commitment , regardless of whether there is a threat that such person is likely to violate federal law .

because most crimes of sexual violence violate state and not federal law , the application of this statute could be significantly limited by the supreme court .

while on the second circuit , judge sotomayor had an opportunity to address commerce clause issues , although it does not appear that these cases are considered of particular significance .

for instance , in united states v. giordano , the court held that the then - mayor of waterbury , connecticut had been constitutionally convicted of making telephone calls to solicit sex with minors , despite the fact that some of these calls had occurred entirely within connecticut .

writing for the court , judge sotomayor held that 18 u.s.c .

§ 2425 , which prohibits the use of "any facility or means of interstate or foreign commerce," to transmit contact information regarding a person under the age of 16 years with the intent of that person engaging in illegal sexual activity , could constitutionally be applied to intrastate phone calls , because the law at issue related to an instrumentality of commerce .

the giordana case is within mainstream commerce clause analysis .

in united states v. lopez , the supreme court identified three different categories of regulation in which the commerce power could be exercised: ( 1 ) regulation of channels of commerce ; ( 2 ) regulation of instrumentalities of commerce ; and ( 3 ) regulation of economic activities that have an "effect" on commerce .

using this framework , the lopez court struck down the gun - free school zones act of 1990 , which made it illegal for "any individual knowingly to possess a firearm at a place that the individual knows , or has reasonable cause to believe , is a school zone. .

the court in lopez reasoned that the law did not fall under the first two commerce categories , but it also found that it had no substantial "effect" ( the third category ) on commercial transactions , either by itself or in the aggregate .

further , the statute contained no requirement that interstate commerce be affected , such as that the gun had been previously transported in interstate commerce .

nor was the criminalization of possession of a gun near a school part of a larger regulatory scheme that did regulate commerce .

it should be noted that the analysis of lopez dealt principally with the "effect" category of commerce clause analysis , not the "channels" or "instrumentalities" of commerce categories .

at least two federal courts of appeals have suggested , however , that where the relationship between a "channels" or "instrumentalities" regulation and commercial activity is attenuated , that there may also need to be some additional commerce clause nexus .

this line of reasoning , however , has not generally been used in the context of a highly regulated interstate instrumentality such as the telephone network at issue in giordana .

thu s , judge sotomayor , relying on past precedent in the circuit , did not address this alternative line of analysis .

it may be noted , however , that judge sotomayor did not appear inclined to focus on the alternative line of reasoning , even when some might consider it relevant to another case decided by the second circuit .

in united states v. harris , the court considered 18 u.s.c .

§ 252a ( a ) ( 5 ) ( b ) , which prohibits: knowingly possess[ing] any book , magazine , periodical , film , videotape , computer disk , or any other material that contains an image of child pornography that has been mailed , or shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce by any means , including by computer , or that was produced using materials that have been mailed , or shipped or transported .

other circuits had evaluated this statute under the "effect" category , and had found that regulation of mere possession of pornography where no commercial activity was involved was insufficient to meet the requirements set forth by the supreme court .

these cases seemed to conclude that the fact that the materials to make the pornography had moved in "channels" of commerce ( the second category ) did not preclude the application of the more rigorous requirements established for the "effects" prong of commerce clause jurisprudence .

it should be noted that the supreme court has not adopted these changes to its commerce clause doctrine as it relates to "channels" and "instrumentalities" of commerce , and supreme court dicta does not appear to support such a change .

further , the court's decision in the case of gonzales v. raich seems to indicate that , to the extent that a prohibition against the possession of illegal contraband is important to a larger regulatory scheme restricting the sale or manufacture of such contraband , it is likely to fall within the necessary and proper clause .

judge sotomayor's decision in harris , however , did not directly evaluate the alternative line of court of appeals cases striking down 18 u.s.c .

§ 2252a ( a ) ( 5 ) ( b ) .

instead , her opinion relied on prior second circuit precedent considering a prohibition on child pornography .

in united states v. holston , the second circuit upheld a prohibition on production ( not possession ) of pornographic depictions based on lopez and its progeny .

in evaluating the relevance of holston , judge sotomayor noted that , for purposes of commerce clause analysis , she saw no distinction between the possession of pornography and its production .

consequently , she found that no further analysis was necessary and upheld the prohibition .

in recent years , the supreme court has considered several cases involving national security .

these cases have typically concerned the scope of executive authority in the conflict with al qaeda and the taliban , as well as the rights owed to persons detained by the united states in the course of the conflict .

court rulings in this area have often been made by a five - justice majority .

as a result , there has been significant interest in judge sotomayor's views regarding national security .

as a supreme court justice , it is possible that she will cast a deciding vote in national security cases that come before the supreme court in the coming years .

an examination of judge sotomayor's opinions provides little guidance as to her judicial philosophy regarding executive authority in the realm of national security .

during her tenure with the second circuit , judge sotomayor heard only a handful of cases concerning national security matters .

as will be discussed later , judge sotomayor wrote an opinion in 2006 for a unanimous three - judge panel in cassidy v. chertoff , holding that minimally intrusive , suspicionless searches of passengers' carry - on baggage and automobile trunks before boarding a commuter ferry were justified on account of the government's interest in deterring terrorist attacks on large vessels involved in mass transportation .

also , as discussed previously , judge sotomayor joined a unanimous three - judge opinion in 2008 striking down on first amendment grounds two provisions of the usa patriot act relating to the disclosure of the receipt of national security letters .

these cases , however , provide little indication as to how judge sotomayor might rule on broader national security issues relating to executive power or the detention of suspected terrorists .

before her appointment to the supreme court , judge sotomayor authored a number of opinions in the area of civil rights .

although these cases all involve claims of discrimination , such claims are made under a wide array of federal , state , and local laws that vary significantly in the types of bias they prohibit and the classes of individuals they protect .

as a result , it is difficult to detect a pattern in justice sotomayor's civil rights rulings .

indeed , of the seven opinions she has authored in the area of civil rights , judge sotomayor has ruled in favor of the party claiming discrimination in three of them and against the party claiming discrimination in four others .

meanwhile , judge sotomayor's stance as in ricci v. destafano , a case involving allegations of reverse discrimination by a group of white firefighters , is somewhat more ambiguous .

although ricci is perhaps the most well known of the civil rights cases in which she has participated , justice sotomayor did not issue a written opinion in the case .

rather , a three - judge panel of the second circuit on which she was included issued a one - paragraph unsigned opinion that summarily affirmed the district court's decision .

nevertheless , the case is significant because the supreme court recently overturned the second circuit's decision .

in ricci , city officials in new haven , connecticut declined to certify a promotional test on which black and hispanic firefighters had performed poorly relative to white firefighters .

several white and hispanic firefighters sued , claiming that the city's actions violated , among other laws , title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , which prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of race , color , national origin , sex , or religion , and the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment , which prohibits a state from denying equal protection to its citizens .

city officials defended their actions , arguing that title vii prohibits employment policies or practices that have a disparate racial impact and that the city was in fact attempting to comply with title vii and avoid a lawsuit when it refused to certify test results that had a disparate impact on minority firefighters .

the district court ultimately sided with the city of new haven , holding that the "[d]efendants' motivation to avoid making promotions based on a test with a racially disparate impact ... does not ... as a matter of law , constitute discriminatory intent , and therefore such evidence is insufficient for plaintiffs to prevail on their title vii claim. .

likewise , the district court rejected the plaintiffs' equal protection claim , ruling that the city's attempt to remedy the disparate impact of the test did not constitute an intent to discriminate against the non - minority firefighters and that the rejection of the test results did not amount to an unlawful racial classification because all applicants were treated the same with respect to the administration and invalidation of the tests .

as noted above , a three - judge panel of the second circuit that included judge sotomayor issued a one - paragraph affirmation of the "well - reasoned opinion" of the district court , noting that because the city "in refusing to validate the exams , was simply trying to fulfill its obligations under title vii when confronted with test results that had a disproportionate racial impact , its actions were protected. .

neither judge sotomayor nor the other judges provided additional insight into their legal reasoning in the decision .

the case has drawn considerable attention , however , not only because of the controversial nature of the reverse discrimination allegations but also because the supreme court recently reversed the second circuit's decision .

in reversing , the court established a new standard for evaluating when avoiding disparate impact liability excuses what otherwise would be prohibited disparate treatment under title vii .

according to the court , "before an employer can engage in intentional discrimination for the asserted purpose of avoiding or remedying an unintentional disparate impact , the employer must have a strong basis in evidence to believe it will be subject to disparate - impact liability if it fails to take the race - conscious , discriminatory action. .

it is important to note that this standard was not in effect when judge sotomayor ruled in the case and therefore would not have been applied by judge sotomayor or her colleagues on the second circuit .

although it is difficult to characterize judge sotomayor's decision in ricci , her written opinions in other civil rights cases provide more insight into her legal reasoning .

several of these cases have been decided at least in part in favor of the party claiming discrimination .

for example , in raniola v. bratton , the second circuit considered , among other claims , allegations of sex discrimination under title vii made by a female police officer who had been terminated from her job .

the district court had dismissed the officer's hostile work environment and retaliation claims as a matter of law , but judge sotomayor , writing for a unanimous three - judge panel , reversed the lower court .

applying the standard that governs when parties move for judgment as a matter of law — to review the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party — judge sotomayor examined evidence of verbal abuse , disparate treatment on the basis of sex , and workplace sabotage and concluded that "[t]he evidence which raniola presented and the additional witness testimony that raniola proffered provide a sufficient basis for a reasonable jury to conclude that raniola was subjected to a hostile work environment because she was a woman and that raniola was suspended , put on probation , and then terminated in retaliation for having complained of her treatment. .

it is important to note that judge sotomayor's ruling did not constitute a decision on the merits of the claim .

rather , by remanding the case to the lower court for trial , judge sotomayor left the ultimate decision on the plaintiff's claims of sex discrimination and retaliation to a jury .

similarly , in cruz v. coach stores , the second circuit reviewed a hispanic female plaintiff's allegations of race and sex discrimination under various federal , state , and local laws .

although judge sotomayor , writing for a unanimous three - judge panel , upheld the district court's rejection of virtually all of the plaintiff's claims — including claims regarding failure to promote , retaliation , discriminatory termination , and disparate impact — the judge did reverse the district court's grant of summary judgment with respect to the plaintiff's hostile work environment claim .

judge sotomayor found that , unlike the other claims , the plaintiff had "established a genuine factual dispute regarding her claim of hostile work environment harassment" on the basis of race and sex when her allegations were viewed in the most favorable light .

specifically , the plaintiff had cited repeated evidence of racial slurs by her supervisor , as well as evidence of physical and verbal sexual harassment .

notably , the district court appeared to consider the evidence of sexual harassment to be too vague or isolated , but judge sotomayor concluded that "the physically threatening nature of [the supervisor's] behavior , which repeatedly ended with him backing cruz into the wall ... brings this case over the line separating merely offensive or boorish conduct from actionable sexual harassment. .

the judge also emphasized that "a jury could find that [the supervisor's] racial harassment exacerbated the effect of his sexually threatening behavior and vice versa. .

as a result , although judge sotomayor rejected the majority of the plaintiff's claims of discrimination , she remanded the case for trial for an ultimate decision on the merits of the hostile work environment claim .

unlike the two decisions above , which were unanimous , judge sotomayor's written opinion in the remaining case in which she sided at least in part with the party claiming discrimination was a dissenting opinion .

in gant v. wallingford board of education , the second circuit examined a case involving an elementary school student who alleged race discrimination under 42 u.s.c .

§§ 1981 and 1983 , two civil rights statutes that provide a remedy for various types of discrimination .

specifically , the plaintiff claimed that school officials intentionally discriminated against him through deliberate indifference to racial hostility in the classroom and through a decision to transfer him from first grade to kindergarten mid - way through the year .

all three judges on the panel agreed that there was insufficient evidence to support the student's claim of racial hostility , but judge sotomayor vigorously dissented from the majority's ruling that the plaintiff's claim of a discriminatory transfer lacked merit .

according to the judge , the plaintiff , who was the only black child in his class and one of only a few black children in the entire school , had presented evidence that his transfer was "unprecedented and contrary to the school's established policies" and that he had suffered disparate treatment as compared to similarly situated white students who had received transitional assistance rather than transfers when experiencing academic difficulties .

as a result , judge sotomayor reasoned that the plaintiff's evidence of race discrimination was sufficient for a reasonable jury to reach a verdict in his favor and she therefore would have remanded the case for trial on the question of the classroom transfer .

in contrast to the cases described above , judge sotomayor has also authored several civil rights opinions in which she ruled or would have ruled against the party claiming discrimination .

for example , in williams v. r.h. donnelly co. , the second circuit considered a black female employee's claim that her employer had violated title vii's prohibition against race and sex discrimination by denying her various promotions , refusing to transfer her , and failing to create a management position for her .

writing for a unanimous three - judge panel , judge sotomayor affirmed the district court's grant of summary judgment to the employer .

specifically , the judge determined that the plaintiff had failed to establish that she was qualified for the promotions she sought , had failed to prove that her employer's refusal to create a position for her was motivated by discrimination , and had failed to demonstrate that the denial of a transfer to a lesser position constituted an adverse employment action , all prerequisites to establishing her claims .

likewise , in norville v. staten island university hospital , judge sotomayor authored a unanimous opinion rejecting race and age discrimination claims brought under state and local laws by an older black female nurse .

with regard to the race discrimination claim , judge sotomayor held that the plaintiff had failed to produce evidence sufficient to support a reasonable inference of race discrimination , in part because she had not demonstrated that similarly situated employees of a different race were treated differently .

with regard to the age discrimination claim , the judge held that the plaintiff had successfully established a prima facie case of discrimination but had failed to prove that the hospital's explanation for its actions were a pretext for discrimination , as required by legal precedents .

in washington v. county of rockland , the second circuit reviewed the claims of a group of black corrections officers who alleged , among other things , that prison officials were illegally motivated by race in violation of 42 u.s.c .

§§ 1981 and 1983 when they pursued administrative disciplinary proceedings against the officers .

the district court held that the plaintiffs failed to file their race discrimination claims in a timely manner , and judge sotomayor , writing for a unanimous three - judge panel , affirmed , ruling that the plaintiffs had not sued until after the statute of limitations had expired .

finally , as discussed earlier , in hankins v. lyght , the second circuit considered a claim brought under the age discrimination in employment act ( adea ) by a minister who was forced to retire under his church's mandatory retirement policy .

the district court dismissed the case , but a majority of the three - judge panel reversed , ruling that the religious freedom restoration act ( rfra ) , which generally bars the government from substantially burdening an individual's free exercise of religion , effectively amended the adea .

the majority therefore remanded the case to the district court for reconsideration under the rfra standards .

however , judge sotomayor dissented , arguing that rfra did not apply to the dispute .

she expressly criticized the majority for "violat[ing] a cardinal principle of judicial restraint" by examining rfra's constitutionality , and she disagreed with several of the majority's legal conclusions regarding the applicability of the statute .

in particular , judge sotomayor argued that the court should not have reached the rfra issue because it should have held that the adea does not apply to employment discrimination lawsuits by clergy members or other employees serving primarily religions roles .

instead , judge sotomayor would have avoided remand , deeming it a "wasteful expenditure of judicial resources and an unnecessary and uninvited burden on the parties. .

thus , she would have affirmed the district court's dismissal of the age discrimination claim .

as these cases indicate , there does not appear to have been a particular pattern evident in judge sotomayor's civil rights opinions .

rather , the variety of outcomes suggests that her approach is reasonably balanced , given that she rejects some claims while accepting others , frequently agrees with her judicial colleagues , and rules both in favor of and against the party claiming discrimination .

as a result , her opinions seem to betray neither a particular sympathy for nor hostility towards alleged victims of discrimination .

if anything , judge sotomayor's civil rights opinions appear to have been rather workmanlike , in the sense that she appears to examine the evidence , apply precedent , and render a verdict without straying from established legal principles , actions that are not unusual given that many of the discrimination cases she has considered do not raise novel legal questions .

judge sotomayor wrote a number of decisions relating to the civil rights of individuals with disabilities under various federal statutes .

many of her cases related to the americans with disabilities act ( ada ) , which is a broad civil rights act that provides nondiscrimination protection for individuals with disabilities in many areas , including employment , public services , and public accommodation and services operated by private entities .

she also has addressed discrimination issues which have arisen under section 504 of the rehabilitation act , which prohibits discrimination against an individual with a disability in a program or activity that receives federal financial assistance , an executive agency of the u.s. or the postal service , as well as the protection and advocacy for individuals with mental illness act ( paimi ) which ensures that "the rights of individuals with mental illness are protected. .

finally , judge sotomayor decided a number of cases relating to the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) , which provides federal funding for the education of children with disabilities and requires , as a condition for the receipt of such funds , the provision of a free appropriate public education in the least restrictive environment .

judge sotomayor's decisions have been generally supportive of claims under these statutes , but she has not always ruled in favor of plaintiffs with disabilities .

in her most discussed decision on disability issues , bartlett v. new york state board of bar examiners , judge sotomayor appears to have anticipated the legislative discussions surrounding the enactment of the ada amendments act by finding that the use of self accommodations did not mean that the plaintiff was not an individual with a disability .

in bartlett , the plaintiff argued that she should be given reasonable accommodations when taking the new york bar exam because of her dyslexia .

in evaluating whether the plaintiff was disabled , judge sotomayor observed that "[a] definition of disability based on outcomes alone , particularly in the context of learning disabilities , would prevent a court from finding a disability in the case of any individual like dr. bartlett who is extremely bright and hardworking , and who uses alternative routes to achieve academic success. .

while analyzing the statutory and regulatory language , judge sotomayor also examined the implications of various legal arguments on the overall intent of the ada .

similarly , in connecticut office of protection and advocacy for persons with disabilities v. hartford board of education , judge sotomayor , writing for the court , addressed whether various federal statutes provided that the connecticut protection and advocacy system should have access to a nonresidential school for children with serious emotional disturbances in order to investigate allegations of abuse and neglect .

finding that the system had such rights , judge sotomayor examined the purposes of the law to protect the legal and human rights of individuals with developmental disabilities and found that these purposes were not limited by the fact that a section of the act specifically provided authority to investigate certain incidents .

judge sotomayor's opinions often turned on the particular facts presented .

for example , in pell v. columbia university , the facts surrounding the allegations of hostility to the plaintiff's dyslexia and the alleged discrimination regarding a foreign language requirement were closely examined .

similarly , in two fact - specific decisions regarding the application of the ada's statute of limitations , judge sotomayor arrived at two different rulings .

in her decisions , judge sotomayor examined the statutory language at issue , as well as the applicable regulations and guidance to inform her decisions .

she also has relied upon the reasoning of other circuits in arriving at her decisions .

in the idea context , judge sotomayor has been described as "representative of the mainstream of prevailing judicial outcomes in k - 12 education. .

judge sotomayor will participate in a major campaign finance decision involving the constitutionality of limiting corporate campaign expenditures .

the court ordered this case to be reargued on september 9 , 2009 , before the beginning of its regular term .

in this case , the court will consider whether to overrule two of its prior decisions , austin v. michigan chamber of commerce , upholding limits on corporate expenditures , and a portion of mcconnell v. federal election commission , upholding the facial validity of a section of the bipartisan campaign reform act of 2002 prohibiting corporate treasury funds from being spent on advertisements referring to a federal candidate and broadcast within 60 days of a general election or 30 days of a primary .

during her tenure on the second circuit , judge sotomayor has not written extensively in the area of election law .

therefore , it is difficult to infer a great deal about her philosophy in the area .

in a ballot access decision , she demonstrated careful consideration of the facts and a strong reliance on past precedent .

dissenting in a case involving the voting rights act and felony disenfranchisement , her approach to statutory interpretation revealed an apparent preference for adhering to the plain meaning of the text , while simultaneously expressing deference to congress .

during her tenure with the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit , judge sotomayor did not address substantive legal questions involving abortion , such as the extent of the constitution's protection of a woman's right to choose .

judge sotomayor , however , authored opinions that have examined the impact of foreign funding restrictions on domestic nonprofit organizations that promote abortion , and has discussed the effect of forced abortions and involuntary family planning practices in the context of applications for asylum .

these opinions illustrate judge sotomayor's concern for precedent and her general adherence to established legal standards .

as discussed previously , in center for reproductive law and policy v. bush , the second circuit considered an appeal brought by a nonprofit organization devoted to the promotion of reproductive rights .

the center for reproductive law and policy ( "crlp" ) challenged the federal government's policy of conditioning the availability of u.s. government funds for foreign nongovernmental organizations on their agreement to neither perform nor promote abortion .

crlp argued that the so - called "mexico city policy" deprived the organization of its rights to freedom of speech and association under the first amendment by limiting its interactions and communications with foreign nongovernmental organizations .

crlp maintained that the mexico city policy discouraged foreign nongovernmental organizations from collaborating with it because the organizations feared being viewed as promoting abortion .

the second circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal of crlp's claim on the grounds that the mexico city policy did not prohibit the organization from exercising its first amendment rights .

writing for the court , judge sotomayor relied heavily on planned parenthood federation of america , inc. v. agency for international development , a 1990 decision by the second circuit that also involved a first amendment challenge to the mexico city policy by a domestic nonprofit organization .

judge sotomayor explained: " planned parenthood not only controls this case conceptually ; it presented the same issue .

planned parenthood rejected the same first amendment challenge to the same provision ... and no intervening supreme court case law alters its precedential value. .

while the district court dismissed crlp's claim on the grounds that the organization lacked standing under article iii of the constitution , the second circuit reached its decision after considering the merits of the claim and declining to resolve the standing question .

after reviewing several decisions by the supreme court involving the assumption of standing by a court in order to proceed directly to the merits of a case , the second circuit reasoned that where a governmental provision is challenged as unconstitutional and another case has already entertained and rejected the same constitutional challenge to the same provision , a court may dispose of the case on the merits without addressing a novel question of jurisdiction .

citing planned parenthood , the second circuit maintained that the mexico city policy did not implicate any constitutional rights .

domestic nonprofit organizations remained free to use their own funds to pursue abortion - related activities in foreign countries .

the decision not to collaborate with crlp because of the acceptance of u.s. government funds by a foreign nongovernmental organization had only an "incidental effect" on the activities of the crlp that did not rise to the level of a constitutional violation .

in shi liang lin v. u.s. dept .

of justice , the second circuit reviewed three orders issued by the board of immigration appeals ( "bia" ) that denied applications for asylum submitted by three unmarried partners of individuals who were forced to have abortions in china .

the bia's denials were based on its conclusion that spouses of individuals who were forced to abort a pregnancy or submit to involuntary sterilization , but not the unmarried partners of such individuals , could automatically qualify for asylum as refugees under federal immigration law .

in reviewing the bia's orders , the second circuit sought to determine whether § 601 ( a ) of the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 , which amended the definition for the term "refugee" to include individuals who were forced to abort a pregnancy or submit to involuntary sterilization , was ambiguous , so that the bia's construction of the term was entitled to deference .

the second circuit evaluated the bia's interpretation of § 601 ( a ) in accordance with the principles articulated by the supreme court in chevron u.s.a. v. nrdc .

in chevron , the suprme court established a two - part test for determining when an agency's interpretation of a statute that it administers is entitled to deference .

first , a reviewing court will consider whether congress has spoken on the question at issue .

if the intent of congress is clear , the court must "give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of congress. .

if the statute is silent or ambiguous , however , a court will examine whether the agency's interpretation constitutes a permissible construction of the statute .

the second circuit , however , not only held that unmarried partners of persons who were threatened with forced abortion or involuntary sterilization were not entitled to asylum , but that the bia's interpretation of § 601 ( a ) extending such protections to spouses was also unfounded .

the court held that congress had spoken unambiguously about who may be deemed a refugee for purposes of asylum eligibility , and that nothing in the definition of the term "refugee" permits a person to obtain asylum if he or she has not personally experienced persecution or a well - rounded fear of future persecution .

it explained: we do not deny that an individual whose spouse undergoes , or is threatened with , a forced abortion or involuntary sterilization may suffer a profound emotional loss as a partner and a potential parent .

but such a loss does not change the requirement that we must follow the "ordinary meaning" of the language chosen by congress , according to which an individual does not automatically qualify for "refugee" status on account of a coercive procedure performed on someone else .

thus , the second circuit maintained that § 601 ( a ) seemed to deny asylum protection to the spouses of individuals forced to abort a pregnancy or submit to involuntary sterilization , as well as the unmarried partners of such individuals .

in a concurring opinion , judge sotomayor criticized the majority opinion for its lack of judicial restraint .

in response to the majority's conclusion that even spouses of individuals forced to abort a pregnancy or submit to involuntary sterilization may not be automatically eligible for asylum , judge sotomayor noted: instead of answering the limited question before us — whether the bia's denial of asylum to the unmarried partners of women forced to undergo abortions or sterilization was unreasonable — the majority has chosen to go beyond it to address an issue that is unbriefed , unargued , and unnecessary to resolve this appeal .

judge sotomayor noted that because congress did not indicate how direct the harm or injury must be before it can be determined that an individual suffers persecution and should be considered a "refugee" for purposes of asylum protection , the bia's construction of the term should be entitled to deference so long as it is reasonable .

judge sotomayor maintained that the majority opinion failed to explain why the harm of forced abortion or sterilization constituted persecution only for the person undergoing the procedure and not for the spouse .

forced abortion , judge sotomayor observed , could be devastating for the spouse , as well as the woman: the termination of a wanted pregnancy under a coercive population control program can only be devastating to any couple , akin , no doubt , to the killing of a child .. .

in the end , i fail to understand how the majority can claim that the harm caused by a spouse's forced abortion or sterilization is not a personal harm to both spouses — either or both of whom can be sterilized for violations of the population control programs — especially given the unique biological nature of pregnancy and special reverence every civilization has accorded to child - rearing and parenthood in marriage .

in zheng v. gonzales , the second circuit reviewed a bia order that dismissed an appeal by a woman seeking asylum based on the involuntary insertion of an intrauterine device ( "iud" ) .

the immigration judge that first considered the petitioner's case denied her application for asylum on the grounds that iud implantation did not constitute persecution and that "congress did not intend to include birth control methods other than abortion or forced sterilization in its definition of persecution.... " the bia agreed with the immigration judge and noted that zheng had not been persecuted , in part , because she did not experience a "significant degree of pain or restriction as a result of the procedure. .

the bia also acknowledged the widespread use of iuds as a method of birth control and observed that there is nothing so inherently egregious about the procedure to conclude that zheng was persecuted .

judge sotomayor , writing for the court , remanded the case to the bia "so that it might articulate its position concerning whether and under what conditions the forced insertion of an iud constitutes persecution. .

the bia had taken contrary positions on whether the involuntary insertion of an iud constituted persecution , finding in at least one other case that such insertion was persecution .

judge sotomayor also noted that the bia had not discussed the issue in a published , precedential opinion .

the bia's failure to explain when the involuntary insertion of an iud would constitute persecution "deprive[d] the bench , the bar and potential asylum applicants of guidance concerning whether and how they might approach the issue. .

during her 11 years as a federal appellate judge , judge sotomayor authored two opinions involving the freedom of information act ( foia ) .

both of the foia decisions — tigue v. department of justice and wood v. federal bureau of investigation — upheld the withholding of requested records by the government .

because the opinions are few and relied on relevant supreme court precedent , it is difficult to draw conclusions from them regarding her overall approach to foia or to related matters such as individual privacy or transparency in government .

foia applies to records held by agencies of the executive branch of the federal government .

with the exception of three special law enforcement exclusions and records already made available for publication or inspection , all other federal agency records may be requested under the foia .

agencies are required to make records not subject to a foia exemption available upon request .

nine categories of information may be exempted from foia disclosure .

judge sotomayor's opinions primarily involved exemptions 5 and 6 — regarding inter - and intra - agency memoranda and disclosures which would invade personal privacy , respectively .

in both opinions , judge sotomayor noted that the supreme court has mandated that foia's exemptions are to be construed narrowly .

the court has granted certiorari in two florida cases to examine whether , in some circumstances , sentencing a juvenile to life imprisonment without parole violates the eighth amendment prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment .

it will also consider whether the sixth amendment right to counsel requires an attorney to advise a defendant regarding the possibility that deportation may be a consequence of a criminal conviction , and whether the sixth amendment confrontation clause guarantees a criminal defendant the right to confront the preparer of a forensic laboratory analysis certificate that was introduced as evidence in his trial .

the confrontation clause case appears to present a question very similar , if not identical , to one the court addressed in a recent 5-4 decision , melendez - diaz v. massachusetts .

in melendez - diaz , a five - justice majority , including justice souter , held that the confrontation clause required the prosecution to make a preparer of forensic analysis available for questioning at trial .

if judge sotomayor were to vote differently than did justice souter in the upcoming case on that issue , her participation could contribute to an overruling or narrowing of the recent melendez - diaz decision .

also in its 2009 term , the court will examine whether the fifth amendment , as interpreted in miranda v. arizona , requires police officers to have expressly advised a defendant of his right to the presence of counsel during questioning , and whether that amendment precludes police officers from questioning a defendant after he has requested the presence of an attorney despite a break in the chain of custody of the defendant or a substantial lapse in time .

in addition , the court will review several decisions involving the constitutional right to habeas corpus .

the court has also granted certiorari to interpret several federal criminal statutes during its 2009 term .

for example , in two cases in which it has granted certiorari , the court will consider the "honest services" provision in the federal mail fraud statute , which imposes criminal liability for fraudulent schemes to withhold material information and deprive the public of its right to the defendant's honest services .

it will also hear a case involving the federal crime of racketeering influenced and corrupted organizations ( rico ) statute .

judge sotomayor has ruled in numerous criminal cases as an appellate judge .

based to some extent on her opinions in fourth amendment cases — in particular on two opinions she has written in cases involving the typical remedy for fourth amendment violations , the so - called "exclusionary rule" — some commentators have speculated that judge sotomayor would be more likely to rule in favor of police or prosecutors in criminal cases than was justice souter .

however , it is difficult to glean any strong evidence of such an inclination from her appellate court opinions .

she has authored several opinions in the criminal law area , and joined others , in which the second circuit ruled in favor of the police or government .

on the other hand , she has authored opinions on behalf of the court that reach the opposite outcome .

in addition , in cases in which judge sotomayor has split with her panel colleagues to write a dissenting opinion , her arguments have generally favored defendants .

more than any other unifying characteristic , her appellate opinions in the criminal justice area , as in many other areas , demonstrate her strong adherence to precedent .

among circuit court opinions written by judge sotomayor having international implications are a dissent involving the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction , a dissent involving federal alienage jurisdiction , and two opinions for the court involving a civil rico suit brought by foreign governments claiming that defendant tobacco companies sought to avoid paying foreign taxes by smuggling cigarettes into plaintiffs' territory .

whereas judge sotomayor's dissent regarding the interpretation of the hague convention remains a minority rule in federal courts , her broad approach to alienage jurisdiction where firms of overseas territories are involved , an approach widely adopted by federal courts , was later approved by the supreme court and also became the rule in the second circuit .

her decision that the revenue rule barred the civil rico case brought by the european communities and other governments against various tobacco manufacturers , a ruling based on second circuit precedent that the supreme court had declined to review , was remanded by the court in light of an intervening ruling that the revenue rule did not apply to a government prosecution under a different statute .

she reinstated the court's original decision finding that it was not called into question by the supreme court case , a judgment the court also let stand .

together , the dissenting opinions show an inclination on the part of judge sotomayor to bring an international perspective to her analysis , reading the convention as protecting parental rights adversely affected by cross - border actions by other parents and looking at the jurisdictional statute in light of how the majority's narrow interpretation and its resulting denial of a neutral judicial forum for disputes with international implications would affect u.s. commercial relations with other countries .

judge sotomayer also consulted and analyzed foreign case law in the hague convention case , but viewed this task as instructional rather than necessary to forming her conclusion .

judge sotomayor's opinions on the application of the revenue rule , which in following second circuit precedent continued to make the circuit unavailable as a forum for foreign government plaintiffs , took foreign policy considerations into account at length .

because separation of powers concerns were a key factor in why the revenue rule was applied , however , she found that the conduct of foreign relations was best left to the political branches and refrained from allowing the litigation to continue in the absence of clear signals from the branches that they intended such cases to proceed .

judge sotomayor participated in numerous immigration law cases during her tenure as a second circuit judge and has authored a number of significant opinions .

this is unsurprising considering that immigration cases can constitute up to 40% of the second circuit's docket .

because immigration cases are so numerous and , indeed , routine , they arguably illustrate the application of judge sotomayor's judicial approach in a context removed from ideological politicization .

overall , if there is any particular hallmark of her jurisprudence that can be gleaned from judge sotomayor's disposition of immigration cases , it is her deferential stance to agency action except when the agency is deemed to have acted outside of statutory authorization .

a foreign national can obtain asylum in the united states if she demonstrates that she has a well - founded fear of persecution in her country of origin on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion .

asylum claims are numerous , and cases in which foreign nationals apply for asylum in the united states can constitute up to 17% of the docket for the federal courts of appeals .

consequently , judge sotomayor has participated in many panels reviewing denials of asylum and has written several important second circuit opinions regarding this topic .

in rui ying lin v. gonzales , she authored the opinion in which the second circuit held that use of false documents to evade persecution in one's home country cannot be used as a basis to discredit all other documents presented in support of an asylum claim .

in another case , zhang v. gonzales , she authored the opinion in which it was held that opposition to political corruption can serve as the basis for the claim that one was persecuted on account of a political opinion .

in these two cases , judge sotomayor's opinions might be perceived as pro - claimant .

however , this perception is perhaps belied by the fact that rather than directly resolving these cases , judge sotomayor remands them to the agency for further proceedings , thus demonstrating a deferential stance to agency adjudications .

this deference to the agency action is also demonstrated in judge sotomayor's concurrence in shi liang lin v. u.s. dept .

of justice , discussed previously , in which it was held that refugee status is not automatically extended to the spouses and unmarried partners of women who have suffered forced sterilization .

in her concurring opinion , judge sotomayor concurred with the disposition of the case at hand but objected to the second circuit's broader holding that spouses did not qualify for automatic refugee status because that particular question was "unbriefed , unargued , and unnecessary to resolve [the] appeal. .

judge sotomayor argued that the opinion should have been limited to the question of whether unmarried partners qualified for automatic refugee status , characterizing the second circuit's approach as an "unprecedented step of constricting the bia's congressionally delegated powers. .

this term , justice sotomayor will join the court in hearing three cases involving various labor issues .

in january 2009 , the court agreed to review an eleventh circuit decision involving a supervisor who claims that he was terminated because he refused to recant his allegation that his employer employed illegal workers .

the eleventh circuit concluded that a discovery order requiring the production of documents that would help the supervisor's claim was not subject to an immediate appeal .

the court will also review a seventh circuit decision involving whether a court may review decisions of the national railroad adjustment board for alleged due process violations .

finally , the court will review a ninth circuit decision concerning whether an arbitration clause in a new collective bargaining agreement should apply to disputes over contract formation .

the ninth circuit found that the parties should be compelled to arbitrate their dispute in its entirety .

judge sotomayor wrote an opinion in one high - profile case in the labor area during her tenure on the second circuit .

in clarett v. national football league , the second circuit reversed a district court decision that found the nfl's three - year eligibility rule in violation of federal antitrust laws .

the three - year rule requires a player to wait at least three full seasons after his high school graduation before entering the nfl draft .

judge sotomayor , writing for the court , concluded that the three - year rule is protected from antitrust scrutiny by the non - statutory labor exemption to the antitrust laws .

unlike the district court , which evaluated the petitioner's claim in accordance with a test first adopted by the u.s. court of appeals for the eighth circuit , judge sotomayor considered the claim in light of three second circuit decisions involving the non - statutory exemption and the concerted activities of a professional sports league .

the second circuit maintained that the relationships among sports leagues and their players are governed by collective bargaining agreements , subject to the carefully structured regime established by federal labor laws and not the antitrust laws: [t]o permit antitrust suits against sports leagues on the ground that their concerted action imposed a restraint upon the labor market would seriously undermine many of the policies embodied by these labor laws , including the congressional policy favoring collective bargaining , the bargaining parties' freedom of contract , and the widespread use of multi - employer bargaining units .

the second circuit viewed the three - year rule as a mandatory subject of collective bargaining and rejected the argument that antitrust law should permit a player to circumvent the bargaining scheme established by federal labor law .

the court noted that as a permissible , mandatory subject of bargaining , the conditions "under which a prospective player ... will be considered for employment as an nfl player are for the union representative and the nfl to determine. .

judge sotomayor's name is attached to only a small number of environmental decisions , of which she actually wrote in two .

the most important of these , partly because it was recently reviewed by the supreme court , is riverkeeper , inc. v. us epa .

riverkeeper addressed an environmental problem caused by the voracious appetite of large power plants for water to cool their facilities .

the daily withdrawal from the nation's waterways by such facilities amounts to billions of gallons , destroying in the process a huge number of aquatic organisms .

responding to the problem , congress , in clean water act ( cwa ) section 316 ( b ) , required that cooling water intake structures reflect the "best technology available" ( bta ) for minimizing adverse environmental impact .

epa issued the challenged rule implementing section 316 ( b ) — governing bta at large , existing power plants ( "phase ii" rule ) — in 2004 .

the most significant argument against epa's phase ii rule addressed by riverkeeper was that epa had impermissibly construed section 316 ( b ) to allow determination of bta based on cost - benefit analysis .

judge sotomayor , writing for the unanimous second circuit panel , agreed .

first , she noted that cwa sections cross - referenced in section 316 ( b ) demonstrate that after 1989 , cost is a lesser , more ancillary consideration in determining what technology epa must require under those sections .

this shift , she wrote , signaled congress' intent in the cwa to move away from cost - benefit analysis .

second , judge sotomayor stated that the language of section 316 ( b ) "plainly indicates that facilities must adopt the best technology available" ( emphasis by the court ) , so that cost - benefit analysis cannot be justified .

judge sotomayor did not altogether preclude considerations of cost in setting bta .

rather , she said ( drawing on an earlier second circuit decision on bta rules for new power plants ) , costs may be considered to a limited extent , in two ways — to determine what technology can be reasonably borne by the industry , and to evaluate cost - effectiveness .

that is , epa must first determine the most effective technology that may reasonably be borne by the industry in question , then , using that technology as a benchmark , epa may consider other factors , including cost - effectiveness , to choose a less expensive technology that achieves the same result .

because the administrative record for the rulemaking was unclear as to the basis for the technologies selected by epa as bta , and thus may have included the impermissible basis of cost - benefit analysis , the court remanded the phase ii rule to epa for clarification and possible reassessment of bta .

of the 13 arguments advanced by the parties before the second circuit , supreme court review was sought on only one — the above cost - benefit issue .

on this issue , judge sotomayor was reversed 6-3 .

writing for the majority , justice scalia found that epa had permissibly relied on cost - benefit analysis in setting bta and in providing for cost - benefit variances from that standard as part of the phase ii regulations .

he deemed it "eminently reasonable to conclude that § 1326 ( b ) 's silence is meant to convey nothing more than a refusal to tie the agency's hands as to whether cost - benefit analysis should be used …. .

the significance of this decision stems from the ubiquity of the debate over the role of cost - benefit analysis in environmental statutes .

industry favors such analysis ; environmentalists , arguing that environmental factors are often undervalued in cost - benefit analyses , oppose its use .

the analysis adopted by the entergy majority may dispose courts to find federal agency authority to use cost - benefit analysis whenever the statute is not explicit one way or the other .

an important climate change case argued before a second circuit panel presided over by judge sotomayor may also figure in the nomination process .

the reason: oral argument occurred three years ago ( june 7 , 2006 ) , but a decision has yet to be rendered .

on the other hand , the second circuit is reportedly slow compared to other circuits in rendering opinions , reportedly ranking 11 th out of the 13 circuits .

the lead clerk of the circuit has been quoted recently as saying that the second circuit has seen a "crushing number of immigration filings" over the last decade .

the case involves an attempt to use the common law to reduce the co 2 emissions that contribute to climate change .

in 2004 , eight states ( ca , ct , ia , nj , ny , ri , vt , wi ) , new york city , and environmental groups sued five electric utility companies chosen as allegedly the five largest co 2 emitters in the united states .

invoking the federal and state common law of public nuisance , plaintiffs sought an injunction requiring defendants to abate their co 2 contribution to the nuisance of climate change .

a similar suit filed the same day in the same court added a private nuisance claim .

in 2005 , the district court dismissed the cases on political question grounds , and the case was argued to the second circuit in 2006 , as mentioned .

this case involves the conscripting of an ancient common law theory to deal with a modern , complex , and global problem and poses tough questions for the court as to causation and remedy .

the southern district of new york and two other district courts have chosen to avoid the merits of common law claims based on greenhouse gas emissions by calling the matter a political question , unsuitable for resolution by the courts .

nonetheless , the current prominence of the climate change issue in congress may direct that body's attention to this case .

in the next term , justice sotomayor will help review at least three cases concerning securities law issues in which the supreme court has granted certiorari for its upcoming term .

one of the cases concerns whether a mutual fund's investment adviser charged a shareholder an excessive fee under the investment company act .

a second case , which many people are watching especially closely , turns on the issue of whether the sarbanes - oxley act of 2002 violates the constitution's separation of powers and the appointments clause by its method of naming the members and their duties of the public company accounting oversight board .

in a third case , involving an alleged cover - up of vioxx users' increased risk of heart attacks , the court will consider when the statute of limitations begins to run for federal securities law fraud claims .

judge sotomayor has written opinions in several cases involving securities law .

five of these cases are discussed below .

four of the five cases discussed , as do most cases involving federal securities laws , concern allegations of violations of the general antifraud provision of the securities exchange act , referred to as section 10 ( b ) , and the rule issued by the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) to implement the statute , referred to as rule 10b - 5 .

because the issues concerning section 10 ( b ) and rule 10b - 5 in these four cases were very different , they are discussed separately .

the fifth case concerned the fair fund provision of the sarbanes - oxley act .

all of the five opinions appear to focus primarily upon the analysis of statutes and cases and display a methodical approach to statutory interpretation .

as a group , judge sotomayor's opinions in the securities context appear to favor neither corporations nor investors .

judge sotomayor has not written extensively in the area of taxation , and it is not possible to draw conclusions about her judicial philosophy from the tax cases in which she has been involved .

one second circuit case in which she authored an opinion has received attention , primarily because the supreme court , while agreeing with the holding , expressly disagreed with her reasoning .

in that case , william l. rudkin testamentary trust v. comm'r , the issue was whether investment - advice fees incurred by a trust were "costs which are paid or incurred in connection with the administration of the … trust and which would not have been incurred if the property were not held in such trust …. .

if so , the fees were fully deductible ; if not , they were only partially deductible as miscellaneous itemized deductions .

at the time the second circuit heard the case , a split had developed among the other circuits .

the sixth circuit had held the fees were fully deductible , while the fourth and federal circuits reached the opposite conclusion after finding the provision only applied to expenses that were not customarily incurred by individuals .

writing for the court , judge sotomayor agreed with the holding of the fourth and federal circuits , but used a different analysis .

looking at the statute's plain meaning , she found it only applied to those expenses that could be incurred by an individual .

this was an objective inquiry and did not require a subjective determination of whether an individual would have incurred such expenses .

the court disagreed with the interpretation by the fourth and federal circuits because it found "nothing in the statute [to] indicate[] that congress intended the [provision] to give rise to factual disputes about whether an individual asset owner is insufficiently financially savvy or the assets sufficiently large such that he or she unquestionably would have sought investment advice. .

the supreme court , in a unanimous decision written by chief justice roberts , affirmed the second circuit's holding , but rejected its reasoning .

according to the court , an analysis focusing on whether such fees could have been incurred by an individual "flies in the face of the statutory language" since "the fact that an individual could not do something is one reason he would not , but not the only possible reason. .

congress would have used "could" had it wanted and "[t]he fact that it did not adopt this readily available and apparent alternative strongly supports rejecting the court of appeals' reading. .

the court also concluded that the second circuit's interpretation made part of the statute superfluous .

instead , the court adopted the analysis of the other circuits , finding the common meaning of the term "would" required a determination as to whether the fees would customarily be incurred if the property was held by an individual .

finding that it was not uncommon for an individual to seek investment advice , the court held the fees were not fully deductible .

thus , while both the second circuit and supreme court held the fees were partially deductible , the court expressly disavowed judge sotomayor's reasoning and adopted an interpretation that she had explicitly rejected .

the case is interesting because both the second circuit and supreme court performed a straight - forward statutory interpretation analysis , looking only at the plain language of the statute , yet came to different conclusions about what the term "would" meant in the context of the statute .

judge sotomayor , in writing for the second circuit , developed an interpretation — one apparently not pursued by either party before the court or adopted by the other appellate courts — that seemed intended to avoid complexity in the tax statute .

the government , in fact , subsequently adopted her analysis before the supreme court , characterizing it as the preferred interpretation "because it makes the statute significantly easier to administer. .

on the other hand , while her intent was perhaps laudatory , it could be criticized , and was by the supreme court , for being inconsistent with the common meanings of the terms in the statute .

judge sotomayor wrote the opinion in malesko v. correctional services corporation , a second circuit decision that would have allowed "bivens actions" against government contractors but was reversed 5-4 by the supreme court .

bivens actions take their name from a 1971 case in which the supreme court recognized a cause of action for damages against federal officials for violations of individuals' fourth amendments rights .

later courts expanded bivens to allow claims against federal officials for failure to provide due process under the fifth amendment and cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the eighth amendment .

the plaintiff in malesko alleged that his eighth amendment rights were violated by a contractor of the federal bureau of prisons , whose employee required him to climb the stairs despite a known heart condition .

while climbing the stairs , he suffered a heart attack , fell , and was injured .

key to the second circuit's decision was its finding that the supreme court's decision in fdic v. meyer , which held that individuals may not bring bivens actions against federal agencies , was not dispositive because "private entities acting on behalf of the federal government are not the equivalent of federal agencies. .

the opinion specifically noted differences between federal agencies and government contractors regarding the deterrent effects and fiscal implications of bivens actions .

it further noted the improbability of the supreme court implicitly overruling numerous pre - meyer cases allowing bivens claims against government contractors and the similarities between bivens actions and actions under 42 u.s.c .

§ 1983 , which allows suits against contractors of state governments for constitutional violations .

judge sotomayor's opinion might suggest that her approach to the purpose and expansion of bivens actions differs from that of the majority in the 2001 supreme court malesko case .

judge sotomayor's malesko opinion characterizes providing a remedy for constitutional violations as a "more important goal of bivens liability" than deterring wrongdoing by individuals .

the supreme court , in contrast , emphasized the deterrence goals of bivens .

in addition , her opinion in malesko would have expanded bivens by allowing plaintiffs to bring actions for damages against government contractors based on their employees' violations of plaintiffs' constitutional rights .

in contrast , the supreme court "refused to extend bivens liability to any new context or new category of defendants. .

the supreme court has not extended bivens since 1980 , and some commentators have read its decisions as signaling a desire to abolish bivens actions .

however , such a characterization might overstate the significance of malesko and , particularly , one sentence in it , given that four other circuits allowed bivens actions against contractors prior to malesko and the malesko opinion largely focuses on issues other than the relative importance of the "goals" of bivens liability .

