in altria group , inc. v. good , the supreme court agreed to resolve a split that developed in the circuit courts with regard to whether the federal cigarette labeling and advertising act ( fclaa ) expressly or impliedly preempted state law claims regarding light or low - tar nicotine descriptors in cigarette advertisements .

on december 15 , 2008 , the court in good , by a vote of 5-4 , affirmed the first circuit court of appeals' holding that the fclaa neither expressly nor impliedly preempted the respondents' state common law fraud claim .

the supreme court has discussed the preemptive effect of the fclaa in two previous cases , cipollone v. liggett group , inc. and lo ri l lard tobacco co. v. reilly .

a plurality in cipollone created a test to determine which common law claims were preempted by the fclaa ; the application of this test was further elucidated in reilly and became an issue once more in good .

this report first provides an overview of the doctrine of preemption , the history of the fclaa , and the major supreme court decisions that have interpreted the preemption provision ( §5 ) of the act .

it then discusses the relevant lower court decisions and the split that arose between the circuit courts .

this report examines the supreme court's decision in altria group , inc. v. good and the effect this decision could have on future tobacco litigation and preemption jurisprudence , in addition to the effect of h.r .

1256 , the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act .

this section examines the development of the preemption provisions in the fclaa , the preemption doctrine , as well the two supreme court cases , cipollone and reilly , that have discussed the preemptive effect of the fclaa .

the supreme court examined the preemptive scope of the fclaa once again in altria group , inc. v. good .

prior to the supreme court granting certiorari , a split developed in the circuit courts regarding whether the fclaa preempted a claim for deceptive practices under a state statute .

under the fclaa , the federal trade commission ( ftc ) has the power to regulate and proscribe unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the advertising of cigarettes .

in 1966 , the ftc proposed a standardized method for measuring tar and nicotine levels .

this became known as the ftc or cambridge method , in which a machine smokes each cigarette the same way to the same length and the particular matter is collected on a pad and measured for tar and nicotine content .

the ftc was aware of certain limitations on the ftc test , including that it could not accurately measure how much tar and nicotine a human smoker would receive from any particular cigarette ; furthermore , some smokers of light cigarettes often engage in compensatory behavior , changing the way they smoked to ensure no actual reduction of tar and nicotine .

after the court's decision in good , it remains to be seen whether even more suits will be initiated against cigarette manufacturers under state fraud statutes with regard to light and low - tar descriptors .

according to the court's decision , congress had no intent to preempt these types of claims .

although it appears that plaintiffs who assert claims under states' unfair trade and deceptive practices statutes seek to recover sums spent on the purchase of light cigarettes , rather than health - related injuries , only future litigation will reveal if , as the dissent predicted , jury verdicts that are favorable to plaintiffs ultimately result in a requirement that manufacturers represent the effects of smoking in their advertising and promotion .

if so , such requirements could be considered inconsistent with the purposes of the fclaa .

additionally , should the ftc issue formal rules that authorize light and low - tar descriptors , it is possible that this action by the agency could ultimately preempt state - law claims for deceptive practices or fraud as the first circuit suggested .

if h.r .

1256 , the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act , discussed infra , becomes law , the ftc may lack the authority to use its rulemaking to regulate light and low - tar descriptors in cigarette advertising .

furthermore , even though the court clarified the fclaa's preemptive effect with regard to state common law fraud claims for light and low - tar descriptors , and adopted the methodology of the cipollone plurality as governing law , lower courts may continue to have difficulty using the predicate duty test in determining whether other state common law claims are preempted .

the court rejected pmusa's argument that the respondents' claims amounted to a failure - to - warn claim stating that such an analysis was not applicable to the claim .

however , the court acknowledged that "respondents' allegations ... could also support a warning neutralization claim .

but respondents did not bring such a claim. .

thus , it would appear , as the first circuit pointed out , that "plaintiffs suing tobacco companies must assert a broad range of causes of action in order to avoid the pitfalls of preemption. .

this could have the effect , as pmusa had argued , of "elevating form over substance and allow parties to evade the preemptive scope of a statute simply by relabeling their .. .

claims. .

there is also the possibility that the court's decision will affect preemption jurisprudence .

in reaching its decision , the court relied on the doctrine of "presumption against preemption," stating that "when the test of a pre - emption clause is susceptible of more than one plausible reading , courts ordinarily 'accept the reading that disfavors pre - emption.' .

however , as the dissent emphasized , the court's reliance on this doctrine has waned in recent preemption cases , citing decisions such as rowe v. new hampshire motor transp .

ass'n .

 , engine mfs .

ass'n v. south coast air quality management dist .

 , buckman co. v. plaintiffs' legal comm .

 , united states v. locke , and geier v. american honda motor corp .

although it appears that the court is choosing to apply this presumption on a case - by - case basis , such as in good and wyeth v. levine , this could have the effect of raising issues within other regulated industries as to "whether there is a presumption against preemption , and , if so , when it applies and how strong it is , and how much deference courts should give to the federal agency's decision. .

on april 2 , 2009 , the house passed h.r .

1256 , the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act .

the bill would give the food and drug administration ( fda ) the authority to regulate the production and marketing of tobacco products .

although it would not amend §5 ( b ) of the fclaa , it includes other provisions that may affect the kinds of lawsuits that are allowed to be initiated in the aftermath of the good decision .

among its many provisions , the family smoking prevention and tobacco control act would: require manufacturers to obtain fda approval in order to market "modified risk" tobacco products , i.e. , products that the manufacturer claims , explicitly or implicitly , will reduce the risk of tobacco - related disease or reduce exposure to potentially harmful substances ( including products using descriptors such as "light," "mild," and "low" ) ; require that the advertising and labeling of modified risk tobacco products enable the public to comprehend the product's risk in the context of all tobacco - related health risks ; preempt any state or locality from establishing or continuing any requirement which is different from , or in addition to , the act's modified risk tobacco product provisions ; and amend fclaa section 5 by creating a new exception that allows states and localities to regulate the time , place , and manner , but not the content of cigarette advertising and promotion .

first , h.r .

1256 appears to address reilly 's finding that the fclaa preempted massachusetts regulations that prohibited outdoor advertising for cigarettes in certain locations because they were based on smoking and health .

by creating an exception to §5 ( b ) that would allow states to enact statutes and / or promulgate regulations , based on smoking and health , that regulate the time , place , and manner , but not content of any tobacco advertising , subject to any first amendment challenge , h.r .

1256 seems to preserve the narrow preemptive effect of §5 ( b ) and framework of the cipollone plurality while giving states the authority to regulate in other aspects of tobacco advertising .

second , the new general preemption provision and framework for approving modified tobacco risk products of h.r .

1256 might affect future cases where plaintiffs wish to assert a common law claim that low - tar or light descriptors fraudulently conveyed the message that such cigarettes deliver less tar and nicotine than do regular brands .

although good established that such claims were not preempted under §5 ( b ) , future claims regarding light cigarettes may be preempted under this new general preemption provision because cigarettes that use such descriptors in their label , labeling , or advertising would be considered "modified tobacco risk products. .

h.r .

1256 's general preemption provision would prevent states from establishing or continuing any "requirement which is different from , or in addition to" the requirements in the statute relating to , among other things , modified risk tobacco products .

as the court in riegel v. medtronic , inc. determined , "[a]bsent other indication , [statutory] reference to a state's 'requirements' includes its common law duties. .

accordingly , "requirements" in this general preemption provision could include common law claims .

therefore , persons who eventually purchase and smoke products that have been approved as modified risk tobacco products may be preempted from asserting common law claims involving light or low - tar descriptors .

