on july 8 , 2012 , international donors and the afghan government met in tokyo to discuss non - military assistance requirements in the 10-year period following the planned withdrawal of the u.s. military and the international security assistance force in 2014 .

donors pledged $16 billion in development aid through 2015 .

on may 25 , 2012 , the house appropriations committee reported h.r .

5857 ( h.rept .

112-494 ) , the fy2013 state , foreign operations appropriations .

it did not specify amounts for afghanistan under either regular or oco appropriations .

on may 25 , 2012 , the house appropriations committee reported h.r .

5856 ( h.rept .

112-493 ) , the fy2013 defense appropriations , providing $5.0 billion for the asff , $250 million for the cerp , $375 million for the afghan infrastructure fund , and $88 million for the business task force .

on may 24 , 2012 , the senate appropriations committee reported s. 3241 ( s.rept .

112-172 ) , the fy2013 state , foreign operations appropriations .

in its report , the committee recommended a total assistance level of $1.6 billion — $1.1 billion in esf , $450 million in incle , $54.3 million in nadr , and $1.5 million in imet .

on may 21 , 2012 , the nato summit in chicago defined a post - transition 2014 and beyond annual security forces budget of $4.1 billion , including an afghan government share of at least $500 million in 2015 and full financial responsibility by 2024 .

in february 2012 , the administration issued its fy2013 budget request , seeking a total of $2.5 billion in foreign operations assistance , including $1.8 billion in esf , $600 million in incle , $54.3 million in nadr , and $1.5 million in imet assistance .

the administration also requested defense aid appropriations , including $5.7 billion for the asff , $400 million for cerp , $400 million for the afghanistan infrastructure fund , and $179 million for the business task force .

afghanistan , one of the poorest countries in the world , would be a candidate for u.s. development assistance under normal circumstances .

but today , as a result of the war on al qaeda and the 2001 military effort that removed taliban rule , afghanistan is a u.s. strategic priority and recipient to date of nearly $83 billion in u.s. foreign assistance serving multiple objectives .

two - thirds of this assistance has been provided in the past four years , since the beginning of fy2009 .

assistance efforts are broadly intended to stabilize and strengthen the country , through a range of development - related programs and through training and materiel support for the afghan police and military .

this report provides a "big picture" overview of the u.s. aid program and congressional action .

it describes what various aid agencies report they are doing in afghanistan .

it does not address the effectiveness of their programs .

for discussion of the afghan political , security , and economic situation , see crs report rl30588 , afghanistan: post - taliban governance , security , and u.s. policy , by [author name scrubbed] , and crs report rs21922 , afghanistan: politics , elections , and government performance , by [author name scrubbed] .

for greater detail on security assistance provided by the department of defense , see crs report r40156 , war in afghanistan: strategy , operations , and issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

the u.s. program of assistance to afghanistan has multiple objectives implemented by a range of actors working in diverse sectors .

the main purpose of the program is to stabilize and strengthen the afghan economic , social , political , and security environment so as to blunt popular support for extremist forces in the region .

the bulk of u.s. assistance is in security - related activities .

since 2001 , nearly two - thirds ( 63% ) of total u.s. assistance has gone to the afghan security forces fund ( asff ) , the account supporting the training and equipping of afghan security forces , and related military and security aid accounts .

about 75% of u.s. assistance went to security programs in fy2012 .

the second - largest portion of assistance has been aimed at economic , social , and political development efforts .

the main provider of these programs is the agency for international development ( usaid ) , with the department of state playing a significant role in democracy and governance activities .

these programs account for roughly 28% of total aid since 2001 .

they accounted for 21% of aid in fy2012 .

a third element of assistance , humanitarian aid , largely implemented through usaid and international organizations , represents about 3% of total aid since 2001 .

they accounted for about 1% of u.s. aid in fy2012 .

the fourth main component of the aid program is counter - narcotics , implemented largely by the state department in conjunction with department of defense ( dod ) , usaid , and the drug enforcement agency ( dea ) .

it accounts for about 5% of total aid since 2001 .

it represented roughly 3% of aid in fy2012 .

u.s. assistance must be viewed within the broader context of the afghan government's development strategy and the contributions of other donors .

in april 2008 , an afghanistan national development strategy ( ands ) was offered by the government as a program of specific goals and benchmarks in 18 sectors from security to poverty reduction to be accomplished from 2008 to 2013 .

the afghan government estimated the cost of achieving these goals at $50 billion , with afghanistan providing $6.8 billion and international donors asked to provide the rest .

the strategy sought to have most funds provided through the central government in order to strengthen its legitimacy in the eyes of its citizens .

persistent questions regarding corruption and the ability of the government to effectively implement programs have prevented donors from more fully adopting this approach .

at the january 2010 london donor conference and again at the july 2010 kabul conference of foreign ministers , donors agreed to the goal of channeling half of all aid directly to the government ( "on - budget" ) within two years conditional on afghan government progress in strengthening public financial management systems , reducing corruption , and improving budget execution .

the 2010 kabul conference added the donor objective of aligning 80% of aid with afghan government priorities within two years , either through the government core budget or off - budget .

the 2010 london conference produced additional pledges of troops , police trainers , and funding .

participants issued a communique supporting a phased transition to an afghan government lead in security , an increased civilian surge to match the military surge , and increased targets for the afghan army and police forces , among other points .

at the 2010 kabul conference , the international community supported the karzai objective that the afghan national security forces should lead and conduct all military operations by the end of 2014 , a position reaffirmed by nato and isaf at the lisbon summit in november 2010 .

the 2012 chicago nato summit moved the objective of afghan security forces leadership up to mid - 2013 .

for its part , at the 2010 kabul conference , the afghan government agreed to enact 37 key laws to curb corruption .

none had been enacted as of november 2011 , partly due to a election dispute - related lack of legislative work for most of 2011 .

some steps have been taken by executive decree .

recent conferences have begun to look beyond the withdrawal of international forces .

at the december 2011 bonn conference , donors pledged to sustain support to afghanistan for another decade , in exchange for clear progress on good governance .

the may 2012 chicago nato summit predicted the need for a post - transition 2014 and beyond annual afghan security forces budget of $4.1 billion , of which the afghan government share would be at least $500 million in 2015 with full financial responsibility by 2024 .

the united states is expected to provide about $2 billion of this amount annually .

in july 2012 , international donors and the afghan government met in tokyo to discuss non - military assistance requirements in the 10-year period following the planned withdrawal of u.s. and nato forces in 2014 .

of particular concern was the estimated gap between predicted afghan government revenues and needs during the post - withdrawal decade .

at the conference , donors pledged $16 billion in development aid through 2015 and committed to providing support through 2017 at or near the levels of the past decade .

in one estimate , of the $46.1 billion in all donor assistance committed to afghanistan through mid - 2009 , the last available figure , u.s. assistance represented about 62% .

in another estimate , nearly $38 billion was committed to afghanistan in non - security official development assistance ( oda ) between 2002 and 2010 , of which the united states accounts for about 48% .

an afghanistan reconstruction trust fund ( artf ) , administered by the world bank , is both a major conduit for donor assistance and a source of direct government aid , supporting both recurrent costs , such as afghan government salaries , and key infrastructure investment .

as of june 2012 , donors had contributed roughly $5.7 billion to the artf , with the u.s. share accounting for 31% of the total .

in june 2011 , many donors , including the united states , reportedly stopped paying into the artf when the international monetary fund was unable to reach a loan agreement with afghanistan because of concerns about afghanistan's troubled kabul bank .

in november 2011 , the imf approved a credit program following financial reforms , leading secretary of state clinton to announce at the 2011 december bonn conference that the united states would release funds , estimated at around $650 million , to the artf .

apart from the united states , the bulk of aid contributions comes from the other nato nations operating in the country as part of the international security assistance force ( isaf ) .

japan is the largest non - nato bilateral donor .

the world bank and european union are the major multilateral agencies conducting aid programs in afghanistan .

the united nations mission in afghanistan ( unama ) is meant to play a key role coordinating aid from all donors .

nato countries , sweden , and south korea lead 14 of the 26 provincial reconstruction teams ( prts ) located in the majority of afghan provinces ( as of early 2012 ) .

the united states leads 12 , mostly those located in the strategically sensitive south and east .

an innovation in the delivery of assistance that facilitates access to more remote regions of the country , the prt has been a significant element in the u.s. aid program ( and was later adopted and modified for iraq ) .

its mission is to help extend the authority of the government of afghanistan by fostering a secure and stable environment .

prt personnel work with government officials to improve governance and provision of basic services .

in 2009 , district support teams ( dst ) , composed of three to five civilians living with forward - deployed military units , were introduced to help build afghan government capacity at a more local level .

prts are composed of both civilian and military personnel , located in conjunction with military forces providing physical security .

in the case of the united states — the model differs by lead country — u.s .

prts are mostly led by a military officer and report up a military chain of command .

most of the coalition prts are civilian - led .

most prts had a predominance of military staff , although this has changed in recent years , particularly in kandahar and helmand prts .

there is now a civilian lead at each prt and dst to act as counterpart to the military commander .

further , whereas in early 2009 there were generally only 3 to 5 civilians among 50 to 100 total personnel , civilian representation in the field rose substantially in the period since then .

in may 2009 , there were 67 civilian personnel in the field , in early january 2010 there were 252 , in april 2010 there were 350 , and by december 2011 there were 456 u.s. civilians in the field .

the civilian team at the prt and dst usually includes officers from the state department , usaid , and department of agriculture .

similar but usually smaller teams are posted to non - u.s. - led prts .

in kandahar and helmand , large u.s. teams are integrated with british and canadian counterparts .

the u.s. prts and other field entities utilize funding under a range of programs to meet their objectives .

programs provide targeted infrastructure aid to meet locally identified needs and aid to address employment and other local concerns , provide management training to local government personnel , and ensure that national - level development efforts in key sectors reach the local population .

other u.s. assistance is provided through the u.s. mission in kabul .

working throughout the country , aid project implementers in most cases are either u.s. or afghan non - governmental organizations receiving grants or private sector for - profit entities on contract .

due to afghan government concerns regarding the existence of "parallel structures" vis - à - vis local governments , the prts are described by u.s. officials as moving from a focus on delivery of services to capacity building .

as international security forces withdraw between now and 2014 , prts and dsts will gradually be terminated or become part of individual country aid programs .

despite significant progress in afghanistan since 2001 , insurgent threats to afghanistan's government escalated beginning in 2006 to the point that some experts began questioning the success of stabilization efforts .

an expanding militant presence in some areas previously considered secure , increased numbers of civilian and military deaths , growing disillusionment with corruption in the government of afghan president hamid karzai , and pakistan's inability to prevent taliban and other militant infiltration into afghanistan led the obama administration to conduct its own "strategic review," the results of which were announced on march 27 , 2009 .

the thrust of the new strategy was a focus , not only on adding u.s. troops — a point reiterated and expanded following a second review that led to the announcement in december 2009 of an additional u.s. troop increase — but also on enhancing assistance efforts .

the march 2009 review led to the formulation of a new aid strategy encapsulated in an integrated civilian - military campaign plan for support to afghanistan , jointly published on august 10 , 2009 , by ambassador eikenberry and general mcchrystal , and elaborated further in an afghanistan and pakistan regional stabilization strategy by the state department's office of the special representative for afghanistan and pakistan in january 2010 .

the strategy emphasizes economic development , coordination among international donors , building local governing structures , improving capacity and reforming the afghan government , and expanding and reforming the afghan security forces .

in practice , the strategy has led to an increase in u.s. assistance to afghanistan , a greater emphasis on geographic centers of instability along the southern and eastern borders , more integrated military - civilian aid activity , and a significant increase in civilian aid personnel to formulate , administer , and monitor aid programs .

with regard to the latter , u.s. civilian staff from state , usaid , usda , justice — at least 11 government departments and agencies — tripled from about 320 in early 2009 to 992 in march 2010 .

total staff numbers , both in kabul and in the field , reached about 1,142 in december 2011 .

they are likely to decline from this point in the future .

with the eventual termination of prts , the department of state plans ( as of june 2012 ) to maintain a civilian presence after 2014 at the u.s. embassy in kabul and at four field offices in herat , mazar - e sharif , kandahar , and jalalabad .

the herat consulate opened in march 2012 ; the other three will open toward the end of 2014 .

the changes in aid strategy are well - illustrated in several significant steps usaid and dod have taken in the period since the strategy was launched .

for one , they have promoted the afghanization of assistance , directing assistance as much as feasible through afghan entities , public and private .

in 2009 , usaid adopted the objective of moving as much as 40% of assistance through the afghan government by the end of 2010 .

as noted earlier , at the january 2010 london conference , the united states and other donors committed to providing 50% of aid through the government of afghanistan by 2012 .

according to the gao , in 2010 the united states provided about $2 billion in direct aid , $1.4 billion by usaid ( 71% of the total ) and $576 million by dod .

this amount represented three times that provided in the previous year .

as of june 2011 , about 38% of usaid funding was going through the afghan government .

the intent is to increase the administrative capabilities of the afghan government and at the same time enable the public to see that their government is providing services .

both usaid and dod are also said to be directing procurement funding away from u.s. contractors and ngos and more to the afghan private sector .

this policy , also adopted by other u.s. government and international entities , seeks to build private sector capacity and increase afghan employment to the extent possible .

in november 2010 , the u.s. embassy , u.s. military and unama formally launched an "afghan first" effort to actively solicit afghan suppliers for procurement needs , including local procurement of agriculture produce for u.s. and isaf military and civilian installations .

between january 2008 and may 2011 , about $654 million in reconstruction funds were awarded by state , dod , and usaid directly to 214 afghan business firms .

another key shift in assistance policy in 2009 and following years has been to move more funds to regions and sectors previously less well - supported .

more money is going to the southern and eastern parts of the country , especially as the military goes in and secures an area .

an estimated 70% - 80% of current u.s. assistance is going to these regions of high priority in the counterinsurgency effort .

beginning in fy2009 , more funding was channeled to agriculture , a sector that had been relatively neglected , but is a way to reach rural areas that had been under the influence of the insurgents and is the most critical part of the afghan economy .

below is a menu of the range of assistance programs the united states is now implementing in afghanistan .

although authorization of aid programs for a specific country are usually not required , in 2002 , congress approved the afghanistan freedom support act ( p.l .

107-327 ) .

it authorizes the full range of economic assistance programs supporting the humanitarian , political , economic , and social development of afghanistan .

a separate title ( ii ) authorized support for the development of the afghanistan security forces ; its authority expired at the end of september 2006 .

since then , security aid has been authorized in annual dod authorization legislation .

economic assistance to afghanistan has been provided in most years since 2001 in both regular appropriations and emergency supplemental appropriations bills .

defense assistance has largely been provided in emergency supplemental appropriations legislation .

in fy2011 and fy2012 , funding for both civilian and defense assistance was provided in regular appropriations ; there was no supplemental .

however , in the fy2012 regular state , foreign operations appropriations , much of the afghan civilian aid was channeled to an off - budget category called overseas contingency operations ( oco as noted in table 2 , most aid has been provided in accounts that fall under one of two budget functions .

most economic and humanitarian aid , as well as imet and the operational expenses of the embassy , the special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction , and usaid , is in the 150 international affairs function , encompassed largely by the state , foreign operations appropriations .

food aid , also under the 150 function , is provided in the agriculture appropriations bill .

most security aid , as well as the cerp , is in the 050 defense budget function , encompassed by the dod appropriations .

in february 2011 , the administration issued its fy2012 budget request , including $3.2 billion in foreign operations assistance to afghanistan and $13.9 billion in dod aid .

under the latter , $12.8 billion was for the asff , $400 million for the cerp , $500 million for the afghan infrastructure fund , and $150 million for the business task force .

the foreign operations request included $2.8 billion in esf .

for fy2012 , the administration sought to differentiate regular , "enduring" assistance requirements from those temporary needs emanating from the war which it categorized as overseas contingency operations ( oco ) funds .

of the esf request , $1.6 billion was in regular "enduring" costs and $1.2 billion was in oco funds .

other requests — $1 million in state and usaid global health , $15.5 million in food aid , $324 million in incle , $66.3 million in nadr , and $2.4 million in imet funds — were considered regular costs .

in its fy2012 request , the administration also proposed $948 million in state department diplomatic and consular programs ( d&cp ) operational expenses for the afghanistan diplomatic and aid effort over and above the ongoing so - called enduring expenses in these countries .

the figure included funding of civilian personnel from the department of state , usaid , and other agencies that are deployed throughout afghanistan .

in addition , $44.4 million in oco funds was requested for the operations of the sigar .

on december 23 , 2011 , the consolidated appropriations act 2012 ( h.r .

2055 , p.l .

112-74 ) was signed into law .

division i , the state , foreign operations appropriations , provided funding for afghanistan , although specific levels under each account were not mentioned .

the legislation required that $50 million be made available for rule of law programs and the statement of conferees directed that $10 million go to the afghan civilian assistance program and at least $5 million be provided for the office of global women's issues small grants program .

in its legislation , congress shifted most of the administration request for regular funding to the off - budget oco category .

after weighing competing priorities in iraq and pakistan , among others eligible for the oco funds , the administration allocated available fy2012 funds , providing $1.8 billion in esf oco and $324 million in incle oco .

it also divided nadr funds , providing $41.8 million in regular funds and $23 million in oco .

congress also appropriated $1 billion for state department d&cp operations in afghanistan .

division a of the consolidated appropriations act 2012 provided department of defense oco appropriations to afghanistan , including $11.2 billion for the asff , $400 million for the cerp , and $400 million for the afghanistan infrastructure fund .

the administration has also allocated about $258 million for the task force for business and stability operations .

in february 2012 , the administration issued its fy2013 budget request , seeking a total of $2.5 billion in esf , incle , nadr , and imet , compared with the $2.3 billion allocated for these accounts in the previous year .

although congress funded most of the fy2012 appropriations from the oco budget , the administration has again requested funding split between regular and oco categories .

it requests $811.4 million in regular esf , $1 billion in oco esf , $400 million in regular incle , $200 million in oco incle , $54.3 million in regular nadr , and $1.5 million in regular imet .

the fy2013 request also includes $1.9 billion for oco state operations , a $871 million increase from the fy2012 level , in order to support needs associated with the pending u.s. military withdrawal .

the funds would provide for civilian facilities in kandahar and jalalabad and increased security .

the administration has requested $49.9 million for the sigar .

the defense appropriations request total includes $5.7 billion for the asff , only slight more than half than the previous year's appropriation , $400 million for cerp , $400 million for the afghanistan infrastructure fund , and $179 million for the task force for business stability operations .

on may 24 , 2012 , the senate appropriations committee reported s. 3241 ( s.rept .

112-172 ) , the fy2013 state , foreign operations appropriations .

in its report , the committee recommended a total assistance level of $1.6 billion , well below the $2.5 billion request , noting that there remained $3.7 billion in unobligated balances as of march 2012 .

the committee would provide $1.1 billion in esf , $450 million in incle , $54.3 million in nadr , and $1.5 million in imet .

the committee recommended $15 million for the afghan civilian assistance program , not less than $5 million for the state department's office of global women's issues small grants program , and not less than $10 million for democracy and human rights .

in addition , the committee supports appropriations of $1.6 billion in state operational d&cp and $49.9 million for the sigar .

it would provide $200.8 million for usaid operational expenses .

the committee also noted its support for plans to reduce u.s. government and contract personnel , and voiced support for rule of law programs and the national solidarity program .

on may 25 , 2012 , the house appropriations committee reported h.r .

5857 ( h.rept .

112-494 ) , the fy2013 state , foreign operations appropriations .

it did not specify amounts for afghanistan under either regular or oco appropriations .

as in the previous year , it provided more funding for each account under the oco category than was requested and less in regular funds .

should the legislation be adopted , the administration would make final country allocations based on competing priorities .

the committee report raised a variety of concerns — expecting full implementation in fy2013 of usaid's accountable assistance for afghanistan initiative to ensure accountability for its programs , encouraging support for the artf and national solidarity programs while maintaining legislative conditions on direct aid , voicing concern for implementing partners due to the transition to the afghan public protection force by withholding funds until the secretary of state certifies that needed contracts are in place , addressing reports of implementing partners receiving tax bills by requiring the secretary to develop a policy to prohibit illegitimate taxation , and urging an inter - agency strategy to deal with the rise in conflict - induced population displacement .

the committee also voiced support for programs focusing on women and girls , rule of law , training for media , and regional trade efforts .

on may 25 , 2012 , the house appropriations committee also reported h.r .

5856 ( h.rept .

112-493 ) , the fy 2013 defense appropriations , providing $5.0 billion for the asff , $250 million for the cerp , $375 million for the afghan infrastructure fund , and $88 million for the business task force .

congress has imposed a wide range of conditions and reporting requirements on its authorization and appropriations of aid to afghanistan .

for example , the fy2012 appropriations contains a provision ( sec .

7046 ( 1 ) , p.l .

112-74 ) that no funds are to be available for esf or incle until the secretary of state certifies that the government of afghanistan is committed to reducing corruption , taking steps to facilitate public participation in governance and oversight , and taking steps to protect the human rights of women ; that funds will be programmed to strengthen the capacity of afghanistan to reduce corruption ; that civil society and government representatives will be consulted .

another provision of the act requires that esf and incle funds be used in a manner that emphasizes the participation of afghan women ( sec .

7046 ( 2 ) ( b ) ( i ) ) .

among congressional reporting requirements , there are two of special note with regard to assistance to afghanistan .

the 2008 defense authorization ( §1229 , p.l .

110-181 ) , which established a special inspector general for afghanistan reconstruction , requires the sigar to submit a quarterly report describing aid activities and funding .

the same legislation ( §1230 ) , extended until 2014 by the 2012 defense authorization ( p.l .

112-181 , section 1218 ) , requires dod , in coordination with all other agencies , to submit a report every six months on progress toward security and stability in afghanistan , including descriptions of the asff , prts , counter - narcotics activities , and other assistance matters .

