technically , there is a single "civil service" for the federal government .

many federal employees work under the broad framework of requirements in title 5 of the united states code ( hereafter , title 5 ) .

however , many laws and rules that cover the civil service have been customized to subsets of federal employees .

that is , agencies and groups of employees have been "carved out" from government - wide provisions in title 5 in areas like hiring , pay , performance appraisal , and labor - management relations .

these subsets of employees may be broken down , for example , by branch of government , agency , and occupation .

in addition , the civil service system has become increasingly decentralized in execution .

agencies also use discretion to create subtle or significant differences within the systems they establish to manage employees .

as a result of these trends , the civil service has become increasingly fragmented in recent decades .

at the same time , it has become more difficult for the office of personnel management ( opm ) and stakeholders to comprehensively monitor and oversee developments related to human capital management ( hcm ) across the federal government .

fragmentation has been evident not only in law , but also is apparent in the data for federal scientific and technical ( s&t ) personnel .

 ( see box 1 . ) .

in recent decades , the federal government has made many efforts to recruit and retain scientists , engineers , and technical workers , who otherwise may find a more attractive environment in the private and nonfederal sectors .

as a group , these s&t personnel may be called the federal s&t workforce .

a large subset of the s&t workforce is composed of scientific and engineering ( s&e ) personnel .

this report provides an illustrative overview of statutory authorities relating to the hiring of , and pay for , federal s&t personnel .

some authorities are government - wide , and others are specific to particular agencies .

because hiring and pay practices are changing constantly , not only by law , but also by agency regulation and administrative action , it is not possible to provide a comprehensive overview or assessment of all policies here .

nonetheless , the report may inform members of congress who wish to consider modifying the ability of the federal government to recruit highly - qualified scientific , engineering , and technical personnel .

before examining these statutory authorities , the report begins with a discussion of what kinds of employees are in the federal s&t and s&e workforces .

the report then analyzes several key factors that are affecting the s&t workforce , both overall in the united states and in the federal government .

the many ways in which federal employees can be described and categorized are illustrative of the fragmentation of the federal scientific and technical workforce , and sometimes cause confusion among human resources practitioners and observers .

therefore , some discussion of uses of this term is provided here .

specifically , federal employees may be categorized as being situated in multiple , overlapping "workforces. .

for example , employees may be described in terms of the organizational units in which they hold positions ( eg , department of energy workforce ) .

in addition , employees oftentimes are described and categorized according to distinct skill sets that they use in their jobs ( eg , scientific and engineering workforce ) .

other examples of the latter usage include the acquisition , information technology , and human resources workforces .

these categories of employees have been referred to colloquially as "functional workforces" or "occupations. .

employees in one of these workforces may work within one agency or across several agencies .

still further ways of categorizing employees relate to how they are hired ( "appointed" ) and paid .

because the procedures for hiring and paying employees frequently are specified in statute and regulation , a workforce may be referred to as corresponding to a certain section of the united states code or part of the code of federal regulations .

congress frequently legislates using all of these conceptions of workforces .

fragmentation is also evident in the ways in which the s&e workforce is categorized , whether broadly as a scientists or engineer , or by sub - occupation categories such as a life scientist or electrical engineer .

the s&e workforce can also be delineated by agency , work activity , educational degree , age , and geographic region .

these characteristics influence federal employment policies .

the national science foundation ( nsf ) provides information on the federal s&e workforce , based on opm data .

table 1 provides an overview of this workforce by major occupational group , in order of the most populous group .

as shown here , the occupation in which the largest number of scientists is employed is the computer and mathematical sciences .

it is also perhaps telling that the plurality of engineers are in the "other engineers" category .

federal s&e personnel also may be categorized in terms of the work they conduct .

table 2 provides the primary work activity of federal scientists and engineers .

as shown here , federal scientists and engineers work on a wide variety of activities in the federal government .

for those whose work activity is known , the largest pool of federal scientists and engineers work in research and in development .

table 3 provides an overview of the number of federal s&es employed , by agency , beginning with the agency that employs the most s&es .

as shown here , the department of defense ( dod ) employs the most federal s&es , almost half of the total federal s&e workforce .

table 4 provides information on the degree level of federal s&es .

the bachelor's degree is the highest degree obtained for the majority of the federal s&e workforce .

in engineering , those at the phd level are a smaller percentage of that occupation's workforce than is the case for those in science occupations .

table 5 provides the geographic location of this workforce , broken down by region , which is located throughout the united states .

as shown here , the south atlantic region ( which includes , among other states and geographic areas , the district of columbia , virginia , and maryland ) has the most scientists and engineers .

the next most numerous region is the pacific region .

the lowest number are located in the west north central and new england areas .

several key factors , reflective of the fragmented nature of federal s&t workforce , have contributed to policymakers' concerns about it .

these factors , which can vary a great deal by the characteristics of a given population within the workforce , include the demand for s&t workers in the broader labor market ; concerns about whether federal salaries are competitive with the private sector for these workers ; the need for u.s. citizenship for federal employment ; and the aging of the federal s&t workforce as those hired during previous federal s&t "booms" retire .

more information on each is provided below .

as noted at the beginning of this report , the federal civil service system has become increasingly fragmented in recent decades .

the next two sections are included to provide context for this complexity and to help explain the configuration of statutory authorities that relate to hiring and pay of the federal government's s&t workforce .

the two sections briefly outline developments relating to statutory authorities that are ( 1 ) executive - branch - wide and ( 2 ) agency - specific in nature .

a number of organizations have analyzed the federal s&t workforce .

these reports have identified some possible policy options that congress and federal agencies might consider undertaking in order to better recruit and retain the federal s&t workforce .

human resource management issues relating to s&t personnel have been of ongoing concern to congress , both government - wide and for particular agencies .

if congress wishes to evaluate the ability of the federal government and its agencies to recruit and retain s&t personnel , the variety of statutory authorities provide illustrations of topics that might be examined .

in addition , the federal government's experience with these statutory authorities might inform congress's deliberations , if congress wished to consider modifying the ability of the federal government to recruit highly - qualified scientific , engineering , and technical personnel .

in evaluating current efforts or considering future modifications , congress may wish to consider factors that include the following: given perceived problems regarding recruitment and retention of federal s&e personnel , agency - specific and executive - branch - wide approaches could be considered .

if an executive - branch - wide approach were pursued , it may be possible to structure legislation to leverage the involvement of entities such as opm , the federal chief human capital officers ( chco ) council , ostp , and omb , in addition to agencies with s&e workforces themselves .

tools to galvanize action by agencies , opm , and omb might be pursued through several means , including requirements for strategic planning , coordination , evaluation , and solitary or joint reporting .

although many statutory authorities have focused on providing additional flexibilities to agencies , it is not clear how much accountability has been gained in exchange .

a number of observers have , over extended periods , expressed concerns about the ability of opm to effectively oversee agency use of these authorities .

the goal of a number of programs is to recruit staff for term appointments of one to five years .

however , if the goal is for an agency to build a long - term workforce who stay for more than five years , reliance on short - term appointments may not be an appropriate model .

further , even if an agency has the goal of building a shorter - term workforce of five years or less , prospective recruits may be unwilling to take a position that has a pre - determined endpoint , even if the rate of compensation is higher .

several of the programs only apply to a small number of individuals .

if the goal is to recruit a large number of individuals , these may not be appropriate models .

although various recruiting mechanisms have been developed and are in active use , there is insufficient evidence as to whether or not these programs are likely to achieve a given employment goal .

some of the agencies continue to experience challenges in employing the personnel they need despite such programs .

some policies are targeted at entry - level employees , while others are targeted at more senior employees .

each may prefer different incentives .

as a result , one factor to consider is whether or not the goal of a program is to recruit entry - level staff , senior staff , or both .

according to news reports , the opm director john berry plans to pursue a significant reform of the civil service system in title 5 , including a pay for performance system , in response to concerns that the federal pay system is "balkanized to the point of a risk of failure. .

the three - pronged strategy , approved by president obama , would "reform the law on federal employee pay: create a fair and credible performance appraisal and accountability system ; develop training that would prepare employees for promotion and support them throughout their careers ; and establish genuine parity between federal and private - sector salaries for employees in comparable occupations. .

the obama administration has taken several actions related to federal s&e personnel actions .

these include: halting expansion of dod's national security personnel system ( nsps ) pending a review by the obama administration ; allowing federal agencies to use excepted service appointments to carry out provisions of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) ; providing agencies with the ability to rehire annuitants ( retired federal employees ) to help carry out arra ; and helping agencies identify specific workforce strategies , including special hiring flexibilities to meet arra requirements .

a draft energy research and development bill proposed by the chair and ranking member of the senate committee on energy and natural resources would provide doe with direct hire , critical pay , and rehire authority .

as described by the committee: section 47 – direct hire authority .

this section gives the doe direct hire authority for a period of two years , such hiring must be consistent with merit principals [sic ] and public notice .

such authority originally rested with the atomic energy commission and was transferred to the nuclear regulatory commission ( nrc ) but not the doe .

the nrc has recently used this authority to rapidly hire 400 engineers for the surge in nuclear plant license applications .

section 48 – critical pay authority .

this section gives the doe critical pay authority to hire up to 40 highly skilled individuals for key or critical mission positions at the department for a period of no more than 4 years up to the salary of the vice - president of the united states .

this will enable doe to attract highly qualified individuals from industry and academia for positions within the department typical of science and engineering intensive missions .

section 49 – rehire authority .

this section gives the doe the authority to rehire retired doe employees for mission critical positions without impacting their retirement annuity .

many department employees served in excess of 20 or 30 years in programmatic positions managing large , technically complicated energy related efforts .

this authority will enable continuity of knowledge transfer as newer employees are hired .

