as the 80 million baby boomers approach retirement , many are concerned they will not have sufficient savings to sustain their standard of living throughout retirement .

few , however , have focused on another risk to their retirement security — the potential cost of financing often expensive long - term care services .

the cost of long - term services and supports ( ltss ) for the majority of older americans may far exceed their financial resources in the future .

private long - term care insurance ( ltci ) is available to provide some financial protection for persons against the risk of the potentially high cost of ltss .

to date , however , only about 1 in 10 individuals aged 55 and older own a ltci policy .

this report discusses the role of ltci in financing ltss and current trends in the ltci industry ; factors affecting the demand for ltci , including cost and complexity of the product and adequacy of consumer protections ; and legislative options available to improve affordability , strengthen consumer protections , and expand consumer education .

services provided by a ltci policy may include a broad range of services and supports to help people with a limited capacity for self - care due to a physical , cognitive ( such as alzheimer's disease ) , or mental disability or condition .

health care and ltss are different .

health care services typically treat specific acute and chronic medical conditions in a medical setting by a medical professional .

ltss , on the other hand , include a wide range of health and health - related support services provided on an informal or formal basis to people who have functional disabilities or cognitive impairments over an extended period of time with the goal of maximizing their independence .

unlike medical treatments , ltss primarily assist individuals in their day - to - day activities .

these "activities of daily living" ( adls ) include bathing , dressing , eating , toileting , and transferring ( from a bed to a chair or vice - versa ) .

generally , ltci policyholders are eligible to begin to receive benefits if they have at least two of the adl limitations .

ltci policies may be sold to an individual directly or to a group as part of an employer - sponsored policy .

the premiums charged for ltci vary by age of purchase , with higher premiums charged to those purchasing at older ages .

this age differential reflects the higher risk of needing ltss at advanced ages .

one study has estimated that over two - thirds of individuals who turn 65 years old will require ltss at some point before they die .

after 15 years of strong growth , demand for private ltci has slowed considerably since 2004 .

in 2008 , the latest year in which demographic data are available , about 11% of the population aged 55 and older and 12% of the population aged 65 and older owned a ltci policy .

low demand for this product has occurred despite enhanced tax incentives ( mainly at the state level ) , increased emphasis on consumer protections , and the enactment of a private ltci program for federal employees .

the factors affecting the demand for ltci can be viewed by comparing two key cohorts: those under the age of 65 and those aged 65 and older .

for those under the age of 65 , annual ltci premiums are generally lower .

however , this cohort also faces competing demands of the cost of raising families and saving for retirement .

many do not fully understand their future risks or coverage options for ltss .

according to a survey by america's health insurance plans , 28% of non - buyers believe medicare will cover their ltss needs , and another 22% do not know who would pay .

although medicare does cover up to 100 days of care in a skilled nursing facility , and limited home health care , it does not cover longer stays in a nursing home or personal home care .

by the time individuals reach the age of 65 or so , if they have not sufficiently planned for their ltss needs , the cost and complexity of the ltci policies become a major barrier to purchase .

in addition , increased concerns have arisen about the adequacy of consumer protections for ltci as a result of inconsistencies in ltci laws and regulations across the states .

more recently , adverse publicity about potential problems with premium stability , claims denials by ltci companies , and heightened concerns about the future solvency of ltci companies in the current economic environment have further dampened demand .

the following section discusses these issues in greater detail .

if participation rates increase in the private ltci market , most actuaries agree that the overall costs of policies may be further reduced because the available risk - pool would be larger .

specifically , one of the key premises of insurance is to spread risk across as large a population as possible .

adverse selection occurs when individuals who expect to have a higher risk of needing ltss in the future ( eg , family history of alzheimer's ) are more likely to purchase a policy than those who do not .

in a voluntary program , low participation may limit an insurer's ability to spread risk adequately resulting in adverse selection .

when adverse selection is present in a voluntary system , insurers must charge higher premiums to cover the higher risk of the insured group .

thus , the greater the participation among the general population , the lower the effects of adverse selection .

many of the concerns about adverse selection were raised when the class program under the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca , p.l .

111-148 , as amended ) was enacted , which was intended to be a voluntary , federally administered ltci program .

according to the american academy of actuaries , design features of the program , such as guaranteed issue ( eg , no pre - existing condition exclusions ) , and the voluntary nature of the program may lead to those most likely needing the benefit to opt - in and healthy individuals , who may not need the benefit , to opt - out .

it was anticipated that adverse selection would likely lead to higher than average premiums and further reduce demand for the class program among young and healthy individuals .

in fact , after examining the actuarial , marketing , and legal issues for a financially solvent program over the next 75 years , hhs sent a letter to congress , stating that the administration does not see a viable path forward for implementation of the class program at this time .

on january 2 , 2013 , the american taxpayers relief act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-240 ) , among other things , repealed the class program .

legislative proposals intended to increase the demand for private ltci policies , and overall participation rates , may include proposals to increase tax incentives to lower the after - tax cost of policies , improve consumer protections and increase consumer confidence in the product , and expand consumer education .

the following describes these proposals in greater detail .

under current law , premiums paid by employees may be subject to a premium conversion arrangement under a cafeteria plan ( flexible spending type account ) and deductible from their taxable income .

there are also other tax credits available to certain individuals who purchase health care insurance in the individual market .

however , ltci premiums currently do not have as generous tax incentives as health insurance .

but a recent survey by ahip suggests that increased tax incentives may increase the demand for ltci .

specifically , according to the ahip survey , 87% of respondents who chose not to purchase ltci said they would be "much more interested" or "more interested" if they could deduct premiums from their taxable income .

this section will first discuss the current tax treatment of ltci and then detail potential legislative proposals and their implications for after - tax ltci premiums .

under current law , there are some tax advantages provided to some aspects of private ltci .

benefits from a "qualified" ltci policy are excluded from the gross income of the taxpayer ( i.e. , they are exempt from taxation ) .

in addition , premiums for ltci are allowed as itemized deductions to the extent they and other unreimbursed medical expenses exceed 10% of adjusted gross income ( agi ) for those under age 65 and 7.5% of agi for those 65 and older .

ltci premium deductions , however , are subject to age - adjusted limits .

in 2013 , these limits range annually from $360 for persons aged 40 or younger up to $4,550 for persons over the age of 70 .

in addition , under current law , employer contributions toward the cost of tax - qualified ltci policies are excluded from the gross income of the employee .

self - employed individuals are allowed to include ltci premiums in calculating their deductions for health insurance expenses .

only amounts less than or equal to the age - adjusted limits can be deducted or excluded from taxable income .

in addition , the medicare prescription drug , improvement and modernization act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-173 ) authorized health savings accounts ( hsas ) , which allow individuals to pay for ltci premiums on a tax - advantaged basis .

individuals are eligible to establish and contribute to an hsa if they have a qualifying high deductible health plan ( hdhp ) .

individuals enrolled in medicare are excluded .

withdrawals from hsas are exempt from federal income taxes if used for purchase of ltci .

as noted earlier , a number of legislative changes to the tax code have enabled insurers to develop hybrid products that combine ltci with either an annuity or a life insurance product .

the pension protection act ( ppa ) of 2006 simplified tax rules regarding combination products ( effective in 2010 ) and added a tax provision specifying that proceeds from an annuity can be used tax - free to purchase a tax - qualified ltci policy ( under section 7702b ( b ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) ) .

ppa also allows individuals to use the cash surrender value of a life insurance policy as payment for a tax - qualified ltci policy and exclude these payments from taxable income .

finally , ppa revised section 1035 of the irc to allow for tax - free exchanges of certain insurance contracts .

under this provision , no gain or loss is recognized on the exchange of a life insurance contract , an endowment contract , an annuity contract for a qualified ltci contract or the exchange of one qualified ltci contract for another .

expanding tax incentives for long - term care insurance may improve the affordability of policies by reducing the after - tax cost of policies and increasing the demand for ltci .

to do this , ltci premiums could be included in one or more of the following options: an employer - sponsored cafeteria or flexible spending account plan , which would exclude them from gross income ; as an "above - the - line" tax deduction to arrive at agi ; or as a credit against tax liability ( "tax credit" ) .

table 4 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each option .

cafeteria plans are employer - established benefit plans under which employees may choose between receiving cash ( typically additional taxable take - home pay ) and certain non - taxable benefits .

under this option , ltci would be an eligible benefit within the plan and the employee would not be taxed on the value of the benefit .

this arrangement reduces both income and employment taxes ( i.e. , social security and medicare payroll taxes ) .

under some of the current legislative proposals , ltci could also be an eligible expense in a flexible spending account ( fsa ) .

fsas and cafeteria plans are closely related , but not all cafeteria plans have fsas and not all fsas are part of cafeteria plans .

reimbursements through an fsa are also exempt from income and employment taxes .

including ltci in a cafeteria plan or fsa would also reduce adjusted gross income for purposes of other tax provisions .

cafeteria plans and fsas only benefit individuals whose employer has established such plans .

for an individual filer with $55,000 in gross income and in the 25% tax bracket , this option would reduce the effective cost of the premiums by 32.65% ( this includes a reduction in employment taxes of 7.65% as well ) .

under this option , ltci premiums would be deducted from a taxpayer's gross income .

an above - the - line deduction also reduces adjusted gross income for other tax provisions .

the key difference from a cafeteria plan is that the provision is available to everyone and not limited to those employers who offer a plan .

in addition , under this option , ltci premiums ( even if deducted from gross income ) would still be subject to employment taxes if the individual were employed .

for an individual filer with $55,000 in income and in the 25% tax bracket , this option would reduce after - tax ltci premiums by 25% .

a tax credit is applied directly against a taxpayer's tax liability .

the key distinction in a tax credit is whether it is refundable or nonrefundable .

a fully refundable tax credit is paid to the taxpayer even if the amount of the credit exceeds the taxpayer's tax liability .

under a nonrefundable credit , if the tax liability is less than the credit amount of all refundable credits available , then the taxpayer would not benefit from the full credit .

under this option , after tax premiums for the individual filer with $55,000 in gross income would decline dollar for dollar by the amount of the tax credit if the individual's tax liability was equal to or exceeded the amount of all available tax credits .

although the discussion above provides a brief overview of the impact of the different options , actual tax savings will vary depending on the specific details of each of the proposals .

to minimize the cost to the federal government , many of the current legislative proposals would not allow the full deduction or credit of premiums initially .

instead these proposals would phase - in the deduction or credit over time ; base the percentage of ltci premiums that is deductible or creditable on the number of years a policy is held ; or limit the income from which a deduction can be taken , allowing only a deduction from gross income for distributions from a 401 ( k ) or ira .

as the market for ltci expands , there is a growing concern that current regulations may not be sufficient to protect consumers from potential abuses in claims administration and processing and future rate stability .

to address these issues , legislative proposals that are introduced to expand tax incentives for ltci may also require these tax - qualified policies to meet specific naic model regulations and laws .

 ( see table 3 for a summary of different versions of the naic model provisions with respect to consumer protections. ) .

the long - term care awareness campaign is a joint federal - state initiative to increase awareness among the american public about the importance of planning for future ltc needs .

the own your future campaign is a collaboration of the centers for medicare & medicaid services ( see http: / / www.cms.hhs.gov ) , the office of the assistant secretary for planning & evaluation ( see http: / / www.aspe.hhs.gov ) , and the administration on aging ( see http: / / www.aoa.gov ) , and it has support from the national governors association ( see http: / / www.nga.org ) .

the program was started in january 2005 .

the project's core activities are state - based direct mail campaigns supported by each participating state's governor , and targeted to households with members between the ages of 45 to 70 .

campaign materials include a long - term care planning kit and state specific information and resources in both print and on the internet .

as of january 2010 , 25 states have participated in the long - term care campaign to increase awareness of the need to plan for future ltss .

the response from consumers to the first two phases of the own your future campaign exceeded expectations , both in terms of consumer interest and in initiating ltss planning actions .

research following a five - state phase of the campaign indicated that individuals who received the planning kit were twice as likely to take some type of ltss planning action as compared to those who did not receive the kit .

based on these successes , congress provided additional support for these education initiatives by establishing the national clearinghouse for long - term care information under the deficit reduction act of 2005 .

under section 6021 ( d ) of the act , congress appropriated $15 million in funding for the national clearinghouse over five years ( 2006 to 2010 ) .

while aca had extended funding for the clearinghouse to 2015 in enacting the class program , the recently enacted american taxpayers relief act of 2012 , in repealing the class program , also rescinds the unobligated balance of aca's funds for the national clearinghouse .

legislative proposals in the 113 th congress may expand or extend further into the future funding for the national clearinghouse .

