on january 1 , 2018 , the medicare outpatient prescription drug benefit ( medicare part d ) began its 13 th year of operation .

congress created part d in the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma ; p.l .

108-173 ) , effective january 1 , 2006 .

the law also made part d the primary source of drug coverage for individuals covered under both medicare and medicaid ( so - called dual eligibles ) .

since that time , part d has been modified by a series of statutes , including by the patient protection and affordable care act of 2010 as amended ( aca ; p.l .

111-148 ; p.l .

111-152 ) .

part d coverage is provided through private insurance plans ( pdps ) that offer only drug coverage , or through medicare advantage ( ma ) plans ( ma - pds ) that offer drug coverage as part of a broader , medicare part c managed care benefit .

alternatively , beneficiaries may be enrolled in retiree prescription drug plans offered by their former employers .

the mma provides subsidies for retiree drug plans as an incentive to employers to continue such plans .

 ( see " retiree drug subsidy ." ) .

a growing number of employers and unions are also offering retirees ( and their eligible spouses and dependents ) part d benefits through employer - group waiver plans ( egwps ) .

see " employer group waiver plans ." ) .

as of july 2018 , 44.2 million medicare beneficiaries were enrolled in part d plans .

of that total , about 25.5 million were in pdps , 18.0 million were in ma - pds , and about 690,000 were in other types of plans .

a major focus of the part d program is providing subsidized coverage to qualified , low - income beneficiaries .

individuals with incomes up to 150% of the federal poverty level and limited assets are eligible for a low - income subsidy ( lis ) .

the lis reduces beneficiaries' out - of - pocket spending by paying for all , or some , of the part d monthly premium and annual deductible , and limiting co - payments or coinsurance .

the lis is progressive , meaning the lowest - income beneficiaries receive the greatest assistance .

an estimated 12.9 million beneficiaries will receive the lis in 2018 .

the aca made major changes to part d in an effort to improve coverage and to make the premium structure more progressive , including requiring higher - income beneficiaries to pay more for coverage .

starting in 2011 , the aca required part d enrollees with incomes above a certain threshold to pay a monthly surcharge in addition to their regular plan premiums .

 ( see " premium surcharge for higher - income enrollees ." ) .

in addition , the aca phases out the "doughnut hole" by requiring drug manufacturers to provide discount for brand - name drugs purchased by beneficiaries in the part d coverage gap , or "doughnut hole" and gradually phases in medicare subsidies to cover 75% of the cost of generic drugs and 25% of the cost of brand name drugs in the coverage gap .

 ( see " the coverage gap ." ) .

the aca provisions were further modified by the medicare access and chip reauthorization act ( macra ; p.l .

114-10 ) and the balanced budget act of 2018 ( bba 2018 ; p.l .

115-123 ) , which , among other things , accelerated the closing of the coverage gap .

medicare part d relies on participating private insurance plans to provide coverage and bear part of the financial risk of the program .

all part d plans must meet certain minimum requirements , though there are significant variations among plans in terms of benefit design including differences in premiums , drug formularies ( i.e. , lists of covered drugs ) , and cost sharing for particular drugs .

in 2018 , a total of 782 pdps are offered nationwide , an increase of 36 ( or 5% ) from 2017 but a 12% reduction from 2016 .

medicare beneficiaries have 23 pdps and 17 ma - pds to choose from in their geographic area , on average .

in general , anyone who is entitled to medicare part a and / or enrolled in part b is eligible to enroll in a medicare part d drug plan .

in addition , an individual must be a u.s. citizen or qualified alien and must permanently reside within one of the 34 designated pdp regions in the united states ; anyone who is living abroad or is incarcerated is not eligible .

for most people , joining part d is voluntary , although dual - eligible beneficiaries ( see " full - subsidy - eligible individuals " ) are automatically enrolled .

medicare beneficiaries cannot be turned down for part d coverage due to preexisting health conditions or high utilization of prescription drugs .

of the 58.6 million medicare beneficiaries in 2017 who were eligible for part d , 42.5 million ( 72.5% ) were enrolled in a part d plan and another 1.6 million ( 2.7% ) had prescription drug coverage through a former employer that received a part d subsidy for a portion of their coverage .

of the remaining 25% of medicare beneficiaries , about half had drug coverage as generous as part d through another source , such as the federal employees health benefits program , tricare , or private coverage .

the remaining 12.5% of medicare beneficiaries either had less generous coverage than part d or no drug coverage at all .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

the mma set out a standard prescription drug benefit structure .

plan sponsors may , and often do , offer different benefit designs and cost - sharing requirements , so long as they meet certain specifications .

under the standard benefit structure , with some exceptions , over the course of a year a beneficiary is responsible for paying ( 1 ) a monthly premium , ( 2 ) an annual deductible , and ( 3 ) co - payments or coinsurance for drug purchases .

additionally , for a certain period called the "coverage gap" ( also known as the doughnut hole ) , beneficiaries face increased out - of - pocket costs .

the aca included provisions to gradually eliminate the coverage gap .

 ( see " the coverage gap ." ) .

actual costs to part d beneficiaries vary from plan to plan depending on the benefit structure and coverage offered , the costs and amount of drugs they use , and the level of any additional assistance such as through a low - income subsidy .

one unique feature of the medicare part d drug benefit is the coverage gap — the period in which part d enrollees are required to pay a larger share of total drug costs until they reach the catastrophic coverage level .

congress included the coverage gap in the benefit structure when the mma was enacted in 2003 because the cost of continuous coverage would have exceeded goals for total spending .

as originally enacted , part d provided a basic level of coverage for all beneficiaries , and extra protection for those with the highest drug costs ( above the catastrophic limit ) .

part d enrollees who did not receive a low - income subsidy generally paid the full cost of drugs while in the coverage gap .

 ( see original part d in figure 4 . ) .

the aca , as amended , included provisions to gradually phase out the coverage gap by 2020 , at which point beneficiaries in standard plans would have a 25% cost share from the time they meet a standard plan deductible until they reached the catastrophic threshold , after which cost sharing is reduced .

 ( see " phaseout of the coverage gap ." ) .

congress included provisions in bba 2018 that phase out the part d coverage gap for brand - name drugs in 2019 , a year earlier than required by the aca .

beneficiaries may have different levels of actual out - of - pocket spending in the coverage gap depending on how their specific plans are structured and the percentage of brand - name and generic drugs that they use .

spending will also vary depending on whether a beneficiary qualifies for the lis based on his or her income and assets .

for example , dual - eligible beneficiaries who are institutionalized have zero co - payments for drugs listed on a plan formulary , including during the time they are in the coverage gap .

other lis beneficiaries have set - dollar co - payments while they are in the coverage gap .

in 2015 , about 26% of medicare part d enrollees reached the coverage gap .

cms offers enrollees suggestions for avoiding or delaying the coverage gap and for saving money while in the gap .

strategies for minimizing out - of - pocket spending include switching to generic , over - the - counter , mail - order , or other lower - cost drugs when possible ; exploring national and community - based charitable programs or state pharmacy assistance programs ( spaps ) that might offer assistance ; and looking into pharmaceutical assistance programs ( also called patient assistance programs or paps ) offered by pharmaceutical manufacturers or independent charities .

additionally , cms suggests that beneficiaries continue using their medicare drug plan cards even when in the coverage gap .

using the cards helps to ensure that beneficiaries are charged the drug plan's discounted , negotiated prices and that their out - of - pocket expenses count toward reaching the catastrophic coverage threshold .

medicare part d provides subsidies to assist low - income beneficiaries with premiums and cost sharing .

lis cost sharing is linked to the standard prescription drug coverage and varies according to a beneficiary's assets and income and , also , whether a beneficiary is institutionalized , or is receiving community - based care .

full - subsidy eligibles have no deductible , minimal cost sharing during the initial coverage period and coverage gap , and no cost sharing above the catastrophic threshold .

additionally , full - benefit dual eligibles who are residents of medical institutions or nursing facilities have no cost sharing .

 ( see " eligibility for low - income assistance ." ) .

the mma included provisions designed to encourage employers to continue to offer drug benefits to their medicare - eligible retirees .

employers have a number of options for providing such coverage .

in order for a drug to be paid by medicare's prescription drug benefit , it must be a drug that is covered under part d and included in the formulary of an individual's part d plan .

 ( see " formularies ." ) .

the mma defines covered part d drugs as ( 1 ) outpatient prescription drugs approved by the food and drug administration ( fda ) , and used for a medically accepted indication ; ( 2 ) biological products that may be dispensed only upon a prescription and that are licensed under the public health service ( phs ) act and produced at a licensed establishment ; ( 3 ) insulin ( including medical supplies associated with the injection of insulin ) ; and ( 4 ) vaccines licensed under the phs act .

drugs can also be treated as part of a plan's formulary as the result of a beneficiary coverage determination or appeal .

certain drugs are excluded from part d coverage by law , including drugs specifically excluded from coverage under medicaid .

the exclusion applies to ( 1 ) drugs used for anorexia , weight loss , or weight gain ; ( 2 ) fertility drugs ; ( 3 ) drugs used for cosmetic purposes or hair growth ; ( 4 ) drugs for symptomatic relief for coughs and colds ; ( 5 )  prescription vitamins and minerals ; and ( 6 ) covered drugs when the manufacturer requires , as a condition of sale , that associated tests be purchased exclusively from the manufacturer .

drugs used for the treatment of sexual or erectile dysfunction are excluded from coverage unless they are used to treat another condition for which the drug has been approved by the fda .

some previously barred drugs are now covered .

since january 1, 2013 , part d plans have been required to include benzodiazepines in their formularies .

barbiturates must be included in plan formularies for an indication of epilepsy , cancer , or chronic mental health disorders .

effective in january 2014 , the aca removed smoking cessation agents , barbiturates and benzodiazepines from the list of drugs allowed to be excluded from medicaid coverage .

the aca provisions meant that part d restrictions on barbiturate coverage ( i.e. , limiting the drugs to treatment of epilepsy , cancer , or chronic mental health disorders ) were ended .

if a state covers excluded drugs for medicaid beneficiaries , it must also cover them for dual eligibles in cases where the drugs are determined to be medically necessary .

dual eligibles may therefore receive coverage from medicaid for some drugs that are excluded from medicare .

additionally , a part d sponsor may elect to include one or more of these drugs in an enhanced part d plan ; however , no federal subsidy is available for the associated costs .

cms regulations require that each part d plan have an appropriate drug utilization management program that ( 1 ) includes incentives to reduce costs when medically appropriate , and ( 2 ) maintains policies and systems to assist in preventing over - utilization and under - utilization of prescribed medications .

since the part d program began in 2006 , the trend among plans has been to impose greater cost - sharing and utilization management .

in addition , during the past several years , cms has imposed more stringent requirements on plans in an effort to identify possible program fraud and abuse involving certain prescription drugs .

medicare part d participants must obtain coverage through a private insurer , or other entity , that contracts with medicare ( a plan sponsor ) .

as previously described , beneficiaries may select either a stand - alone prescription drug plan or a medicare advantage plan that includes prescription drug coverage along with other medicare services .

pdps are required to be available region - wide within each of the 34 designated pdp regions .

ma - pds are generally local , operating on a countywide basis ; however , region - wide ma - pds are available in many of the 26 ma regions in the united states .

a pdp sponsor may offer a pdp in more than one region , including all pdp regions ; however , the sponsor must submit separate coverage bids for each region it serves .

medicare payments to plans are determined through a competitive bidding process , and enrollee premiums are tied to plan bids .

plans bear some risk for their enrollees' drug spending .

part d sponsors are required to establish a pharmacy network sufficient to ensure access to covered part d drugs for all enrollees .

sponsors must demonstrate that they provide ( 1 ) convenient access to retail pharmacies for all enrollees , ( 2 ) adequate access to home infusion pharmacies for all enrollees , ( 3 ) convenient access to long - term care ( ltc ) pharmacies for residents of ltc facilities , and ( 4 ) access to indian health service , tribes , or urban indian programs pharmacies operating in the sponsor's service area .

part d enrollees have the right to request or appeal coverage determinations , file grievances against plan sponsors , and file complaints regarding quality of care .

pdps and ma - pds are required to provide enrollees with written information about their rights , and to institute both standard and expedited procedures for addressing coverage issues .

an enrollee may appoint a representative to act on his or her behalf during the grievance and appeals process such as a friend , relative , attorney , physician , or an employee of a pharmacy or a charity .

to appoint a representative , an enrollee must submit a written statement to the drug plan sponsor .

alternatively , a surrogate or representative may be appointed by a court or authorized under a state or other applicable law to act on behalf of an enrollee .

a prescribing physician or other prescriber may request a standard or expedited coverage determination , redetermination , or independent review entity ( ire ) reconsideration on behalf of an enrollee without being named a representative .

 ( physicians or prescribers do not have all the rights of a designated representative , however , unless they have gone through the formal appointment process. ) .

the size , nature , and complexity of the medicare part d program put it at particular risk for fraud , waste , and abuse .

some examples of program vulnerabilities that have been identified include drug diversion ( redirecting prescription drugs , such as opioids , for illegal purposes ) ; billing for drugs that are not dispensed ; and inappropriate plan denials of covered drugs .

a variety of entities are involved in oversight activities to ensure program compliance and identify potentially fraudulent activities .

medicare's financial operations are accounted for through two trust funds maintained by the department of the treasury — the hospital insurance ( hi ) trust fund for part a and the supplementary medical insurance ( smi ) trust fund , which contains separate accounts for parts b and part d. unlike the hi program , smi was not intended to be fully supported through dedicated sources of income .

instead , it relies primarily on general tax revenues and beneficiary premiums as revenue sources .

according to the 2018 medicare trustees report , during cy2017 , total part d expenditures were approximately $100.0 billion .

 ( see table 10 . ) .

this amount included the combined costs of prescription drugs provided by part d plans to enrollees and medicare payments to employer - sponsored retiree health plans and federal administrative expenses , including expenses incurred by hhs , ssa , and the department of the treasury in administering part d. such duties include making payments to part d plans and implementing fraud and abuse control activities .

 ( see the appendix for historical and projected part d expenditures. ) .

the major sources of revenue for the part d account include general revenues , beneficiary premiums , and state contributions .

in cy2017 , of the $100.2 billion in total part d income , general revenues accounted for $73.2 billion , premiums accounted for $15.5 billion , and transfers from states for $11.4 billion .

the appropriation language adopted for the part d account provides resources for benefit payments without the need for congressional approval .

this allows substantial flexibility in the amount of general revenues available to the account , and eliminates the need for a contingency reserve .

as a result , assets in the part d account are generally low and only need to be held for a short time until they are used to meet immediate expenditures .

as premium and general revenue income for part d is reset each year to match expected costs , the medicare trustees consider the part d account to be in satisfactory financial condition under current law .

beneficiary premiums are based on the participating plans' national average bid amounts and are defined prior to each year's operations , with the average premium amounting to 25.5% of the expected per capita plan costs for basic coverage .

 ( see " premiums ." ) .

in 2018 , the base monthly premium is $35.02 ; however , beneficiaries pay different premiums depending on the plan they selected ( and whether they are entitled to low - income premium subsidies ) .

beneficiaries may have their premiums deducted from their social security or other federal benefit payments ; these are then forwarded to part d plans on their behalf .

alternatively , they may pay their premiums directly to the part d plans .

as required by the aca , since 2011 , beneficiaries with higher incomes pay income - related monthly premium adjustments in addition to the premiums charged by the plans in which they have enrolled .

 ( see " premium surcharge for higher - income enrollees ." ) .

these extra amounts are credited to the part d trust fund account and reduce the amount of general revenue funding needed .

because individual plan premiums vary , the additional amount paid is calculated as a percentage of the base beneficiary premium , not the individual's actual premium amount .

this extra amount is usually deducted from an individual's monthly social security payments regardless of how that person ordinarily pays the monthly prescription plan premiums .

if the amount is greater than the monthly payment from social security , or an individual does not receive social security payments ( eg , the individual has not yet signed up for social security benefits ) , then cms may directly bill the individual for this amount .

in cy2017 , $5.0 billion in premium amounts were withheld from social security benefit checks or other federal benefit payments .

 ( see table 10 . ) .

another $10.5 billion in premiums were paid directly to the plans by beneficiaries .

as noted , premiums for the part d program are generally set at an amount equal to 25.5% of standard benefit costs ; however , as recipients of the part d low - income subsidies are not required to pay premiums and premiums are based only on standard benefits ( i.e. , the premium calculation does not include such things as costs associated with the low - income subsidy and risk - corridor payments ) , premiums made up about 15.5% of total part d program revenues in 2017 .

general revenues are transferred from the treasury to the part d account on an as - needed basis to cover the portion of program expenditures funded by federal subsidies .

these transfers are based on expected costs of the direct subsidy , reinsurance payments , employer subsidies , low - income subsidies , net risk - sharing payments , administrative expenses , and advanced discount payments .

in cy2017 , contributions received from the general fund of the treasury amounted to $73.2 billion , or about 73% of total part d revenue .

subsequent to the availability of part d drug coverage and low - income subsidies in 2006 , medicaid is no longer the primary payer of drug costs for full - benefit dual - eligible beneficiaries .

however , mma contained a provision ( labeled by some as the "clawback provision" ) that requires states to pay the part d account in the smi trust fund a portion of the costs that they would have incurred for this population if they were still the primary payer .

these amounts are based on the product of the estimated annual per capita full dual - eligible drug payment amount and the monthly state enrollment of full dual eligibles .

starting in 2006 , states paid 90% of these estimated costs .

this percentage phased down over a 10-year period to 75% starting in 2015 .

in cy2017 , state payments amounted to $11.4 billion , or about 11.3% of part d revenues .

actual spending for the medicare prescription drug benefit has been lower than estimated at the beginning of the program .

the 2004 medicare trustees report , the first of such reports issued subsequent to the enactment of mma , projected that total program spending would be $85 billion in cy2006 ( the first year of the program ) and would grow to about $162 billion by cy2013 .

actual medicare expenditures for the part d drug benefit were approximately $47 billion in cy2006 and close to $70 billion in cy2013 .

the difference between projected and actual spending has been due to both lower than expected enrollment and per capita spending .

 ( see table 11 . ) .

original cbo estimates of part d spending were also higher than actual spending for fy2004-fy2013 .

 ( see table 12 . ) .

while aggregate part d expenditures have increased by an average annual rate of 7.4% over the past 10 years ( 2008-2017 ) , most of this growth reflects the growth in enrollment during the initial years of the program .

per capita expenditures during this time increased at a much slower annual rate of 3.8% .

both the medicare trustees and cbo attribute the slower per capita growth rate to a high proportion of prescriptions filled with low - cost generic drugs , as well as to patent expirations of major drugs during this period .

in their 2018 report , the medicare trustees noted that 2017 part d per capita benefit expenditures were lower than in 2016 , and attributed this decrease to an increase in plan rebates and a reduction in hepatitis c drug spending .

the trustees expect this decline to continue in 2018 , for similar reasons .

 ( s ee table 13 . ) .

over the next 10 years ( 2018-2027 ) , the medicare trustees project more rapid growth in part d costs , with aggregate benefits increasing on average at 6.9% annually , and per capita expenditures increasing on average by 3.9% each year .

this projected growth is due to expectations of further increases in the number of enrollees , changes in the distribution of enrollees among coverage categories ( eg , a movement from subsidized retiree plans to regular part d plans and growth in the number of people reaching the catastrophic coverage level ) , a slowing of the trend toward greater generic drug utilization , and an increase in the use and the prices of specialty drugs .

 ( see table 13 and table 14 . ) .

the medicare trustees project that total part d expenditures will more than double during the next 10 years , from $94.5 billion in 2018 to $195.3 billion in 2027 .

 ( see table a - 1 . ) .

annual per capita part d benefit expenditures are also projected to increase — from $2,057 in 2018 to $3,293 in 2027 .

over the longer term , the trustees project that total part d spending will grow from 0.48% of gdp in 2017 , to 0.64% in 2027 and to 1.16% of gdp in 2092 .

