the purpose of spectrum policy , law , and regulation is to manage a natural resource for the maximum possible benefit of the public .

electromagnetic spectrum , commonly referred to as radio frequency spectrum or wireless spectrum , refers to the properties in air that transmit electric signals and , with applied technology , can deliver voice , text , and video communications .

access to radio frequency spectrum is controlled by assigning rights to specific license holders or to certain classes of users .

the assignment of spectrum rights does not convey ownership .

radio frequency spectrum is managed by the federal communications commission ( fcc ) for commercial and other non - federal uses and by the national telecommunications and information administration ( ntia ) for federal government use .

wireless broadband , with its rich array of services and content , requires new spectrum capacity to accommodate growth .

spectrum capacity is necessary to deliver mobile broadband to consumers and businesses and also to support the communications needs of industries that use fixed wireless broadband to transmit large quantities of information quickly and reliably .

although radio frequency spectrum ( air ) is abundant , usable spectrum is currently limited by the constraints of applied technology .

spectrum policy therefore requires making decisions about how radio frequencies will be allocated and who will have access to them .

current spectrum policy is based on managing channels of radio frequencies to avoid interference .

the fcc , over many years , has developed and refined a system of exclusive licenses for users of specific frequencies .

auctions are a market - driven solution to assigning licenses to use specific frequencies and are a recent innovation in spectrum management and policy .

previously , the fcc granted licenses using a process known as "comparative hearings" ( also known as "beauty contests" ) , and has used lotteries to distribute spectrum licenses .

the fcc also allocates spectrum for designated purposes , such as wifi , without assigning a license to a specific owner ( unlicensed spectrum ) .

as wireless technology moves from channel management to broadband network management , spectrum policy going forward may entail encouraging innovation in spectrum - and network - sharing technologies .

an increasing number of policy makers and wireless industry leaders are urging that laws and regulations be revised to reflect significant changes in wireless technology that are creating a new mobile network communications environment .

title vi of the middle class tax relief and job creation act of 2012 ( p.l .

112-96 , signed into law on february 22 , 2012 ) contains provisions that include reallocation of spectrum , new assignments of spectrum rights , and changes in procedures for repurposing spectrum used by the federal government .

many of the provisions in title vi , frequently referred to as the public safety and spectrum act , or spectrum act , focus on spectrum assignment within the existing regulatory framework , in which licenses for designated radio frequencies are awarded through competitive bidding systems ( auctions ) .

major provisions in the spectrum act that are summarized in this report cover deficit reduction ; directed auctions ; incentive auctions for television broadcasters ; reallocation of spectrum from federal to commercial use ; and unlicensed spectrum .

other provisions in the act , not covered in this report , include simplifying the approval of zoning requests for modification of cell towers at the state and local level and putting in place measures to facilitate antenna placement on federal property .

the act also has provided for the establishment of a new authority to plan and develop a nationwide public safety broadband network and has included other measures in support of improved emergency communications .

the united states currently enjoys a position of world leadership in mobile broadband technology development and deployment .

u.s. companies have been at the forefront of mobile wireless and internet convergence .

the introduction of the first iphone in 2007 is a prominent signpost marking the convergence of these technologies .

innovation in applying the internet protocol ( ip ) to mobile networks has spurred jobs and economic growth .

the success of smartphones like the iphone , in the united states and globally , followed on that of wifi , which had stoked consumer demand for wireless access to the internet .

new economic and social cultures are being built on the ubiquity and ease of access to the internet from mobile devices .

this expanding industry requires additional spectrum capacity , a key resource .

the spectrum act employs three key policy tools for increasing the availability of radio frequency spectrum for wireless broadband: allocating additional spectrum ; reassigning spectrum to new users ; and opening up spectrum for unlicensed use .

other policy options that may be employed to increase spectrum capacity include requiring that wireless network infrastructure be shared ; changing the cost structure of spectrum access ; moving to more spectrum - efficient technologies ; and sharing spectrum .

facilitating the adoption of new wireless technologies that enable spectrum sharing is emerging as a major policy consideration for spectrum management .

major advances in wireless technology have given the united states a competitive edge in communications innovation , fueling industry growth and job creation .

policy makers may wish to consider not only how to maintain this leadership but also how to adapt to changing economic and social expectations .

the mobile network communications environment presents new challenges and opportunities in policy areas such as identity theft , privacy protection , street crime ( for example , smartphone theft ) , health services , education , urban management , and electronic payments .

the amount of spectrum needed for fully realized wireless access to broadband is such that meeting the needs of broadband policy goals could be difficult to achieve through the market - driven auction process .

to meet current demands of the wireless industry , large amounts of new radio frequencies would need to be identified and released .

without abandoning competitive auctions , spectrum policy could benefit from including additional ways to assign or manage spectrum that might better serve the deployment of wireless broadband and the implementation of a national broadband policy .

current spectrum policy relies heavily on auctions to assign spectrum rights through licensing .

however , the adoption of spectrum - efficient technologies is likely to require a rethinking of spectrum management policies and tools .

the assignment and supervision of licenses might give way to policies and procedures for managing pooled resources .

auctioning licenses might be replaced by auctioning access ; the static event of selling a license replaced by the dynamic auctioning of spectrum access on a moment - by - moment basis .

auction winners are deemed to be the companies that can maximize the value of the spectrum to society by maximizing its value as a corporate asset .

however , auction - centric spectrum policies appear to have generally focused on assigning licenses to commercial competitors in traditional markets that serve consumers and businesses .

auctioning spectrum licenses may direct assets to end - use customers instead of providing wireless services where the consumer may be the beneficiary but not the customer .

wireless networks are an important component of smart grid communications , for example .

spectrum resources are also needed for railroad safety , for water conservation , for the safe maintenance of critical infrastructure industries , and for many other applications that may not have an immediate commercial value but can provide long - lasting value to society as a whole .

appendix a .

competition and technology policy telephone service was once considered a natural monopoly , and regulated accordingly .

the presumption was that redundant telephone infrastructure was inefficient and not in the public interest .

state and federal regulators favored granting operating rights to a single company , within a specific facilities territory , to benefit from economies of scale , facilitate interoperability , and maximize other benefits .

in return for the monopoly position , the selected provider was expected to fulfill a number of requirements intended to benefit society .

thus , for decades , the regulated monopoly was seen by most policy - makers as ( 1 ) ensuring that costly infrastructure was put in place and ( 2 ) meeting society's needs , as interpreted by regulations and the law .

past policies to regulate a monopolistic market may have influenced current policies for promoting competition .

the fcc's emphasis on efficiency for delivering services to a pre - determined market could be leading wireless competition toward monopoly ; new regulatory regimes might be a consequence of this trend , if it continues .

with the introduction of auctions for spectrum licenses in 1994 , the united states began to shift away from assigning spectrum licenses based on regulatory decisions and toward competitive market mechanisms .

one objective of the telecommunications act of 1996 was to open up the communications industry to greater competition among different sectors .

one outcome of the growth of competition was the establishment of different regulatory regimes for information networks and for telecommunications .

as a consequence of these and other legislative and regulatory changes , the wireless industry has areas of competition ( eg , for spectrum licenses ) within a regulatory shell , such as the rules governing the public switched telephone network ( pstn ) .

as the bulk of wireless communications traffic moves from voice to data , companies will likely modify their business plans in order to remain competitive in the new environment .

a shift in infrastructure technology and regulatory environment might open wireless competition to companies with business plans that are not modeled on pre - existing telecommunications industry formulae .

future providers of wireless broadband might include any company with a robust network for carrying data and a business case for serving broadband consumers .

potential new entrants , however , may lack access to radio frequency spectrum , the essential resource for wireless broadband .

in formulating spectrum policy , mainstream viewpoints generally diverge on whether to give priority to market economics or social goals .

regarding access to spectrum , economic policy looks to harness market forces to allocate spectrum efficiently , with spectrum license auctions as the driver .

social policy favors ensuring wireless access to support a variety of social objectives where economic return is not easily quantified , such as improving education , health services , and public safety .

both approaches can stimulate economic growth and job creation .

in evaluating competition within an industry , economists and policy makers examine barriers to entry , among other factors .

barriers might come from high costs for market entry such as investment in infrastructure or there might be legal and regulatory barriers to entry .

as part of its evaluation of competition for mobile services , the fcc has identified three factors that could constitute barriers to entry to the commercial mobile communications industry .

these barriers affect not only competitiveness but also access to networks and investment in new technology .

the factors are "first - mover advantages , large sunk costs , and access to spectrum. .

all three of these factors are subject to regulations that have been influenced by past or existing policies regarding spectrum allocation and assignment .

first - mover advantages have accrued primarily to the early entrants in the wireless industry .

early in the development of the cell phone industry , the fcc created cellular markets and assigned two spectrum licenses to each market ; one license went automatically to the incumbent provider in that market .

the second license was made available to a competing service provider ( not the market incumbent ) ; the difficulties in choosing the competitors that would receive licenses contributed to the subsequent move to auctions as a means for assigning spectrum rights .

these early entrants , and the successor companies that acquired them and their licenses , have maintained their core customer base and benefit from early investments in infrastructure .

many first movers into the wireless market , therefore , acquired their market - leader status through regulatory decisions that provided them with spectrum licenses , not through market competition .

large sunk costs refer to the high levels of investment needed to enter the wireless market .

not including the price of purchasing spectrum , billions of dollars are required to build new infrastructure .

the sunk costs of incumbent wireless service providers set a high bar for new entrants to match if they are to compete effectively in major markets .

in the mobile telephone industry , the fcc has observed that most capital expenditures are spent on existing networks: to expand and improve geographic coverage ; to increase capacity of existing networks ; and to improve network capabilities .

performance requirements for spectrum license - holders , such as the size of a market that must be served or deadlines for completing infrastructure build - outs , are some of the policy decisions that can add to the cost of entry .

spectrum auctions and competition the fcc was authorized to organize auctions to award spectrum licenses for certain wireless communications services in the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1993 ( p.l .

103-66 ) .

the act amended the communications act of 1934 with a number of important provisions affecting the availability of spectrum .

the licensing improvement section of the act laid out the general requirements for the fcc to establish a competitive bidding methodology and consider , in the process , objectives such as the development and rapid deployment of new technologies .

the law prohibited the fcc from making spectrum allocation decisions based "solely or predominately on the expectation of federal revenues.... " the emerging telecommunications technologies section directed the ntia to identify not less than 200 mhz of radio frequencies used by the federal government that could be transferred to the commercial sector through auctions .

the fcc was directed to allocate and assign these released frequencies over a period of at least 10 years , and to reserve a significant portion of the frequencies for allocation after the 10-year time span .

similar to the requirements for competitive bidding , the fcc was instructed to ensure the availability of frequencies for new technologies and services , and also the availability of frequencies to stimulate the development of wireless technologies .

the fcc was further required to address "the feasibility of reallocating portions of the spectrum from current commercial and other non - federal uses to provide for more efficient use of spectrum" and for "innovation and marketplace developments that may affect the relative efficiencies of different spectrum allocations. .

over time , auction rules have been modified in accordance with the changing policy goals of the fcc and congress but subsequent amendments to the communications act of 1934 have not substantively changed the above - noted provisions regarding spectrum allocation .

the rules set by the fcc for using spectrum licenses ( service rules ) may have been oriented toward the concepts of building and managing networks that were formed in the days of the telephone , favoring traditional telecommunications business plans over those of companies with different business models .

some companies that might be well suited to meet social goals , such as access in rural areas , might have been precluded from bidding at all because of constraints not considered relevant to market - driven allocations .

for example , public utilities , municipal co - operatives , commuter railroads , and other public or quasi - public entities face a variety of legal , regulatory , and structural constraints that limit or prohibit their ability to participate in an auction or buy spectrum licenses .

many of these constraints exist at the state level but federal spectrum policy plays a role in perpetuating the status quo .

there are many ways to view competition .

although competitiveness may be evaluated by factors such as barriers to entry or number of market participants , a key measure of whether market competition is working is an assessment of the dynamic of a specific market: its prices , variety , level of service , and other indicators that are considered hallmarks of competitive behavior .

the federal trade commission , for example , promotes competition as "the best way to reduce costs , encourage innovation , and expand choices for consumers. .

viewpoints about the level of competitiveness in providing wireless services to the u.s. market differ .

however , telecommunications business analysts generally describe the u.s. market for wireless services as competitive because consumers benefit in many ways from competition on price , service , coverage , and the availability of new devices .

both the wireless industry and its regulator have focused on "wireless consumer welfare" in evaluating competition and the effectiveness of spectrum policies for assigning spectrum licenses .

auctions are judged to be an efficient way of assigning spectrum for commercial uses that adhere to traditional business plans .

spectrum caps as part of its preparations for the first spectrum license auctions , the fcc decided to set caps on the amount of spectrum any one company could control in any geographically designated market .

the theory behind spectrum capping is that each license has an economic value and a foreclosure value .

the economic value is derived from the return on investment in spectrum licenses and network infrastructure .

the foreclosure value is the value to a wireless company that already has substantial market share and wants to keep its dominant position by precluding competition .

spectrum caps were chosen as the method to prevent foreclosure bidding .

the intent was to ensure multiple competitors in each market and to restrict bidding to only the licenses that could be used in the near term .

beginning in 2001 , spectrum policy placed increased emphasis on promoting spectrum and market efficiency through consolidation .

the fcc ruled to end spectrum caps , citing greater spectral efficiency from larger networks as one benefit of the ruling .

spectrum caps were seen as barriers to mergers within the wireless industry , to the growth of existing wireless companies , and to the benefits of scale economies .

the spectrum caps were eliminated on january 1 , 2003 .

auction rules requiring the timely build - out of networks became a key policy tool to deter hoarding .

the fcc instituted a policy for evaluating spectrum holdings on a market - by - market , case - by - case basis — a practice referred to as spectrum screening — as a measure of competitiveness .

in 2008 , the rural telecommunications group , inc. ( rtg ) petitioned the fcc to impose a spectrum cap of 110 mhz for holdings below 2.3 ghz .

in october 2008 , the fcc sought comments on the rtg petition for rulemaking .

rtg argued that competition in the industry was declining as it became more concentrated .

it claimed that the larger carriers were warehousing their spectrum holdings in rural areas while rural carriers were struggling to acquire spectrum capacity for mobile broadband and expansion .

rural carriers , rtg reported , were being shut out of opportunities to acquire new spectrum holdings and were being outbid in spectrum auctions .

opponents to the spectrum cap cited data to support their claims that the wireless communications market is competitive .

they argued that additional amounts of spectrum are needed to support the growth in mobile broadband and that a spectrum cap could cut off growth and innovation .

implementing spectrum caps as a tool for regulating competition would represent a significant shift in policy for the fcc , were it to take that course .

in comments filed regarding the national broadband plan , the department of justice considered the possibility that "the foreclosure value for incumbents in a given locale could be very high. .

although it recognized some form of spectrum caps as an option for assuring new market entrants , it observed that "there are substantial advantages to deploying newly available spectrum in order to enable additional providers to mount stronger challenges to broadband incumbents. .

competition in rural markets over the years , various legislative and policy initiatives have created a number of requirements to help small and rural carriers acquire spectrum licenses .

some of the fcc's efforts to encourage spectrum license ownership for small , rural , or entrepreneurial businesses are in response to congressional mandates .

these and other statutory and regulatory programs may have allowed many small carriers to remain in business even though many others have been absorbed by larger carriers .

as wireless traffic , revenue , and profits migrate to broadband , business models that were effective for voice traffic may no longer be viable , especially for companies that have relied on the regulatory environment to protect their markets .

this change in operating environment may have disproportionately affected the ability of rural wireless carriers , in particular , to compete effectively .

a study of how new technologies might be affecting the competitiveness of small and rural carriers might be useful in reviewing the effectiveness of policies intended to aid them .

the fcc , acting on the statutory authority given to it by congress , has broad regulatory powers for spectrum management .

the fcc was created as part of the communications act of 1934 as the successor to the federal radio commission , which was formed under the radio act of 1927 .

the first statute covering the regulation of airwaves in the united states was the radio act of 1912 , which gave the authority to assign usage rights ( licenses ) to the secretary of the department of commerce and labor .

licensing was necessary in part because , as radio communications grew , it became crucial that frequencies be reserved for specific uses or users , to minimize interference among wireless transmissions .

a key component of spectrum policy is the allocation of bands of frequencies for specific uses and the assignment of licenses within those bands .

allocation refers to the decisions , sometimes reached at the international level , that set aside bands of frequencies for categories of uses or users ; assignment refers to the transfer of spectrum rights to specific license - holders .

the rules set by the fcc for using spectrum licenses ( service rules ) may have been oriented toward the concepts of building and managing networks that were formed in the days of the telephone , favoring traditional telecommunications business plans over those of companies with different business models .

appendix b. spectrum - hungry technologies enabling technologies that are fueling both the demand for mobile broadband services and the need for radio frequency spectrum include long term evolution ( lte ) ; wimax ; fixed wireless ; wifi ; high performance mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets ; and cloud computing .

fixed wireless and wifi are not new technologies but mobile broadband has given them new roles in meeting consumer demand .

future technologies include network - centric technologies , which include opportunistic solutions such as dynamic spectrum access ( dsa ) .

long term evolution ( lte ) lte is the projected development of existing 3g networks built on universal mobile telephone system ( umts ) standards .

like all fourth - generation wireless technologies , lte's core network uses internet protocols .

the network architecture is intended to facilitate mobile broadband deployment with capabilities that can deliver large amounts of data , quickly and efficiently , to large numbers of simultaneous users .

lte will likely be implemented in stages through modifications to networks using frequencies in bands already allocated for commercial wireless networks .

lte might operate on spectrum bands at 700 mhz , 1.7 ghz , 2.3 ghz , 2.5 ghz , and 3.4 ghz .

wimax wimax provides mobile broadband but its earliest applications were for fixed wireless services .

wimax ( worldwide interoperability for microwave access ) refers to both a technology and an industry standard , the work of an industry coalition of network and equipment suppliers .

wimax uses multiple frequencies around the world in ranges from 700 mhz to 66 ghz .

in the united states , available frequencies include 700 mhz , 1.9 ghz , 2.3 ghz , 2.5 ghz , and 2.7 ghz .

the introduction of wimax in the united states is being jointly led by sprint nextel corporation and clearwire corporation .

fixed wireless services fixed wireless services have taken on new importance as a "backhaul" link for 4g .

backhaul is the telecommunications industry term that refers to connections between a core system and a subsidiary node .

an example of backhaul is the link between a network — which could be the internet or an internetwork that can connect to the internet — and the cell tower base stations that route traffic from wireless to wired systems .

two backhaul technologies well - suited for mobile internet access are fiber optic cable and point - to - point microwave radio relay transmissions .

network expansion plans for wimax and lte include microwave links as a cost - effective substitute for fiber optic wire under certain conditions .

radio frequencies available in the united states for microwave technologies of different types start in the 930 mhz band and range as high as the 90 ghz band .

wifi the popularity of wifi is often cited as a successful innovation that was implemented using unlicensed frequencies .

wifi provides wireless internet access for personal computers and handheld devices and is also used by businesses to link computer - based communications within a local area .

links are connected to a high - speed landline either at a business location or through hotspots .

hotspots are typically located in homes or convenient public locations , including airports and café environments such as starbucks .

wifi uses radio frequencies in the free 2.4 ghz and 5.4 / 5.7ghz spectrum bands .

many 3g and 4g wireless devices that operate on licensed frequencies can also use the unlicensed frequencies set aside for wifi .

cloud computing cloud computing is a catch - all term that is popularly used to describe a range of information technology resources that are separately stored for access through a network , including the internet .

an internet search on google , for example , is using cloud computing to access a rich resource of data and information processing .

network connectivity to services is another resource provided by cloud computing .

google inc. , for example , offers word processing , e - mail , and other services through google docs .

although off - site data processing and information storage are not new concepts , cloud computing benefits from the significant advances in network technology and capacity that are hallmarks of the broadband era .

cloud computing can provide economies of scale to businesses of all sizes .

small businesses in particular can benefit from forgoing the costs of installing and managing hardware and software by buying what they need from the cloud .

consumers also can benefit because they no longer need to buy personal computers in order to run complex programs or store large amounts of data .

the convergence of 4g wireless technology — with its smartphones and netbooks — and the growing accessibility of cloud computing to businesses and consumers alike will contribute to the predicted explosive growth in demand for wireless bandwidth .

network - centric technologies the concept of channel management dates to the development of the radio telegraph by guglielmo marconi and his contemporaries .

in the age of the internet , however , channel management is an inefficient way to provide spectrum capacity for mobile broadband .

innovation points to network - centric spectrum management as an effective way to provide spectrum capacity to meet the bandwidth needs of fourth - generation wireless devices .

network - centric technologies enable sharing by organizing the transmission of radio signals along the same principle as the internet .

a transmission moves from origination to destination not along a fixed path but by passing from one available node to the next .

when radios are networked using network - centric technologies , individual communications nodes continue to operate and can compensate for failed links .

the effects of interference are manageable rather than catastrophic .

the network is used to overcome radio limitations .

with channel management techniques currently in use , if a channel's link fails , the radio is cut off .

pooling resources , one of the concepts that powers the internet now , is likely to become the dominant principle for spectrum management in the future .

dynamic spectrum access ( dsa ) , content - based networking , and delay and disruption technology networking , along with cognitive radio , and decision - making software , are examples of technologies that can enable internet - like management of spectrum resources .

dsa is part of the next generation program , or xg , a technology development project sponsored by the strategic technology office of the defense advanced research projects agency ( darpa ) .

the main goals of the program include developing both the enabling technologies and system concepts that dynamically redistribute allocated spectrum .

the department of defense ( dod ) is working to implement network - centric operations ( nco ) through a number of initiatives .

leadership and support to achieve dod goals in the crucial area of spectrum management is provided by the defense spectrum organization ( dso ) created in 2006 within the defense information systems agency ( disa ) .

the dso is leading dod efforts to transform spectrum management in support of future net - centric operations and warfare , and to meet military needs for dynamic , agile , and adaptive access to spectrum .

the dso is guiding dod spectrum management along a path that envisions moving away from stove - piped systems to network - centric spectrum management .

darpa has commenced a program to improve radar and communications capabilities by creating technical solutions to enable spectrum sharing .

the program , shared spectrum access for radar and communications ( ssparc ) , will focus on frequencies between 2 and 4 ghz .

according to darpa , technologies could be applicable to other frequencies as well .

the program seeks to support two types of sharing environments for military radar: one with other military communications networks and one for commercial networks .

