as insurance products , all annuities are regulated at the state level .

some annuity products , however , are also considered securities products and are regulated by the sec .

on june 26 , 2008 , the sec announced a proposed rule regarding indexed annuities .

this rule was finalized on january 8 , 2009 .

specifically , rule 151a removes an annuity contract from the insurance exemption in the securities act of 1933 if "the amounts payable by the insurer under the contract are more likely than not to exceed the amounts guaranteed under the contract. .

the same proposal also added rule 12h - 7 , exempting state - regulated insurance companies from the requirements under the securities exchange act of 1934 to file reports on such annuity contracts .

the effective date of the rule is to be january 12 , 2011 .

the primary impact of this rule change is that many , if not most , of the practices related to the sale of indexed annuities of those companies and individuals selling indexed annuities will be regulated by both the sec and the states .

this rule generated controversy , with several thousand comments to the sec opposing it , including several written by members of congress .

the sec extended its comment period before promulgating its final rule 151a .

in its final rule , the sec stated that the nature of the investment risk posed by indexed annuities means that they should be regulated as securities , rather than solely as insurance products , as long as more than half the time the expected return of the indexed annuities is more likely than not greater than the minimum guaranteed return .

in this case , the sec stated , it is the purchaser of the annuity , rather than the insurance company , who would bear most of the investment risk .

as a result , such purchasers should be entitled to the disclosure requirements , selling restrictions , and antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws , the sec reasoned .

the rule also cited a need to protect investors from fraudulent and abusive practices related to the sale of equity - indexed annuities .

on the day the sec published its final rule 151a , a coalition of insurance companies and insurance trade groups filed a petition for review in the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit challenging the rule .

the petitioners challenging the rule included american equity life insurance co. and the national association of insurance commissioners .

the association of american retired persons provided briefs supporting the sec rule .

the petitioners made two arguments: ( 1 ) the sec unreasonably interpreted the term "annuity contract" not to include fixed indexed annuities ( fias ) , and ( 2 ) the sec did not fulfill its statutory duty under section 2 ( b ) of the 1933 act to consider the effect of the rule upon efficiency , competition , and capital formation .

on july 21 , 2009 , the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia decided the case .

the court , after a thorough analysis of whether the sec's rule 151a was reasonable under the two - step test set forth in chevron u.s.a. inc. v. natural resources defense coun ci l , inc. ( chevron ) , held that the rule's interpretation of "annuity contract" was reasonable and therefore that fias could be treated as securities rather than insurance products .

however , the court also held that the commission did not adequately consider the effect of the rule upon efficiency , competition , and capital formation .

the court therefore remanded the rule for reconsideration and a more complete analysis of the impact of the rule upon competition , efficiency , and capital formation .

h.r .

2733 was introduced in the house on june 4 , 2009 , by representative gregory meeks along with 21 cosponsors .

it was referred to the house financial services committee .

senator benjamin nelson introduced an identical bill , s. 1389 , in the senate on june 25 , 2009 .

it was referred to the senate banking , housing , and urban affairs committee .

neither committee has held hearing or markup on the legislation .

h.r .

2733 / s. 1389 would amend the securities act of 1933 to specify that this act's exemption from the definition of a securities product would include "any insurance or endowment policy or annuity contract or optional annuity contract ( a ) the value of which does not vary according to the performance of a separate account , and ( b ) which satisfies standard nonforfeiture laws or similar requirements. .

the bill would also specifically annul rule 151a as promulgated by the sec .

this bill would have the effect of returning the regulation of indexed annuities to the status quo before the sec's promulgation of rule 151a ; namely , indexed annuities would be exempted from sec regulation and solely subject to regulation by the state insurance regulators .

many opponents of the rule , who would presumably support the legislation , see the extra sec regulatory layer as unnecessarily duplicative of the existing state insurance regulation .

they may point out , for example , that the sec has had authority over variable annuity products for many years , yet consumer complaints regarding these products continue to be heard .

the sec registration requirements that would be annulled by the legislation involve some cost .

because of the increasing cost for those offering indexed annuities , opponents of rule 151a argue , some companies might choose to discontinue these products , or individual agents or brokers might choose to stop selling them .

this could reduce the supply of what some see as an important retirement product .

the sec and supporters of rule 151a , who would presumably oppose the legislation , do not see the additional regulation for the indexed annuity market as duplicative .

rather , they characterize rule 151a as providing necessary protection for consumers .

the sec also argues that because indexed annuities expose consumers to investment risk , these annuities should be treated as securities products , and consumers should have the same protections when they purchase indexed annuities as when they purchase securities .

they agree that this regulation has some costs , and argue the costs are offset by consumer benefits such as enhanced disclosure and standardization of selling practices .

the continued existence of abuses in variable annuities , despite both sec and state regulation , may also be an argument for supporting additional oversight for indexed annuities , which share some similar characteristics .

h.r .

4173 and s. 3217 are broad bills reforming the financial regulatory system in the united states .

as introduced , neither directly addressed sec rule 151a or the issue of sec oversight of annuities .

during floor consideration of s. 3217 , senator tom harkin submitted the language of s. 1389 as an amendment ( s.amdt .

3920 ) , but this amendment was not called up or voted on prior to the senate finishing consideration of s. 3217 .

the senate substituted the amended text of s. 3217 into h.r .

4173 and passed this amended bill on may 20 , 2010 .

during the conference committee reconciling the differences between the house and senate versions of h.r .

4173 , senator harkin offered another annuities amendment , which was ultimately adopted as section 989j of the conference report .

although not specifically addressing sec rule 151a , the section requires the sec to treat certain annuities and insurance contracts as exempt securities .

the requirements for this treatment include two conditions similar to h.r .

2733 / s. 1389 , namely that the value of the contract does not vary according to the performance of a separate account and that non - forfeiture standards are in place .

in addition , section 989j requires that consumer protections meeting or exceeding the requirements of the naic's suitability in annuity transactions model regulation are in place either through state regulations or through implementation by the company itself .

during conference debate on section 989j and after its passage , this language was generally interpreted as returning regulation of fixed index annuities to the status quo prior to sec rule 151a .

because the language does not directly nullify the rule , as h.r .

2733 / s. 1389 would have done , additional regulation or litigation may occur , particularly with regard to the consumer protection requirements .

as of january 2010 , five states and the district of columbia have taken no action with regard to the naic model regulation and 12 states have taken action on the issue but "have not adopted the naic model in a uniform and substantially similar manner" according to the naic .

the house agreed to the h.r .

4173 conference report on june 30 , 2010 by a vote of 237-192 .

the senate agreed to the conference report on july 15 , 2010 by a vote of 60-39 .

president obama signed the bill into law as p.l .

111-203 on july 21 , 2010 .

