this report is an overview of the fy2010 appropriations for the department of homeland security ( dhs ) programs that are designed to provide assistance to state and local governments , and public and private entities , such as ports .

these programs are primarily used by first responders , which include firefighters , emergency medical personnel , emergency managers , and law enforcement officers .

specifically , the appropriations for these programs provide for grants , training , exercises , and other support to states , territories , and tribal and joint jurisdictions to prepare for terrorism and major disasters .

the programs are administered by two different organizations within the federal emergency management agency: the grant programs directorate ( gpd ) and the national preparedness directorate ( npd ) .

this report will be updated to reflect appropriated funding for these programs in fy2010 .

gpd is responsible for administering the state and regional preparedness program and the metropolitan statistical area ( msa ) preparedness program .

npd is responsible for administering the training , measurement , and exercise programs , which fund state and local preparedness exercises , training , technical assistance activities and evaluations .

in fy2010 this account funds the national exercise program ( nep ) , state and local training programs , technical assistance ( ta ) programs , and evaluations and national assessments .

congress appropriated approximately $4.2 billion for dhs programs for state and locality homeland security in fy2010 .

conferees also established limits on the amount fema and grantees can use funding for management and administration costs .

see table 1 below for fy2009 and fy2010 funding levels .

additionally , table 1 provides information on the administration's fy2010 budget request , and the house - and senate - passed versions of the fy2010 dhs appropriations .

even though congress has appropriated funding for fema's grant programs , congress could elect to address three issues when considering appropriating future funds for dhs's state and local assistance programs .

the first issue is the overall reduction in funding for state and local assistance programs , the second issue is the allocation method dhs uses to determine state and local grant awards , and the third issue is the reduction in appropriations for the assistance to firefighters program .

one issue that has been debated annually by congress is the overall amount to be appropriated for these programs .

in fy2010 , the administration proposed to reduce the overall funding for these programs by $909 million .

the house - passed version of h.r .

2892 proposed to reduce the overall funding for these programs in fy2010 by $817 million and the senate - passed version of h.r .

2892 proposed a reduction of $559 million .

with the enactment of the fy2010 dhs appropriations , congress determined to fund fema programs with an approximate appropriation total of $4.2 billion , which was a reduction of $610 million from the amount appropriated in fy2009 .

as stated earlier in this report , this reduction is either the result of the elimination of funding for some grant programs or through the reduction of funding for others .

in the past eight years , congress has appropriated an approximate total of $33 billion for state and local homeland security assistance with an average annual appropriation of $3.7 billion .

in fy2009 congress appropriated a high total of funding of $4.78 billion ; the lowest appropriated amount was $1.43 billion in fy2002 .

some might argue that since over $33 billion has been appropriated and allocated for state and local homeland security , jurisdictions should have met their homeland security needs .

this point of view could lead one to assume that congress should reduce funding to a level that ensures states and localities are able to maintain their homeland security capabilities , but doesn't fund new homeland security projects .

additionally , some may argue that states and localities should assume more responsibility in funding their homeland security projects and the federal government should reduce overall funding .

this , however , may be difficult due to the present state and local financial circumstances .

another argument for maintaining current funding levels is the ever changing terrorism threat and the constant threat of natural and accidental man - made disasters .

as one homeland security threat ( natural or man - made ) is identified and met , other threats develop and require new homeland security capabilities or processes .

some may also argue that funding amounts should be increased due to what appears to be an increase in natural disasters and their costs .

another potential issue of debate is how grant program funding is distributed to states and localities .

specifically , congress may want to continue to address the funding distribution methodologies to ensure states and localities meet their homeland security needs .

this issue has garnered congress' attention the most over the past eight years , with the issue addressed in p.l .

110-53 in january 2007 .

specifically , p.l .

110-53 required that shsgp and uasi allocations be based entirely on risk ; however , shsgp recipients were guaranteed a minimum amount annually through 2012 .

this funding debate has been primarily focused on shsgp and uasi ; funding allocation methodologies for the majority of gpd and npd programs have not been discussed during this debate .

some observers have criticized the guaranteed minimum allocation for shsgp and the continued use of population as a key variable for other grant program distribution methodologies ( for such grant programs as emergency management performance grants and citizen corps programs ) .

for example , the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states ( 9 / 11 commission ) recommended that all homeland security assistance be allocated based only on risk .

since p.l .

110-53 required dhs to guarantee a minimum amount of shsgp funding to states , it could be argued that the law did not meet the 9 / 11 commission recommendation .

on the other hand , some might contend that the statue requires funds to be allocated on the basis of risk but with a floor that provides a guaranteed minimum .

while the 9 / 11 commission criticized the allocation of federal homeland security assistance and recommended that the distribution not "remain a program for general revenue sharing," commissioners acknowledged that "every state and city needs to have some minimum infrastructure for emergency response. .

the 9 / 11 commission also recommended that state and local homeland security assistance should "supplement state and local resources based on the risks or vulnerabilities that merit additional support. .

in a policy document published prior to his inauguration , president obama stated , in what arguably is in agreement with the 9 / 11 commission , that homeland security assistance should be based solely on risk .

due to this criticism , congress may wish to consider conducting oversight hearings on how dhs allocates homeland security funding to jurisdictions .

instead of guaranteed minimums , congress could require that dhs allocate funding based solely on risk .

this option , however , might result in some jurisdictions receiving no or limited allocations .

arguably , a risk assessment process used to allocate homeland security assistance would determine that every state and locality has some risk , whether terrorism or natural disaster related , and needs some amount of funding .

such a process , however , would require dhs to evaluate state and local capabilities ( currently dhs relies primarily on grant recipient self evaluations ) , vulnerabilities , and risk in a manner that accurately reflects the nation's current homeland security environment .

for fy2010 , the administration proposed $170 million for assistance to firefighter grants ( afg ) , a 70% decrease from the fy2009 level , and $420 million for safer ( staffing for adequate fire and emergency response firefighters ) , double the amount appropriated in fy2009 .

the total amount requested for firefighter assistance ( afg and safer ) was $590 million , a 24% decrease from fy2009 .

the fy2010 budget proposal stated that the firefighter assistance grant process will give priority to applications that enhance capabilities for terrorism response and other major incidents .

afg grants are used primarily for firefighting equipment , while safer grants are used for hiring ( by career departments ) and recruitment / retention ( by volunteer departments ) .

the $170 million request for afg would have been the lowest level for the program since fy2001 , the program's initial year .

on the other hand , the proposed doubling of the safer budget to $420 million would have been the highest level for this program since its inception .

in evaluating the budget proposal , congress may assess whether there is an appropriate balance between funding for firefighter equipment and hiring / recruitment .

house - passed h.r .

2892 provided $800 million for firefighter assistance , including $390 million for afg and $420 million for safer .

although the safer level matches the administration's request , the afg level is more than twice what the administration proposed .

according to the house committee report , the administration's request of $170 million for afg "is woefully inadequate given the vast needs of fire departments across the nation for equipment. .

the committee directed fema to continue granting funds to local fire departments , include the united states fire administration in the grant decision process , and maintain an all - hazard focus while granting eligibility for activities such as wellness .

senate - passed h.r .

2892 provided $810 million for firefighter assistance , including $390 million for afg and $420 million for safer .

the committee directed dhs to continue funding applications according to local priorities and priorities established by the united states fire administration , and to continue direct funding to fire departments through the peer review process .

p.l .

111-83 provided $390 million for afg and $420 million for safer , identical to the levels in both the house and senate - passed bills .

the conference agreement directed fema to continue the present practice of funding applications according to local priorities and those established by the usfa , to maintain an all - hazards focus , to grant funds for eligible activities in accordance with the authorizing statute , and to continue the current grant application and review process as specified in the house report .

