title iii of the congressional budget act of 1974 ( titles i - ix of p.l .

93-344 , 2 u.s.c .

601-661 ) ( "the budget act" ) , as amended , provides for the adoption of an annual concurrent resolution on the budget by congress .

the budget resolution establishes the levels of revenues , spending , the surplus or deficit , and the public debt for each year covering the upcoming fiscal year and at least four additional years ( "out - years" ) to be enacted through subsequent legislation .

this report does not discuss the enforcement of those levels or committee allocations .

this report will outline the most significant provisions contained within the budget act that affect the consideration and amending of budget resolutions in the senate .

with only a few exceptions , these budget act provisions are enforced by points of order .

because points of order are not self - enforcing ( not automatically triggered ) , enforcement requires that a senator raise a point of order against the consideration of the budget resolution or an amendment .

in the event that no point of order is raised , the budget resolution or amendment is presumed to be within the limits prescribed by the budget act .

after a senator raises a budget act point of order against an amendment , the senator offering the amendment may make a motion to waive the point of order .

most budget act points of order may be waived by a vote of at least three - fifths of all senators duly chosen and sworn ( 60 votes if there are no vacancies ) .

if three - fifths of senators vote to adopt the motion to waive the point of order , the senate can then hold a vote on the amendment itself .

if three - fifths of senators do not vote in favor of the motion to waive the point of order , the point of order is sustained and the amendment falls .

few budget act points of order are raised during the consideration of budget resolutions , and , of those , even fewer are waived .

consideration of a budget resolution is privileged , meaning the motion for the senate to proceed to consideration of a budget resolution is nondebatable .

for most other measures , a motion to proceed to their consideration is debatable .

section 301 ( a ) of the budget act prescribes the content required for this the budget resolution , and is discussed below .

section 305 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the budget act limits total debate time in the senate on budget resolutions to 50 hours .

it provides that the majority and minority leaders or their designees , normally the chair and ranking member of the budget committee , manage the time .

it further specifies that the 50 hours of debate is equally divided and controlled so that both the majority and minority managers have 25 hours each , and they in turn can yield time to other senators .

debate , debatable motions , appeals , and amendments are included in the 50 hours .

time used for quorum calls is counted toward the 50 hours , but roll call votes are not .

because the limit is specifically applied to debate , consideration may sometimes extend beyond the 50-hour limit .

after the 50 hours expires ( or remaining time is yielded back ) , senators may continue to consider the budget resolution and offer further amendments , motions , and appeals , but with no time provided for debate .

in practice , the senate often uses unanimous consent agreements to conduct business in a way divergent from the provisions of 305 ( b ) .

for example , in lieu of recognizing the real time running on the clock , the senate has sometimes agreed by unanimous consent at the end of a day to consider a specific amount of time on the resolution as remaining , regardless of the actual amount of time used to that point .

similarly , the senate may choose a specific day and time at which the debate time on the budget resolution will be deemed expired .

section 305 ( b ) ( 3 ) also provides that , after opening statements , up to four hours may be designated for senate debate on economic goals and policies .

although the senate does not normally explicitly reserve time for debating economic goals and policies during debate on the budget resolution , senators may informally discuss economic goals and policies before the resolution is even brought to the floor , often during a period of morning business in the days leading up to the beginning of initial consideration , or senators offer commentary during the leaders' time for opening statements .

sometimes the senate agrees through unanimous consent to postpone the offering of amendments , thereby effectively reserving a block of time for general debate .

for example , a unanimous consent agreement might provide that , once the resolution is brought up , amendments are not in order until the following day's session , or until after an afternoon recess .

section 301 ( a ) of the budget act specifies that the budget resolution must contain the following elements for the upcoming fiscal year ( "budget year" ) and at least the next four out - years: totals of new budget authority and outlays , total federal revenues , the budget surplus or deficit , new budget authority and outlays for each major functional category , and the public debt .

senate enforcement also requires figures for outlays and revenues under the old - age , survivors , and disability insurance program established under the social security act .

the budget act further specifies that neither the outlays nor the revenues from the social security program should be included in the budget resolution's overall surplus or deficit totals .

section 301 ( b ) provides for other elements that may be included in the budget resolution , such as reconciliation instructions , or establishing procedures for adjusting committee allocations .

section 301 ( b ) ( 4 ) is known as the "elastic clause" and permits the inclusion of other matters or procedures deemed appropriate to carry out the budget act .

section 301 ( g ) provides that any reconciliation instructions included in a budget resolution must not affect social security .

section 305 ( b ) ( 2 ) of the budget act provides for a point of order against non - germane amendments .

this has been the most common point of order raised against budget resolution amendments .

in fact , this provision accounts for all sustained budget act points of order during budget resolution consideration in the past 10 years .

determining whether an amendment is "germane" can prove difficult , and is decided on a case - by - case basis .

a non - germane amendment generally is one that would introduce new subject matter not present in the underlying resolution .

the primary factor in determining germaneness is the strength of the relationship between the amendment's subject and the text of the underlying resolution .

section 305 ( b ) ( 6 ) of the budget act , unlike most budget act provisions that restrict the type or form or time of an amendment , instead provides that , notwithstanding any other rule of limitation on the amending process , it is in order to offer an amendment for the purpose of ensuring mathematical consistency .

this rule applies even when the amendment might otherwise be out of order — for example , offering an amendment that would re - amend already amended text would normally be out of order , but should be held in order if its purpose is to ensure mathematical consistency .

additionally , if a complete substitute to a budget resolution is adopted , amendments that ensure mathematical consistency that were previously adopted are still in order .

section 305 ( d ) further provides that it is out of order for the senate to vote on agreeing to a budget resolution unless the figures contained in it are mathematically consistent .

this rule can be distinguished from section 301 ( g ) — "economic assumptions" refers to the different methods that can be utilized to calculate budget projections , but "mathematical consistency" refers only to whether the actual computation of figures is mathematically sound .

