a primary mission of the department of homeland security ( dhs , department ) is to "prevent terrorist attacks within the united states , reduce the vulnerability of the united states to terrorism , and minimize the damage , and assist in the recovery from terrorist attacks that do occur in the united states .

the current organization of the department is displayed at figure 1 .

to support this mission , dhs has had an intelligence component since its inception in 2003 .

the homeland security act of 2002 , assigned the original dhs intelligence component — the directorate of information analysis and infrastructure protection — with responsibility to receive , analyze , and integrate law enforcement and intelligence information in order to — " ( a ) identify and assess the nature and scope of terrorist threats to the homeland ; ( b ) detect and identify threats of terrorism against the united states ; and ( c ) understand such threats in light of actual and potential vulnerabilities of the homeland. .

congress also made information sharing a top priority of the new dhs intelligence organization , requiring it "to disseminate , as appropriate , information analyzed by the department within the department , to other agencies of the federal government with responsibilities related to homeland security , and to agencies of state and local government and private sector entities , with such responsibilities in order to assist in the deterrence , prevention , preemption of , or response to , terrorist attacks against the united states. .

following the release of the 9 / 11 commission report in 2004 , which identified a breakdown in information sharing as a key factor contributing to the failure to prevent the september 11 , 2001 attacks , congress underscored the importance it attached to information sharing at all levels of government .

the intelligence reform and terrorism prevention act of 2004 required the president to "create an information sharing environment for the sharing of terrorism information in a manner consistent with national security and with applicable legal standards relating to privacy and civil liberties," and "to designate an individual as the program manager responsible for information sharing across the federal government. .

in july 2005 , following "a systematic evaluation of the department's operations , policies and structures" ( commonly called the second stage review or "2sr" ) , former secretary of homeland security , michael chertoff , initiated a major reorganization of dhs .

in his remarks describing the reorganization , he noted that "…intelligence lies at the heart of everything that we do. .

in an effort to improve how dhs manages its intelligence and information sharing responsibilities , he established a strengthened office of intelligence and analysis ( i&a ) and made the assistant secretary for information analysis ( now under secretary for intelligence and analysis ) the chief intelligence officer ( cint ) for the department .

he also tasked i&a with ensuring that intelligence is coordinated , fused , and analyzed within the department to provide a common operational picture ; provide a primary connection between dhs and the intelligence community ( ic ) as a whole ; and to act as a primary source of information for state , local and private sector partners .

in testimony to a house of representatives hearing shortly after his selection , the first dhs cint , stated that "[m]y goal and my role as chief intelligence officer is to see that homeland security intelligence , a blend of traditional and nontraditional intelligence that produces unique and actionable insights , takes its place along the other kinds of intelligence as an indispensable tool for securing the nation .

he also set five priorities: improving the quality of intelligence analysis across the department ; integrating the dhs ie ; strengthening support to state , local , and tribal authorities and the private sector ; ensuring that dhs ie takes its place in the ic ; and solidifying the relationship with the congress ; and improving transparency and responsiveness .

since the 2sr reorganization , congress imposed additional requirements on dhs through the implementing recommendations of the 9 / 11 commission act of 2007: integrate information and standardize the format of intelligence products produced within dhs and its components .

establish department - wide procedures for review and analysis of information provided by state , local , tribal , and private sector elements ; integrate that information into dhs intelligence products , and disseminate to federal partners within the intelligence community .

evaluate how dhs components are utilizing homeland security information and participating in the information sharing environment .

establish a comprehensive information technology network architecture to connect various dhs elements and promote information sharing .

establish a dhs state , local , and regional fusion center initiative to establish partnerships with state , local , and regional fusion centers .

coordinate and oversee the creation of an interagency threat assessment and coordination group that will bring state , local , and tribal law enforcement and intelligence analysts "to work in the national counterterrorism center ( nctc ) with federal intelligence analysts for the purpose of integrating , analyzing and assisting in the dissemination of federally - coordinated information…. .

the dhs ie consists of those elements within dhs that have an intelligence mission .

these include i&a , the homeland infrastructure threat and risk analysis center , and the intelligence division of the office of operations coordination and planning ( all located at the dhs headquarters ) , and the intelligence elements of six operational components: u.s. customs and border protection ( cbp ) , u.s. immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) , u.s .

citizenship and immigration services ( uscis ) , transportation security administration ( tsa ) , u.s. coast guard ( uscg ) , and u.s. secret service ( usss ) .

the department and uscg are statutory members of the ic .

on february 11 , 2010 , the senate confirmed president obama's selection of caryn wagner to serve as under secretary for intelligence and analysis .

as she assumes responsibility for the dhs ie , congress will likely be interested in the progress of integration of the department's intelligence components and the quality and relevance of the intelligence dhs ie produces for front line law enforcement and security officials who are responsible for protecting america and its people .

also in february , dhs published its first quadrennial homeland security review ( qhsr ) , a comprehensive assessment outlining its long - term strategy and priorities for homeland security and guidance on the department's programs , assets , capabilities , budget , policies , and authorities .

the next step in the department's qhsr process is to conduct a "bottom - up review" to systematically link strategy to program to budget .

the results of that review will be particularly important as congress considers an authorization bill for dhs .

some have argued that there is a broad homeland security intelligence enterprise that encompasses not only the dhs ie , but other organizations at the federal , state , local , tribal , and private sector levels that collect and analyze homeland security information and disseminate intelligence products .

this report will focus on the dhs ie both at headquarters and within the components ; how it is organized ; and how it supports key departmental activities to include homeland security analysis and threat warning , border security , critical infrastructure protection , and support to and the sharing of information with state , local , tribal , and private sector partners .

it will also discuss oversight challenges and options for congress to consider on these issues .

cbp is the agency responsible for securing the nation's borders at and between ports of entry ( poe ) .

it was established in 2003 , as a result of the homeland security act of 2002 , consolidating the inspection and patrol functions of the legacy u.s. customs service , the immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) , the u.s. border patrol ( bp ) , and the animal and plant health inspection service ( aphis ) .

cbp's primary mission is to prevent the entry of terrorists and the instruments of terrorism into the united states .

but it also has responsibility to prevent illegal immigration ; regulate and facilitate international trade ; collect import duties ; enforce u.s. trade and drug laws ; and protect americans and u.s. agricultural and economic interests by preventing the importation of harmful pests , diseases , and contaminated , diseased , infested , or adulterated agricultural and food products .

cbp accomplishes its various missions by inspecting persons and goods to determine if they are authorized to enter the united states .

cbp officers and border patrol agents intercept illegal narcotics , firearms , counterfeit merchandise , and other types of contraband .

they also interdict unauthorized aliens and enforce more than 400 laws and regulations at the border .

ice is the largest investigative organization within dhs .

it was established in 2003 and incorporated into dhs by consolidating the investigative elements of the former u.s. customs service and immigration and naturalization service ( ins ) and by transferring the federal protective service from the general services administration ( gsa ) .

ice's mission is to enforce trade and immigration laws through the investigation of activities , persons and events that may pose a threat to the safety or security of the united states and its people .

oi also investigates illegal trafficking in weapons ( including weapons of mass destruction ) , the smuggling of narcotics and other contraband , human smuggling and trafficking , money laundering and other financial crimes , fraudulent trade practices , identity and benefit fraud , child pornography , child sex tourism , and health and public safety dangers .

it has four operational divisions: office of investigations ( oi ) .

oi is responsible for investigating a range of issues that may threaten national security .

oi uses its legal authority to investigate issues such as immigration crime , human rights violations , and human smuggling ; narcotics , weapons and other types of smuggling ; and financial crimes , cybercrime , and export enforcement issues .

of note , ice special agents are the largest non - fbi component of the joint terrorism task forces ( jttf ) .

detention and removal operations ( dro ) .

dro is the primary enforcement arm within ice for the identification , apprehension and removal of illegal aliens from the united states .

office of international affairs ( oia ) .

with 63 offices in 44 countries , oia develops partnerships with foreign governments to advance the homeland security mission .

office of intelligence , discussed below .

as the agency that oversees lawful immigration to the united states , uscis establishes immigration services , policies and priorities to preserve america's legacy as a nation of immigrants while ensuring that no one is admitted who is a threat to public safety .

the homeland security act of 2002 established uscis as a component of dhs in 2003 and transferred to the new agency the immigration and citizenship adjudication functions of the former ins .

the three principal immigrant service activities of uscis are the adjudication of petitions for immigration benefits ; the adjudication of naturalization petitions from lawful permanent residents desiring to become u.s. citizens ; and the consideration of refugee and asylum claims , and related humanitarian and international concerns .

uscis is not a law enforcement agency nor a member of the ic and the vast majority of its funding is derived from fees collected from immigration benefit applicants and petitioners .

thus its activities are limited to adjudication of immigration benefits , which includes conducting background checks on the individuals and organizations who submit applications and petitions , as well as the intended beneficiaries .

as part of that process , uscis collects biometrics , in the form of digital photographs and fingerprints .

on average each day , uscis processes 30,000 applications for immigration benefits , issues 7,300 permanent resident cards ( green cards ) , adjudicates 400 refugee applications , and naturalizes 3,400 new civilian citizens and 30 new citizens who are member of the u.s. armed forces .

uscis also has the authority to detect and combat immigration fraud .

in a conference report to the fy2005 department of homeland security appropriations act , congress recognized uscis as the responsible agency for developing , implementing , directing , and overseeing the joint uscis - ice anti - fraud initiative and conducting law enforcement / background checks on every applicant , beneficiary , and petitioner prior to granting any immigration benefits .

individuals and organizations intent on harming the united states have become increasingly sophisticated in their methods of gaining entry into the country .

the nexus between immigration benefit fraud and threats to national security was illustrated in the 1993 world trade center bombing when the plot's mastermind , mahmud abouhalima , received a residency visa as an "agricultural worker" despite the fact that he was employed as a new york city cab driver .

in 2004 , uscis established the office of fraud detection and national security ( fdns ) .

in january 2010 , fdns was promoted to a directorate to reflect the priority uscis places on its anti - fraud and national security responsibilities and to place greater emphasis on them .

fdns consists of four branches that collectively are responsible for detecting , pursuing , and deterring fraud ; ensuring background checks are conducted on all persons seeking benefits before granting benefits ; identifying systemic vulnerabilities and other weaknesses that compromise the integrity of the legal immigration system ; and serving as uscis' primary conduit to and from law enforcement and intelligence agencies .

in november 2001 , congress established tsa through the aviation and transportation security act of 2001 ( atsa ) .

the agency was originally made part of the department of transportation , but was transferred to dhs pursuant to the homeland security act when the department was established in march 2003 .

tsa is most commonly known for its aviation security role , particularly the security screening of airline passengers and their baggage .

however , atsa assigned the assistant secretary for tsa responsibility for security in all modes of transportation – aviation , maritime , mass transit , highway and motor carrier , freight rail , and pipeline .

these modes form a transportation network that is central to the american economy .

that network connects cities , towns , and farms , and moves millions of people and millions of tons of goods .

the majority of transportation infrastructure in the united states is privately - owned .

the remainder is owned and operated by state , local , or regional entities .

the size of the transportation sector in the united states makes it impossible for the federal government to provide security for all modes .

the exception is the commercial aviation sector .

but , tsa does provide threat and other intelligence information to support security programs for each sector .

in addition , tsa collaborates with industry and government operators and other stakeholders to develop strategies , policies , and programs to reduce security risks and vulnerabilities within each mode .

finally , it seeks to enhance capabilities to detect , deter , and prevent terrorist attacks and respond to and recover from attacks and security incidents , should they occur .

tsa uses a threat - based , risk management approach to the security task .

according to former tsa administrator kip hawley: "it begins with intelligence gathered by multiple u.s. agencies that is analyzed , shared , and applied. .

intelligence is a key driver in determining the level of security appropriate for the threat environment .

as a nation of travelers and traders , america has a strategic interest in the maritime domain .

the oceans bordering north america are both a barrier and a highway , separating the united states from potential enemies , connecting it to allies , and providing a venue for commerce and trade .

due to its complex nature and immense size , the maritime domain is recognized as particularly susceptible to exploitation and disruption by individuals , organizations , and states .

the uscg is a military , multi - mission , maritime service that is the "principal federal agency responsible for safety , security , and stewardship within the maritime domain .

these missions are performed in any maritime region where those interests may be at risk , including international waters and america's coasts , ports , and inland waterways .

in march 2003 , pursuant to the homeland security act , the uscg was transferred from the department of transportation to dhs .

the uscg has several diverse missions — national defense , homeland security , maritime safety , and environmental and natural resources stewardship .

to accomplish these missions , the uscg has authorities unique within the federal government .

it is both an armed service and the nation's primary maritime law enforcement agency .

although the usss is best known for its responsibility to protect the president and vice president of the united states and visiting foreign heads of state and government , it was first established in 1865 as a law enforcement agency with a mandate to investigate the counterfeiting of u.s. currency .

its protective responsibilities began in 1901 following the assassination of president mckinley and were codified by congress in 1906 .

the usss remained a distinct organization within the department of the treasury until its transfer to dhs effective march 1 , 2003 , pursuant to the homeland security act of 2002 .

today , in addition to its protective service mission , the usss is responsible for maintaining the integrity of the nation's financial infrastructure and payment systems .

this was historically accomplished through the enforcement of counterfeiting statutes , but since 1984 , its investigative responsibilities have expanded to include crimes that involve financial institution fraud , computer and telecommunications fraud , false identification documents , access device fraud , advance fee fraud , electronic funds transfers , and certain money laundering crimes .

managing competing claims for intelligence support is one of the biggest challenge facing the dhs ie .

former under secretary allen stressed the importance of supporting the department itself — both headquarters and operational components — noting that "... keeping dangerous people and dangerous items from crossing our air , land , and sea borders and protecting our critical infrastructures ... requires having reliable , real - time information and intelligence to allow the department to identify and characterize threats uniformly , support security countermeasures , and achieve unity of effort in the response. .

but , the dhs ie also has responsibilities to support the president , the secretary , and other national leaders with a strategic perspective on a range of "all hazards" homeland security issues including terrorism threats .

state , local , and tribal , law enforcement and security officials , as well as the operators of the nation's critical infrastructure , are also important customers .

they require timely and actionable intelligence through usable products in order to prepare for and respond to a variety of threats .

helping the department achieve the right balance among these competing claims on its intelligence resources and capabilities is a challenging task for congress .

the following are options the congress may wish to consider in exercising its oversight responsibility .

in 2009 , secretary napolitano directed i&a to outline a department - wide initiative to strengthen the baseline capabilities and analytic capacity of state and major urban area fusion centers .

as a result , a new program office for the fusion center program , the jfc pmo , will be established .

dhs intends for the office to be managed on a day - to - day basis by i&a , but all relevant dhs components will be involved to include staff from those components .

among the intended responsibilities of the new jfc pmo are: lead a unified department - wide effort to develop and implement survey tools to ensure state , local and tribal customers are provided the opportunities to define and identify the types of homeland security - related information they need , and the format in which they need it .

develop mechanisms , in coordination with federal , state , local , tribal , and territorial authorities , to improve the capability of fusion centers to gather , assess , analyze , and share locally generated and national information and intelligence , in order to provide complete pictures of regional and national threats and trends .

the secretary requested a recommendation by march 2010 on the feasibility and optimal structure and resources of the jfc - pmo .

under secretary wagner has testified that the department is also considering how a pending jfc - pmo will align with the white house's direction that dhs , in coordination with the pm - ise , be the lead agency in establishing a national fusion center program office .

the establishment and operation of these offices will be of interest to congress .

law enforcement officers have praised fusion centers as a vital resource for information sharing and coordination while at the same time expressing great concern about the sustainment of these centers through consistent funding .

currently , funds from the state homeland security grant program ( shsgp ) and urban area security initiative ( uasi ) are used to support state and local fusion centers .

these grant programs are managed within dhs by the federal emergency management agency ( fema ) grant programs directorate ( gpd ) .

however , the intelligence and information sharing activities that these funds support are operationally managed by dhs i&a .

some contend this disconnect between fund administration and implementation is problematic .

congress may wish to consider alternative funding arrangements for fusion centers .

one option is to designate a percentage of shsgp and uasi funds for fusion centers .

another is to authorize and appropriate funding for a new grant program for fusion centers .

the success of the fusion center program is dependent on the infrastructure that enables state and local fusion centers to have access to each other's information as well as to the appropriate federal databases .

the fusion center program and the nationwide suspicious activity report initiative ( nsi ) rely on the concept of shared space architecture , where the fusion centers replicate data from their systems to an external server under their control , making the decision on what to share totally under their control .

a secure portal is then created that allows simultaneous searching of all such databases so that fusion centers will be able to aggregate any relevant information that exists throughout the national fusion center network .

the nsi project team has arranged for secure access to this portal on one of three existing networks — law enforcement online , regional information sharing services , or hsin .

each fusion center will require a server and software to translate data from whatever case management or intelligence system is in place to a separate database on the server .

achieving information sharing objectives also requires that partners establish wide - scale electronic trust between the caretakers of sensitive information and those who need and are authorized to use that information .

fusion centers must , therefore , acquire a federated capability for identity and privilege management that securely communicates a user's roles , rights , and privileges to ensure network security and privacy protections .

the two elements of this are identification / authentication — the identity of end users and how they were authenticated ; and privilege management — the certifications , clearances , job functions , and organizational affiliations associated with end users that serve as the basis for authorization decisions .

congress may wish to consider providing funding and leadership to provide this infrastructure capability to all 72 fusion centers .

in february 2010 , dhs produced its first quadrennial homeland security review ( qhsr ) , a comprehensive assessment outlining its long - term strategy and priorities for homeland security and guidance on the department's programs , assets , capabilities , budget , policies , and authorities .

the qhsr report outlines the nation's homeland security missions , which it describes as enterprise - wide ( i.e. , not limited to dhs ) : mission 1 .

preventing terrorism and enhancing security  mission 2: securing and managing our borders mission 3 , enforcing and administering our immigration laws  mission 4:  safeguarding and securing cyberspace   mission 5:  ensuring resilience to disasters   the report also calls for the maturing and s trengthening of the homeland security enterprise by: establishing a comprehensive system for building and sharing awareness of risks and threats .

developing and implementing a methodology to conduct national - level homeland security risk assessments .

enhancing critical tools and institutionalizing arrangements for timely access and effective sharing of information and analysis .

establishing a robust approach to identify verification that safeguards individual privacy and civil rights .

ensuring shared situational awareness in the air , land and maritime domains .

using and integrating counterintelligence in all aspects of homeland security to thwart attacks against the homeland .

promoting a common understanding of security as a shared responsibility .

fostering communities that have information , capabilities , and resources to prevent threats , respond to disruptions , and ensure their own well - being .

fostering a broad national culture of cooperation and mutual aid .

ensuring scientifically informed analysis and decisions are coupled to innovative and effective technological solutions .

a review of the qhsr report and the forthcoming "bottom - up review" will give congress an opportunity to review the department's latest judgments about the homeland security - related risks facing the country and what resources should be committed to address those risks .

the results of that review will be particularly important as congress considers an authorization bill for dhs .

former secretary chertoff has said that "dhs must base its work on priorities that are driven by risk. .

dhs has defined "risk" as the product of three variables , threat ( the likelihood of an attack occurring ) , vulnerability ( the relative exposure to an attack ) , and consequence ( the expected impact of an attack ) .

the dhs ie identifies , measures , and monitors the threat variable in the dhs risk equation .

the role of the dhs ie in risk management decision making at the department is another area congress may wish to explore .

a recent study by the homeland security institute noted that dhs risk assessments require threat inputs but generating useful threat judgments is challenging .

it suggested ways to improve risk and intelligence analyst collaboration to better support dhs decision making .

terrorism remains the paramount concern to the department .

the latest national intelligence estimate on the terrorist threat to the united states , concludes that "al qa'ida is and will remain the most serious terrorist threat to the homeland ... has protected or regenerated key elements of its homeland attack capability ... and that in its homeland plotting is likely to continue to focus on prominent political , economic , and infrastructure targets with the goal of producing mass casualties , visually dramatic destruction , significant economic aftershocks , and / or fear among the u.s .

population. .

following the hijacking of aircraft , that were then flown into the world trade center and the pentagon with devastating effects , a significant portion of homeland security resources in the united states were understandably devoted to aviation security — an amount proportionally larger than that of other transportation modes or critical infrastructure .

the 2006 transatlantic airlines plot and the christmas day 2010 attempted bombing of northwest flight 253 , demonstrate that the threat to commercial aviation remains but that the tactics employed have evolved .

since 9 / 11 , al - qa'ida and other terrorist groups with anti - western and anti - american ideologies have committed several other deadly terrorist attacks , including: bali , 2002 .

the islamist group jemaah islamiyah bombed nightclubs killing 202 .

madrid , 2004 .

a muslim , al - qa'ida - inspired terrorist cell bombed commuter trains killing 190 and injuring over 1,000 .

london , 2005 .

british islamist extremists bombed city buses killing 52 and injuring over 700 .

mumbai , 2008 .

a team from the militant group lashkar - e - taiba conducted a shooting and bombing rampage at two hotels , a railway station , hospital , jewish center , cafe , and cinema .

164 were killed .

all of these attacks involved mass casualties .

all resulted in visually dramatic destruction .

but , none of them were committed against civil aviation .

recognizing that some elements of the nation's critical infrastructure are defended in depth against attack , while others are not , a question of abiding interest is whether terrorists might adapt by choosing to attack softer targets in the homeland , such as nightclubs , commuter trains , buses , or other places where large numbers of americans congregate .

in addition , in a period of less than one year ( may 2009-march 2010 ) , there were 12 "homegrown" jihadist - inspired terrorist attacks and plots ( two attacks and 10 plots ) by american citizens or lawful permanent residents of the united states .

by comparison , in over seven years from the 9 / 11 attacks through may 2009 , there was an annual average of only two such plots , none of which resulted in attacks .

this has not gone unnoticed by many who are concerned that domestic radicalization , previously viewed as a problem largely confined to europe , is a bigger threat in the united states than originally believed .

and what about methods of attack not yet imagined ? .

the australian scholar mervyn bendle asks us to consider one such scenario .

the recent catastrophic bushfires in his own country "alert us to the extreme danger posed by pyroterrorism , especially as global terrorist organizations continue to modify their strategies in the face of increasingly effective counterterrorism measures employed against them .

pyroterrorism can do great harm to valuable natural resources and infrastructure ; destabilise and degrade regional economies ; kill , maim , terrorise , and radically reduce the quality of life of large populations of people ; and even destabilise social and political systems. .

bendle argues that this is not an "alarmist , eccentric , or "islamophobic" notion. .

his study documents that pyroterrorism involvement has been suspected or established in greece , israel , spain , and estonia .

moreover , in the late 1990's , the earth liberation front set fire to various forests , commercial and industrial buildings in the united states including the u.s. forest service headquarters in oregon .

pyroterrorism is just one example of many alternative hypotheses that homeland security risk managers may wish to consider in order to avoid what was famously described in the 9 / 11 commission report as "a failure of imagination. .

threat assessment is a critical component of the risk equation .

risk , in turn , is an important element of the qhsr which will ultimately inform how the department proposes to allocate resources in the future based on the evolving threat environment .

therefore , congress may wish to explore: how i&a will support the next step in the department's qhsr process , the top - to - bottom review that is intended to link strategy to program to budget .

how intelligence analysis and assessments are used within the department to determine priorities for funding of new or existing homeland security programs .

how intelligence analyses and assessments have led to increased or decreased funding for existing programs .

the framework that dhs will establish for enhanced collaboration among risk and intelligence analysts .

