internet search engine operators such as google , microsoft , and yahoo generate significant revenue by selling words or phrases ( referred to as "keywords" ) that trigger paid advertisements that appear on their search result web pages .

there has been much litigation over the past five years concerning the sale or purchase of trademarks as keywords to trigger sponsored search engine results .

federal courts have struggled to determine whether such trademark usage constitutes actionable trademark infringement .

this report first provides a brief general overview of trademark law and then reviews court opinions in this rapidly changing area of law .

a "trademark" is any word , name , symbol , or device or any combination thereof adopted and used by a manufacturer or merchant ( 1 ) to indicate the source of his or her goods or services and ( 2 ) to identify and distinguish the goods or services from those offered by others .

the principal federal statute governing trademarks is the trademark act of 1946 ( conventionally known as the lanham act ) .

unlike the other major branches of intellectual property law ( copyright and patent ) , the constitutional basis for federal trademark law is not the intellectual property ( ip ) clause of the u.s. constitution , but rather the commerce clause .

under the lanham act , a merchant or manufacturer that wants to use a particular word or symbol ( referred to as a "mark" in trademark law parlance ) in association with a product or service must register the mark with the u.s. patent and trademark office to obtain federal protection for the mark .

the lanham act provides a trademark owner with the right to prevent business competitors from using that mark .

the purpose and benefits of trademark law have been described by the u.s. supreme court as follows: in principle , trademark law , by preventing others from copying a source - identifying mark , reduces the customer's costs of shopping and making purchasing decisions ... for it quickly and easily assures a potential customer that this item – the item with this mark – is made by the same producer as other similarly marked items that he or she liked ( or disliked ) in the past .

at the same time , the law helps assure a producer that it ( and not an imitating competitor ) will reap the financial , reputation - related rewards associated with a desirable product .

the law thereby encourages the production of quality products ... and simultaneously discourages those who hope to sell inferior products by capitalizing on a consumer's inability quickly to evaluate the quality of an item offered for sale .

internet search engines such as google , yahoo , or microsoft's bing generate significant revenue from the sale of keywords to trigger online advertisements that appear on search result pages .

these advertisements typically relate to search terms entered by internet users and appear as "banner" advertisements on the top of the web page or "sponsored links" that are displayed on the right column of a web page or before relevant search results ; such web ads , if clicked on , direct the user to the website of the advertiser .

for example , general electric ( ge ) could purchase the word "refrigerator" from google in order to have a "sponsored link" advertisement for ge's refrigerators appear next to relevant search results .

someone interested in refrigerators who searches for that generic , descriptive word that has been purchased by ge as a keyword would then be presented with a sponsored advertisement that links to ge's website concerning its refrigerators .

if whirlpool or frigidaire also wanted to purchase the keyword "refrigerator" from google , the search engine could follow a priority of request system or conduct an auction for the three refrigerator makers to bid on the term .

while the sale of a descriptive word such as "refrigerator" by internet search engines does not raise trademark concerns , the sale of a competitor's brand name or trademark as a keyword may be actionable as a violation of federal trademark law .

for example , google or yahoo could choose to sell the trademark name "whirlpool" to ge , such that an advertisement for ge appliances would appear as a "sponsored link" on the computer screen of a person who searched for "whirlpool. .

in response , whirlpool may file a trademark infringement lawsuit against either the search engine ( as the seller of its trademark ) or ge ( as the purchaser ) , complaining that such unauthorized use of its trademark may create a likelihood of consumer confusion as to whether ge's advertisement is in some manner sponsored by , endorsed by , approved by , or affiliated with whirlpool .

the prospects of whirlpool winning such a lawsuit to restrain the practice or obtain damages are unclear , however , due to a lack of case law that has specifically addressed the "likelihood of confusion" element of the trademark infringement claim .

while trademark owners may be unhappy that their competitors' advertisements appear in an internet search for their trademarked names , they also may be upset over having to pay more to secure their own trademarks as keywords in an auction system .

however , some observers claim that an internet search engine's practice of selling trademarks as keywords benefits consumers , as it helps them to discover competing products that may be less expensive or of higher quality .

also , sponsored advertisements allow consumers to comparison shop and may inform consumers about relevant news and criticism about the searched - for trademark name .

keyword - triggered advertising cases have involved trademark owners bringing suit against either keyword sellers ( internet search engines ) or keyword buyers ( advertisers ) .

in trying to hold search engines responsible for trademark infringement , trademark owners have tried two approaches: ( 1 ) direct trademark infringement , in which the search engine is making an illegal use of the mark by selling keywords , and ( 2 ) contributory infringement , in which the search engine is liable for facilitating the advertiser's direct infringement .

although lawsuits against internet search engines such as google may garner more attention in the press , the vast majority of the cases have involved the trademark owner directly suing the keyword buyer , who is usually the advertiser of a competing good or service .

whether a case has been brought against the keyword seller or buyer , courts have treated the trademark infringement issues in generally the same manner .

it is important to note that there have been very few final court rulings in keyword advertising cases , as most opinions have involved pre - trial rulings from judges on procedural motions filed by the parties .

for example , courts have had to address a threshold question about whether a trademark owner would be able to overcome defense motions to dismiss the case for failure to state a claim for relief ( pursuant to federal rules of civil procedure 12 ( b ) ( 6 ) ) , on the grounds that the use of a trademark as a paid keyword is not a "use in commerce" within the meaning of the lanham act .

in considering these motions , the courts have had to determine whether genuine issues of material fact exist that would prevent a summary judgment ruling in favor of the alleged infringer .

a genuine issue for trial exists if the trademark owner presents evidence from which a reasonable jury , viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the trademark owner , could resolve the material issue in his or her favor .

as the u.s court of appeals for the ninth circuit has previously explained: the moving party – in this case , the defendants – bears the initial burden of identifying for the court the portions of the materials on file that it believes demonstrate the absence of any genuine issue of material fact .

if the moving party meets its initial burden , the burden shifts to the non - moving party to set forth ... specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial .

we may not weigh the evidence or determine the truth of the matter but may only determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial .

therefore , judges that have presided over most keyword advertising cases to date have not been concerned about whether a plaintiff will ultimately prevail in the lawsuit , but whether he or she "is entitled to offer evidence to support the claim[]. .

the legality of using trademarks as keywords to trigger online advertising has been much litigated in recent years , although there is not yet a definitive answer .

the courts thus far have appeared to resolve the initial "use in commerce" threshold for purposes of the lanham act .

however , as discussed above , there is a lack of judicial consensus concerning the more important question of whether such trademark use causes likelihood of confusion .

courts have also not yet fully examined the extent to which a defendant may assert affirmative defenses , nor have they explored what kind of remedies would be appropriate for such infringement .

therefore , this issue will continue to occupy the federal courts and be a source of dispute between trademark owners and keyword buyers and sellers .

