for over 20 years , economic and trade relations between the united states and the socialist republic of vietnam ( vietnam ) remained virtually frozen , in part a legacy of the extended military conflict of the 1960s and 1970s .

on may 2 , 1975 , after north vietnam defeated u.s. ally south vietnam , president gerald r. ford extended president richard m. nixon's 1964 trade embargo on north vietnam to cover the reunified nation .

under the ford embargo , bilateral trade and financial transactions were prohibited .

economic and trade relations between the two nations began to thaw during the clinton administration , building on joint efforts during the reagan and george h. w. bush administrations to resolve a sensitive issue in the united states — recovering the remains of u.s. military personnel declared "missing in action" ( mia ) during the vietnam war .

the shift in u.s. policy also was spurred by vietnam's withdrawal from cambodia .

president bill clinton ordered an end to the u.s. trade embargo on vietnam on february 3 , 1994 .

in 1997 , president clinton appointed the first u.s. ambassador to vietnam since the end of the vietnam war .

bilateral relations also improved , in part , due to vietnam's 1986 decision to shift from a soviet - style central planned economy to a form of market socialism .

the new economic policy , known as doi moi ( "change and newness" ) , ushered in a period of over 20 years of rapid growth in vietnam .

since 1995 , vietnam's real gdp growth has averaged over 7% per year , second only to china .

much of that growth has been generated by foreign investments in vietnam's manufacturing sector , particularly its clothing industry .

the united states and vietnam signed a bilateral trade agreement ( bta ) on july 13 , 2000 , which went into force on december 10 , 2001 .

as part of the bta , the united states extended to vietnam conditional most favored nation ( mfn ) trade status , now known as normal trade relations ( ntr ) .

economic and trade relations further improved when the united states granted vietnam permanent normal trade relations ( pntr ) status on december 29 , 2006 , as part of vietnam's accession to the world trade organization ( wto ) .

since the signing of the bta , the united states government has appropriated approximately $4-5 million each year to support vietnam's economic reforms .

in addition , the two nations have set up a ministerial - level trade and investment agreement ( tifa ) council to discuss issues related to the implementation of the bit and wto agreements , as well as trade and investment policies in general .

in contrast to some other nations ( for example , china ) , official u.s. and vietnamese trade data are comparatively close and reflect a similar pattern in the growth of bilateral trade ( see table 1 ) .

for the first few years following the end of the u.s. embargo , trade between the two nations grew slowly , principally because of vietnam's lack of ntr .

however , following the granting of conditional ntr in december 2001 , trade flows between the united states and vietnam grew quickly .

merchandise trade nearly doubled between 2001 and 2002 , regardless of which nation's figures one uses .

bilateral trade jumped again in 2007 , following the united states granting pntr status to vietnam .

total trade declined slightly in 2009 as u.s. imports from vietnam slid 4.7% because of the economic recession .

u.s. exports to vietnam increased by 11.4% in 2009 .

the growth in bilateral trade has not been without its accompanying issues and problems .

both nations are negotiating membership in the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership agreement ( tpp ) , a multilateral trade group .

for its part , vietnam has indicated a desire to foster closer trade relations by applying for acceptance into the u.s. general system of preferences ( gsp ) program , and participating in negotiations of a bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) .

the growth in trade has also created sources of trade friction .

a rapid increase in vietnam's clothing exports to the united states led to a controversial monitoring program .

the growth in vietnam's export of catfish has also generated tensions between the two nations .

other economic issues have had an indirect effect on bilateral relations , such as claims of poor working conditions in factories in vietnam , vietnam's designation as a "non - market economy," allegations of inadequate intellectual property rights ( ipr ) protection in vietnam , and vietnam's exchange rate policy .

this report will examine each of these trade issues , discussing their main elements and exploring their implications for the 111 th congress .

this will be followed by an analysis of key trends in bilateral trade to discern any potential sources of trade friction in the future .

the bush administration notified congress of its intention to enter into negotiations with the members of the trans - pacific strategic economic partnership agreement ( tpp ) on september 22 , 2008 .

the tpp — previously known as the p4 — is a multilateral free trade agreement between brunei , chile , new zealand , and singapore that came into force in 2006 .

the u.s. announcement of interest in joining the tpp was quickly followed by similar expressions of interest by australia , peru , and vietnam .

in the president's 2009 annual report on the u.s. trade agreements program , the obama administration stated that u.s. participation in the tpp would strengthen u.s. trade and investment ties in the asia - pacific , help u.s. businesses compete in the region , and "could serve as a vehicle for achieving the long - term asia - pacific economic cooperation ( apec ) objective of a free trade area of the asia - pacific. .

vietnam's deputy prime minister and foreign minister pham gai khiem listed negotiations to join the tpp — along with the u.s .

bit talks and partnership and cooperative agreement with the european union — as among vietnam's top trade priorities in 2009 .

during an april 2010 speech in washington , dc , prime minister dung made particular note of both country's participation in the tpp negotiations .

the first meeting of the interested parties was held in melbourne , australia , on march 15-19 , 2010 .

the next round of negotiations is scheduled for the week beginning june 14 in the united states .

following the talks in melbourne , u.s. trade representative ron kirk stated the negotiations were off to a "strong start," and that "u.s. negotiators will now seek further input from congress and u.s. stakeholders on negotiating objectives and approaches to key issues as we prepare for the second round of tpp negotiations in june. .

vietnam's participation in the tpp negotiations could complicate u.s. intentions .

whereas the other parties involved in the negotiations are generally viewed as having comparatively open trade policies , vietnam has made less progress in trade and investment liberalization .

given that the apparent u.s. goal is to create a more open and comprehensive free trade area in the asia - pacific , vietnam's participation in the talks could constrain u.s. efforts to expand the scope and depth of the tpp .

backers of vietnam's participation in the negotiations maintain that it could accelerate economic reforms , and open its economy to more foreign investment and trade .

another complicating factor is vietnam's membership in the association of southeast asian nations ( asean ) and its support for asean's discussions with other nations to form a pan - asian trade association that could exclude the united states .

over the last several years , asean has organized meetings with various configurations of asian nations — such as the asean + 3 ( china , japan , and south korea ) , and asean + 6 ( australia , china , india , japan , new zealand , and south korea ) — to discuss the formation of a free trade area that would include only asian nations .

however , in an april 2010 meeting with crs , vietnamese trade officials indicated that vietnam would like to see the united states take a more active role in a possible asean + 8 ( australia , china , india , japan , new zealand , russia , south korea and united states ) forming the basis for a larger regional trade association .

since vietnam is serving as asean chair for 2010 , the trade officials indicated that a major symbolic gesture by the united states — such as seeking to formally join the east asia summit — would be warmly welcomed by vietnam .

there is one bill pending before the 111 th congress that , if passed , could have a direct bearing on the tpp negotiations .

the trade reform , accountability , development , and employment act of 2009 ( h.r .

3012 and s. 2821 ) would require all nations that are party to the tpp agreement to establish laws protecting "core labor rights" and "adequate and effective protection of intellectual property rights," among other conditions .

in may 2008 , vietnam formally requested to be added to the u.s. generalized system of preferences ( gsp ) program as a "beneficiary developing country" ( bdc ) .

on june 20 , 2008 , the office of the u.s. trade representative ( ustr ) announced that it was initiating a formal review of vietnam's eligibility for gsp benefits and would accept public comments on the application until august 4 , 2008 .

since then , there has been no formal announcement from ustr regarding the status of vietnam's gsp application .

the u.s. gsp program authorizes the president to grant duty - free treatment for any eligible product from any beneficiary country .

initially created by title v of the trade act of 1974 ( p.l .

93-618 ) for a 10-year period , the gsp program has been repeatedly renewed by congress , most recently in a one - year extension on december 22 , 2009 , as part of p.l .

111-124 .

the statute also provides the president with specific political and economic criteria to use when designating eligible countries and products .

inclusion in the u.s. gsp program is a high trade priority for the vietnamese government .

vietnam has already been accepted into several other gsp programs , including those of canada , the european union ( eu ) , and japan .

the status of vietnam's gsp application was reportedly raised during the meeting of the u.s. - vietnam trade and investment framework agreement ( tifa ) council in washington , dc , from april 15-22 , 2009 .

on december 2 , 2009 , vietnam's foreign minister pham gia khiem reportedly asked former u.s. trade representative susan schwab to urge the obama administration to add vietnam to the u.s. gsp program .

according to sources in vietnam's ministry of foreign affairs ( mofa ) , the vietnamese government sees its acceptance into the gsp program as another step in the normalization of bilateral relations .

during their june 2008 meeting , president bush and prime minister dung announced the launch of talks to establish a bilateral investment treaty ( bit ) .

bits are designed to improve the climate for foreign investors by establishing dispute settlement procedures and by protecting foreign investors from performance requirements , restrictions on transferring funds , and arbitrary expropriation .

the united states has signed 47 bits , with 40 currently in force .

vietnam has signed over 50 bits .

vietnam's clothing exports to the united states were among the greatest beneficiaries of the u.s. decision to grant vietnam conditional ntr status in december 2001 ( see figure 1 ) .

up until 2002 , u.s. imports of clothing from vietnam were small both in value ( below $50 million ) and as a share of total imports from vietnam ( below 10% ) .

following the u.s. extension of conditional ntr to vietnam , u.s. clothing imports from vietnam shot up in value and share .

as a share of total imports , clothing peaked in 2003 at 51.4% .

the value of u.s. clothing imports from vietnam has continued to rise every year until 2009 , with the largest year - on - year increases occurring in 2003 and 2007 — the first full years after the u.s. granted vietnam conditional and permanent ntr status , respectively .

vietnam has become a major source of u.s. clothing imports , second only to china .

the two spikes in clothing imports gave rise to efforts to restrict clothing trade with vietnam , first in the form of a separate bilateral textile agreement and later in the form of a unilateral monitoring program that expired in january 2009 .

in both cases , vietnam initially protested u.s. efforts to restrict clothing trade , but in the end complied with the u.s. policies .

several members of congress , and in particular members with significant clothing and textile manufacturing in their districts or states , voiced concern that a "surge" in vietnamese clothing exports to the united states could cause damage to u.s. clothing and textile companies and workers .

however , major u.s. retailers and importers maintained that these two programs would restrict trade from vietnam , causing harm to u.s. companies and consumers .

catfish have been a constant source of trade friction between the united states and vietnam for the past decade .

vietnam is a major exporter of frozen fish fillets using certain varieties of fish — known as basa and tra in vietnamese — that are commonly referred to as catfish in the global fish market .

since 1999 , vietnamese exports of basa and tra frozen fish fillets have secured a growing share of the u.s. market , despite the objections of the u.s. catfish industry and the actions of the u.s. government .

in 2009 , vietnam reportedly exported 47,000 tons of basa and tra , worth $134 million to the united states .

over the last 10 years , the united states has taken several actions that were designed to have an impact on the import of vietnamese basa and tra .

in 2002 , congress passed legislation that prohibited the labeling of basa and tra as "catfish. .

in august 2003 , the u.s. government imposed antidumping duties on "certain frozen fish fillets from vietnam," including basa and tra .

despite these measures , vietnam's exports of basa and tra continued to rise .

in the eyes of the vietnamese government , the u.s. response to the growth of vietnam's basa and tra exports constitutes a case of trade protectionism designed to shelter u.s. catfish producers from legitimate competition .

supporters of u.s. trade policies against vietnam's exports of basa and tra say the measures are designed to defend u.s. consumers and businesses from the unsafe products and unfair business practices of vietnam .

the ongoing tensions around catfish trade were heightened by two fairly recent events .

the first was the passage of the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) by the 110 th congress on may 22 , 2008 .

the second event was the itc's determination on june 15 , 2009 , to keep in place the antidumping duties on certain frozen fish fillet imports from vietnam "for the foreseeable future. .

the preceding issues are topics where there has been or continues to be direct bilateral interaction .

in addition , there are several economic issues that indirectly influence relations between the united states and vietnam .

of these , the most prominent issues for the 111 th congress include workers' rights , the designation of vietnam as a non - market economy , ipr protection , and vietnam's exchange rate policy .

the preceding sections of the report have focused on current and past issues in u.s. - vietnam trade relations .

the final section of the report attempts to identify potential sources of future trade friction by examining trends in bilateral trade figures .

the focus will be on three aspects of recent trade relations — merchandise trade , trade in services , and foreign direct investment ( fdi ) .

only a few years have passed since trade relations between the united states and vietnam have opened .

as previously mentioned , the rapid growth in vietnam's export of two types of products — clothing and catfish — quickly made them sources of trade tension between the two nations .

however , there are other commodities that contribute more to u.s. - vietnam trade flows that could also become touch points for trouble in bilateral trade relations .

according to u.s. trade statistics , the top u.s. imports from vietnam in 2009 , besides clothing and fish , were ( in order ) furniture and bedding ; footwear ; electrical machinery ; mineral fuel and oil ; machinery ; spices , coffee , and tea ; and edible fruits and nuts ( see table 2 ) .

the top u.s. exports to vietnam included ( in order ) non - railway vehicles , machinery , iron and steel , meat , cotton , plastic and plastic articles , food waste and animal feed , electrical machinery , optical and medical equipment , and wood and wooden articles .

the juxtaposition of these two lists reveals product categories that may warrant watching , as well as a connection between some of the top trade commodities .

over the last 10 years , vietnam has risen from being the 62 nd - largest source for furniture and bedding imports for the united states to being the fourth - largest source — surpassing past leaders such as italy , malaysia , and taiwan .

furniture and bedding provided over 11% of total u.s. imports from vietnam in 2009 , and it was the second - fastest growth category of imports from vietnam ( after electrical machinery ) since 1998 .

while most of the focus has been on clothing imports from vietnam , footwear imports from vietnam were over 10% of total imports in 2009 .

vietnam was the second - largest source of footwear imports for the united states in 2009 , exceeding italy , malaysia , and taiwan .

vietnam's electrical machinery exports to the united states grew more than 1,000-fold over the last 10 years , reaching over $630 million in 2009 and over 5% of total u.s. imports from vietnam .

according to interviews with foreign investors in vietnam , there is great potential for growth in this sector because of vietnam's inexpensive , skilled workers .

there is also a discernable interplay between vietnam's top exports to the united states and the top u.s. exports to vietnam .

vietnam imports substantial amounts of cotton from the united states , which is then used to manufacture clothing to be exported to the united states .

similarly , vietnam imports wood from the united states that may end up in the furniture that is imported by the united states from vietnam .

there is also a significant amount of cross - trade in electrical machinery — a top - 10 export item for both countries — as parts and components are shipped back and forth across the pacific ocean .

the implication is that efforts to curtail the growth of certain top exports of vietnam to the united states could result in a decline in u.s. exports to vietnam and possible job losses in the united states .

the united states perceives a trade advantage in several of the services sectors , especially financial services .

in the latest u.s. national trade estimate ( nte ) , the office of the u.s. trade representative indicated that as part of the implementation of the bta , vietnam has committed to greater liberalization of a broad array of its services sectors , including financial services , telecommunications , express delivery , distribution services , and certain professions .

vietnam has already committed to allowing 100% foreign ownership of securities firms and express delivery service providers by 2012 .

it is likely that the united states will press vietnam for more access during the bta talks , as well as during the bit negotiations .

in 2008 , vietnam received $60 billion in foreign direct investments ( fdi ) despite the global economic crisis .

the leading source of fdi in 2008 was malaysia , largely due to a nearly $10 billion steel complex project financed by the lion group .

the second - and third - largest sources of fdi in 2008 were taiwan and japan , respectively .

the united states is the seventh - largest source of fdi in vietnam over the last 10 years .

however , matthew daley , former president of the u.s. - asean business council , recently told an audience in hanoi that he expects the united states to become the largest foreign direct investor in vietnam in the next two to three years .

according to daley , during the first quarter of 2009 , nearly two - thirds of the fdi registered in vietnam was from the united states .

growing u.s. interest in investment opportunities in vietnam could have an impact on the bit negotiations and , by implication , have an effect on the 111 th congress if the negotiations are completed in 2010 .

in addition , as more u.s. companies invest in vietnam , there is the possibility of more business - to - business disagreements between u.s. and vietnamese companies , and more constituent pressure on congress to address perceived shortcomings in vietnam's treatment of foreign - owned enterprises .

