the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , as amended by the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb , p.l .

107-110 ) , and the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea , p.l .

108-446 ) both require all students with disabilities to participate in district and state assessments .

because student achievement on state assessments is used to determine adequate yearly progress ( ayp ) in state accountability systems mandated by esea , schools are now held accountable for the achievement of all students , including students with disabilities .

the 113 th congress is actively considering whether to amend and extend the esea .

as part of these deliberations , consideration has been given to how students with disabilities are included in accountability systems .

the nclb focus on accountability for the achievement of students with disabilities led educators , administrators , and policy makers to reexamine the appropriateness of the general state assessment for measuring the achievement of certain students with disabilities .

although many students with disabilities are able to participate in the general state assessment , either with or without accommodations , other students with disabilities may not be able to participate fully in the general state assessment because of the nature and severity of their disability .

these students may need an alternate assessment that is tailored to their needs and allows them to more accurately demonstrate what they know and can do .

there are currently five assessment options for measuring the achievement of students with disabilities: ( 1 ) general state assessment , ( 2 ) general state assessment with accommodations , ( 3 ) alternate assessment based on grade - level standards , ( 4 ) alternate assessment based on alternate achievement standards ( aa - aas ) , and ( 5 ) alternate assessment based on modified achievement standards ( aa - mas ) .

the first three assessment options ( general state assessment , general state assessment with accommodations , and alternate assessment based on grade - level standards ) result in scores that may be counted in ayp calculations in the typical manner , as determined by a state's accountability system .

scores from the second two assessment options ( aa - aas and aa - mas ) have restrictions on the way they may be counted in ayp calculations .

these restrictions are outlined in regulations issued by the u.s. department of education ( ed ) and have numerous implications for state accountability systems .

in august 2013 , ed proposed regulations that would require states to transition away from aa - mas .

in addition , in september 2011 , the secretary announced that states may request flexibility on various esea academic accountability requirements , teacher qualification - related requirements , and funding flexibility requirements that were enacted through the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ; p.l .

107-110 ) in exchange for meeting four principles established by ed .

the four principles , as stated by ed , are as follows: ( 1 ) college - and career - ready expectations for all students ; ( 2 ) state - developed differentiated recognition , accountability , and support ; ( 3 ) supporting effective instruction and leadership ; and ( 4 ) reducing duplication and unnecessary burden .

as of march 5 , 2014 , ed had approved esea flexibility package applications for 42 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico .

similar flexibility was also provided to a group of leas in california .

under the esea flexibility package , states are required to provide for alternate assessments based on grade - level academic achievement standards or alternate assessments based on alternate academic achievement standards for the students with the most significant cognitive disabilities .

these assessments must be aligned with the state's college - and career - ready standards .

no later than the 2014-2015 school year , states operating under the esea flexibility package must include students who are currently eligible to take alternate assessments based on modified academic achievement standards in their assessments based on grade - level academic achievement standards .

thus , 42 states , the district of columbia , and puerto rico will no longer be able to administer alternate assessments based on modified academic achievement standards as of the 2014-2015 school year , regardless of when or if ed enacts the aforementioned proposed regulations .

as none of the aforementioned changes have been promulgated through statutory language or regulation , this report focuses primarily on the current ed regulations that allow states to use scores from alternate assessments for ayp calculations in accountability systems .

it does , however , highlight some issues that may arise due to the proposed regulations and the issuance of the esea flexibility package .

this report also describes the current status of state implementation of alternate assessments and examines some of the challenges states have encountered in developing and implementing these assessments .

this is followed by a discussion of other policy proposals for measuring the achievement of students with disabilities and including them in accountability systems .

the report concludes with a brief examination of esea reauthorization activity in the 113 th congress as it relates to alternate assessments .

including students with disabilities in state assessments is a relatively new practice .

as recently as the 1990s , students with disabilities were often excluded from general state assessments .

the improving america's schools act of 1994 ( iasa , p.l .

103-382 ) and idea of 1997 ( p.l .

105-17 ) were the first pieces of federal legislation that mandated the participation of students with disabilities in state assessments .

by mandating participation of students with disabilities in state assessments , the legislation sought to increase access to the general education curriculum for students with disabilities and , in turn , increase expectations and achievement of students with disabilities .

the use of alternate assessments within state assessment systems is also relatively new .

in 1997 , idea required states to develop alternate assessments for students with disabilities for whom the general state assessment was inappropriate .

the alternate assessment was intended to be a more accurate measure of what some students with disabilities know and can do .

alternate assessments were intended to decrease the barriers of the general state assessments and allow students with disabilities to demonstrate their knowledge more accurately .

several years after iasa and idea required students with disabilities to participate in state assessments , the no child left behind act of 2001 ( nclb ) greatly increased the emphasis on student assessment , and the academic achievement of students with disabilities gained more attention .

under nclb , student scores on state assessments are used to measure ayp .

scores on these assessments must be disaggregated by various subgroups , one of which is students with disabilities .

although nclb requires states to develop at least one alternate assessment to use within their state assessment systems , the law did not explicitly outline how the alternate assessments should be used within an accountability system .

the combination of the requirement to include all students with disabilities in state assessment systems and nclb's requirement that all subgroups of students meet ayp goals created a need for states to have more accurate assessments for all students with disabilities , including students with the most significant cognitive disabilities and other students with disabilities who were not expected to meet grade - level achievement standards within the academic year .

for these students with disabilities , an alternate assessment may be more appropriate than the general state assessment .

because of the nclb requirement to develop at least one alternate assessment , many alternate assessments were already used by states .

nonetheless , questions remained about who should be eligible to take alternate assessments and how scores from alternate assessments should be counted within state accountability systems .

to address these concerns , ed released regulations outlining the use of two types of alternate assessments for students with disabilities: alternate assessments based on alternate achievement standards ( aa - aas ) and alternate assessments based on modified achievement standards ( aa - mas ) .

the regulations provide guidance to states on how to determine a student's eligibility for participation in alternate assessments and how to count scores from alternate assessments in state accountability systems .

an alternate assessment is an assessment designed for students with disabilities for whom the general state assessment is inappropriate even when they are provided with appropriate accommodations .

it is designed to be a more accurate measure of what students with disabilities know and can do .

alternate assessments differ from general state assessments in both form and complexity .

the form of an alternate assessment varies depending on the needs of the student .

the assessment may include teacher observation of the student , samples of student work that demonstrate mastery of specific content ( eg , portfolio assessment ) , performance on tasks produced in an "on - demand" setting ( eg , performance assessment ) , or other methods of collecting data on student achievement .

an alternate assessment is developed by adapting two parameters of the general state assessment: content standards and achievement standards .

a content standard specifies what all students should know and be able to do .

content standards describe what teachers should be teaching and what students should be learning in academic areas , such as reading , mathematics , and science .

an achievement standard is a predetermined level of performance that denotes proficiency within a given content area .

achievement standards describe how well a student must perform in order to be proficient within a content area .

determining achievement levels requires that achievement standards describe the competencies associated with varying levels of proficiency and set "cut scores" that categorize students into these levels .

an example of a content standard for elementary mathematics may be: "know the addition facts ( sums to 20 ) and the corresponding subtraction facts and commit them to memory. .

the corresponding achievement standard may be a level of mastery that defines proficiency ( eg , number correct , 80% accuracy , 90% accuracy , and so on ) .

understanding the difference between content standards and achievement standards is essential to understanding the way different types of alternate assessments are developed .

ed regulations regarding the design of alternate assessments describe different methods for developing alternate assessments that vary according to ( 1 ) when it is appropriate to adapt and extend content standards and achievement standards , and ( 2 ) when it is appropriate to adapt only the achievement standards .

in general , in aa - aas , it is appropriate to adapt and extend content standards and achievement standards ; in aa - mas , it is appropriate to adapt only the achievement standards .

ed issued two sets of regulations concerning the development of alternate assessments and their use in state accountability systems .

in december 2003 , ed finalized nclb regulations that authorized states to use results from aa - aas in ayp calculations for students with the most significant cognitive disabilities .

later , in april 2007 , ed finalized nclb regulations that authorized states to use results from aa - mas in ayp calculations for other students with disabilities who were unlikely to reach grade - level proficiency within a year .

the following sections describe the regulations issued by ed concerning the development of aa - aas and aa - mas and their use in state accountability systems .

in addition , appendix a provides a table that summarizes the similarities and differences between aa - aas and aa - mas .

in regulations dated december 9 , 2003 , ed stated that it intended "to issue a report on the implementation of this regulation after two years of implementation. .

in response to this commitment , ed released a report from the study of state implementation of accountability and teacher quality under no child left behind ( ssi - nclb ) .

the report presents findings concerning states' implementation of aa - aas .

the report's findings are based on surveys of state officials in school years 2004-2005 and 2006-2007 , as well as extant data about states' implementation of nclb assessment and accountability requirements .

at the time of data collection , ed regulations regarding aa - mas were not finalized .

during the development of the aa - mas regulations , ed offered "2% interim policy options. .

when ed regulations regarding aa - mas were finalized and released on april 9 , 2007 , they included a transition provision regarding modified achievement standards , which provided that states could ( with approval from the secretary ) continue to use the 2% interim policy options through school year 2008-2009 .

since the 2% interim policy options expired and states are now required to adopt the finalized ed regulations regarding aa - mas , implementation results of this transitional provision will not be discussed .

the following sections describe several challenges states have encountered in the development and implementation of alternate assessments .

although all states now have approved assessment systems that incorporate aa - aas and nearly all use results from these assessments in their accountability systems , most states are still in the development process of incorporating aa - mas .

one difficulty that states faced in the development and implementation of alternate assessments was the limited statutory language provided in nclb .

the limited statutory language may have delayed states in the development of alternate assessments as they awaited regulations from ed .

another challenge in developing alternate assessments was developing alternate assessments that met professional standards for technical adequacy , including validity and reliability .

the lack of technical adequacy evidence delayed ed's approval of some state assessment systems , which further delayed the implementation of alternate assessments .

as this report has discussed , the inclusion of students with disabilities in state assessment and accountability systems is a relatively new practice .

nclb was the first federal law that held schools accountable for the academic achievement of students with disabilities , and the methods used to include these students have been evolving since its enactment .

the reauthorization of esea may revisit issues related to the assessment of students with disabilities and the ways in which schools are held accountable for their academic achievement .

the education commission of the states ( ecs ) collected and synthesized recommendations for nclb / esea reauthorization from 15 national education organizations .

ecs manages a database of these recommendations around 16 issue areas , one of which is "students with disabilities. .

of the 15 surveyed organizations , 13 provided recommendations on the assessment of students with disabilities .

some organizations advocated improving current practice , such as improving alternate assessments , maintaining the current 1% and 2% regulations , and increasing funding for the development of assessments for students with disabilities .

other organizations , however , proposed more substantial changes to current practice , such as reconsidering the 1% and 2% caps , increasing the role of ieps in assessment and accountability systems , increasing the use of growth models for students with disabilities , and providing other policy flexibility in ayp determinations .

an analysis of these proposed changes to current practice is provided in the following sections .

during the 113 th congress , both the house and the senate have considered legislation to reauthorize the esea .

on june 12 , 2013 , the senate health , education , labor , and pensions ( help ) committee considered and ordered reported the strengthening america's schools act ( s. 1094 ) by a strictly partisan vote of 12-10 .

the house education and workforce committee also considered and ordered reported a bill that would reauthorize the esea .

on june 19 , 2013 , on a strictly partisan vote of 23-16 , the success for all students act ( h.r .

5 ) was ordered reported .

h.r .

5 was subsequently considered and amended on the house floor .

the amended version of h.r .

5 was passed on july 19 , 2013 , by a vote of 221-207 .

it is unclear whether s. 1094 will be considered on the senate floor .

subsequent references to s. 1094 and h.r .

5 in this report refer to s. 1094 as ordered reported by the help committee and h.r .

5 as passed by the house .

both s. 1094 and h.r .

5 would make changes to title i - a accountability requirements that would affect assessments for students with disabilities .

s. 1094 would authorize ( but not require ) the development of alternate assessments aligned with alternate academic standards for students with the most significant cognitive disabilities .

it would limit the use of alternative assessments in state accountability systems by continuing to limit the percentage of scores used within the accountability system to 1% of all students .

however , s. 1094 would not authorize the development or use of alternate assessments aligned with modified achievement standards for other students with disabilities .

further , it would explicitly prohibit the development or implementation of any modified achievement standard .

h.r .

5 would also authorize ( but not require ) the development of alternate assessments aligned with alternate academic standards for students with the most significant cognitive disabilities .

however , h.r .

5 would not limit the use of alternate assessments in the accountability system .

in addition , h.r .

5 would not explicitly authorize or prohibit the development or use of alternate assessments aligned with modified achievement standards for other students with disabilities .

appendix a. characteristics of alternate assessments appendix b .

methods of redistributing scores appendix c. redistributing scores example lea a does not exceed the 1% cap ; it is 0.1% under the cap .

however , lea a exceeds the 2% cap by 0.6% .

because an lea ( or state ) may exceed the 2% cap by the amount it is below the 1% cap , the lea only needs to redistribute 0.5% of its proficient and advanced scores as non - proficient scores ( 0.9% + 2.6% = 3.5% ; 3.5% - 3.0% = 0.5% ) .

lea b is under the 1% cap by 0.3% and over the 2% cap by 0.3 percent .

an lea or state may exceed the 2% cap provided that it does not have more than a total of 3% proficient and advanced scores from both types of alternate assessments ( aa - aas and aa - mas ) .

in this case , lea b does not exceed that 3% limit , so it does not need to redistribute any scores .

lea c exceeds the 1% cap by 0.4% , but it is under the 2% cap by 0.5% .

an lea or state may not exceed the 1% cap ( unless the lea has an exception from the state ) , even if it has less than 2% of proficient or advanced scores on aa - mas .

therefore , lea c has 0.4% of its proficient and advanced scores from aa - aas that must be redistributed as non - proficient scores .

lea d exceeds both the 1% and 2% caps ( by 0.3% and 0.6% , respectively ) .

therefore , lea d has 0.9% of its proficient and advanced scores from its alternate assessments that must be redistributed as non - proficient scores .

 ( 1.3% + 2.6% = 3.9% ; 3.9% - 3.0% = 0.9% ) .

note that 0.3% must be from aa - aas scores since lea d was 0.3% over the 1% cap ( unless the lea has an exception from the state ) .

