in an earth day speech , president obama linked the importance of winning the technological race to develop clean energy sources with the economic problems associated with u.s. dependence on oil .

the president said that the federal deficit , the trade deficit , as well as global warming , were all related to u.s. dependence on oil , especially imported oil .

he also described a fickle attitude held by american consumers , who typically are outraged by high gasoline prices or shortages , while displaying apathy toward the issue of oil prices during periods of low prices .

in a market economy , the government can alter the behavior of consumers and producers through tax and subsidy policies .

if the government wants to discourage the consumption of a commodity , it can raise the cost of the good to consumers by levying taxes at various stages of the production process , or by levying a tax at the point of sale .

typically , the higher cost faced by the consumer will lead to reduced consumption .

if the government chooses to encourage the development of a technology or a good , it can lower private costs through various types of subsidy , which may then benefit consumers in the form of lower prices .

given the president's position , as reflected in his earth day speech , his fy2010 budget proposal includes both subsidies for alternative energy sources and increased taxes on the oil industry .

this report analyzes the likely economic effects that might occur if the president's proposed tax increases on the oil industry are enacted by congress .

during most of the 20 th century the oil industry received favorable tax treatment in comparison with other u.s. industries through tax provisions such as the percentage depletion allowance and the expensing of intangible drilling expenses .

favorable tax treatment helped to keep petroleum product costs low , and encouraged consumption .

low gasoline prices were a factor in both residential and business location decisions , holiday travel , and other aspects of american life .

these decisions represent economic investments which might no longer be viable if the relative price of gasoline and oil increase .

for example , when the price of gasoline rose to more than $4 per gallon , based on oil prices that rose to over $145 per barrel , during the second half of 2008 , consumers shifted their spending away from sport utility vehicles and light trucks toward more fuel efficient vehicles , reducing the sales and profitability of the u.s. automobile industry , and accelerating the collapse of the industry .

shifting the energy consumption pattern from oil to alternative fuels is unlikely to occur without adjustment costs to consumers and u.s. industry .

under the pressure of an economic recession that began at the end of 2007 and continues in 2009 , a financial crisis which has required support of the banking system and financial markets , and the costs of new policy initiatives in healthcare , carbon emissions , and other areas , the level of projected federal deficit is a matter of concern .

the desire to shift the nation away from oil , and to try to control the federal deficit , has led to a number of proposals to increase taxes on the oil industry .

many of these proposals represent the elimination of tax expenditures .

table 1 identifies the proposed tax changes for the oil industry , and the white house's estimates of the revenues , or in its terms , deficit reduction , generated to 2014 , if enacted by congress .

many of these measures have the effect of equalizing the treatment of the independent oil producers to that of the major oil companies .

this equalization is accomplished through eliminating preferential tax treatment of the independent companies compared to that of the major oil companies .

in some cases , for example , the expensing of intangible drilling expenses , the major oil companies have been excluded from the benefits of the tax provision while the benefit was still in effect for the independent oil producers .

as shown in table 1 , none of the proposed revenue changes are estimated to have a significant effect in 2010 .

almost 80% of the total proposed tax changes would come from only three of the proposals .

these three proposals are likely to increase total taxes on the oil industry: an excise tax on gulf of mexico oil and natural gas production , the rescinding of the manufacturing tax deduction for the oil industry , and the repeal of percentage depletion .

on the one hand , the deficit reduction proposed items in table 1 can be considered to be effective tax increases on the oil and natural gas industries that could have the effect of decreasing exploration , development , and production while increasing prices and increasing our foreign oil dependence .

these same proposals , from an alternate point of view , can also be considered to be the elimination of tax preferences that have favored the oil and natural gas industries over other energy sources , and made oil and gas products artificially inexpensive , with consumer costs held below true cost of consumption , when the costs associated with climate change and energy dependence , among other effects , are included .

whichever view is adopted , the real effects of these proposals on oil production , consumption , and imports are likely to be small relative to both the federal deficit and the revenues of the oil industry .

