home visiting is a strategy for delivering support and services to families or individuals in their homes .

while home visiting may also be used to address needs of the chronically ill or elderly , this report deals exclusively with home visiting as a service strategy for families with young children or those who are expecting children .

further , as used in this report , the terms "home visitation" or "home visiting programs" refer to structured models of interaction with families and children ; these programs have specific child and family goals , involve regular home visits over a sustained period of time , and have established components or curricula to be covered during those visits .

further , this kind of home visitation is typically implemented as a primary prevention strategy — home visiting is offered before any specific "problem" ( eg , abuse or neglect of children , early childhood developmental delays ) has been identified .

at the same time , many home visitation models discussed in this report target services to families with certain risk factors ( eg , low income , low social support ) for poor child outcomes .

in addition , some home visiting programs implement intervention strategies meant to prevent recurrence of a poor outcome or to limit any ongoing negative consequences .

there are a variety of early home visiting models .

these models typically seek to positively impact one or more child or family outcomes across three main domains: maternal and child health ; early childhood social , emotional , and cognitive development ; and family / parent functioning .

some estimates suggest that , at any point in time , as many as 400,000 to 500,000 families may be receiving early childhood home visitation services .

this equals about 3% of all families with children under the age of six ( 17.4 million families ) , or a little more than 7% of those same families with income below 200% of the poverty line ( 7.0 million families ) .

depending on the particular model of early childhood home visitation being used , the visitors may be specially trained nurses , other professionals , or paraprofessionals ; visits may begin during a woman's pregnancy or later ; and the visits may continue , regularly , until the child reaches his / her second birthday or enters school .

participation of families is voluntary .

early childhood home visitation is currently undergoing a phase of broad popularity .

this appears to be driven in some part by newer research on how the human brain develops and , specifically , the significance of the prenatal and early childhood environments to later life .

to a large extent , parents shape their children's earliest experiences , and because most home visiting programs seek to help parents understand their own child's development , advocates see these programs as an opportunity to enhance child development , thereby achieving long - term positive benefits for the children , their parents , and society .

further , at least since the 1960s , a variety of early childhood home visiting models have undergone many assessments and evaluations intended to test how effectively they achieve their goals .

while the results of these evaluations have been mixed , some models , or aspects of models , have been shown to be particularly effective .

overall , while researchers have cautioned that home visiting is not a panacea , they have generally encouraged its use as part of a range of strategies intended to enhance and improve early childhood .

there are many "models" used to provide voluntary prenatal and early childhood home visitation .

at the state and community level , implementation of early childhood home visitation models can vary greatly .

some states and communities rely on established models , others blend components from more than one model , and some develop their own models .

in addition , many states support more than one model of home visiting .

these models may target different groups of families , have different primary goals , and / or operate in different parts of the state .

the administration for children and families ( acf ) , an agency of the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) , is currently carrying out a competitive grant initiative intended to assist grantees in implementing home visitation models that have been proven effective .

apart from this research effort ( described below ) , the federal government currently supports some ongoing programs in which home visitation is a primary strategy for achieving program goals ( eg , early head start ) , others in which support for home visiting is explicitly permitted or strongly suggested by the program's statutory authority ( eg , maternal and child health block grant and promoting safe and stable families ) , and still others where the broad purposes of the program allow use of funds for some or all of the activities supported by home visitation programs ( eg , temporary assistance for needy families ( tanf ) , medicaid ) .

most home visiting programs now in operation use a blend of federal and state funding streams , with some additional support coming from local public funds or private sources .

for example , support for healthy families america ( hfa ) programs in 2004 came from an average of 2.4 federal funding sources , 2.0 state funding sources , and 2.7 local funding sources by state .

looking at findings across multiple home visiting studies , researchers conclude that home visiting can provide benefits to children and their parents , including preventing potential child abuse and neglect , enhancing cognitive development , improving parenting attitudes and parenting behaviors ( eg , discipline strategies ) , and increasing maternal education .

they caution , however , that while all of those positive effects for home visiting programs were statistically significant , the size of the effect is small .

 ( that is to say , the difference between observed outcomes for home visited as opposed to not - visited parents and children is small. ) .

further , while one or more individual studies may have shown positive effects with regard to many other desired outcomes , those effects have not necessarily been studied and / or achieved across more than one study or program site .

efforts to better understand the components of successful home visitation and to find additional effective methods for meeting a range of family and child needs continue with newer research providing additional information on positive outcomes .

in sum , most researchers seem confident that early childhood home visitation can be effective in improving outcomes for families and children , although they differ on how strong they think this evidence is across the range of program models and across the variety of outcomes .

other researchers caution that to be effective ( regardless of program model or goal ) a home visitation program's goals must be aligned with the program's content ( eg , if you want to prevent child abuse and neglect you have to focus on the aspect ( s ) of the home visit that will accomplish this ) , and that home visitors must appropriately and adequately deliver the services .

they also make clear that home visiting is not a silver bullet strategy that can solve all prevention needs .

instead they suggest it will be most successful if it is integrated into a broader set of services that are focused on supporting families and ensuring positive outcomes for young children .

these include quality center - based education for preschoolers , preventive health care as part of medical homes for all children , parenting support groups , and clinical mental health and other treatment services for parents who need them .

finally , they seek continued study of programs to understand what is most effective and they urge that programs be implemented in a manner that permits continuous quality improvement .

the president's fy2010 budget request included a proposal to provide mandatory funding to states for home visitation programs , and the fy2010 budget resolution ( s.con.res .

13 ) supports increased federal funding for these programs provided this can be done in a "deficit neutral" manner .

a number of legislative proposals to provide more support for home visitation programs have been offered , and the health care reform proposals passed by the house in november 2009 ( h.r .

3962 ) and senate in december 2009 ( h.r .

3590 ) would both establish a program of , and provide funding for , grants to states to support the expansion of home visiting to families with young children and those expecting children .

the fy2011 budget does not make specific reference to establishing a home visiting program .

as part of its fy2010 budget request the obama administration proposed a new capped entitlement program to support formula grants to states , territories , and tribes for the establishment and expansion of "evidence - based" home visitation programs for low - income mothers and pregnant women .

it expected the program to "create long - term positive impacts for children and their families , as well as generate long - term positive impacts for society as a whole. .

outcomes the administration cited that may be achieved by home visitation include reductions in child abuse and neglect , improvements in children's health and development and their readiness for school , and improvements in the ability of parents to support children's optimal cognitive , language , social - emotional , and physical development .

further , it noted that one model of home visitation , which used nurses to visit low - income first - time mothers , was found to reduce medicaid costs in several randomized control trials .

accordingly the administration assumed that expanding proven effective home visitation programs would result in savings to the medicaid program ( via reductions in preterm births , emergency room use , and subsequent births ) totaling $77 million in the first five years and $664 million over the entire 10 years .

mandatory funding for the newly proposed home visitation program was proposed at $124 million in budget authority ( $87 million in "outlays" ) for fy2010 , rising each year to $790 million in budget authority ( $710 million in outlays ) by year five of the program ( fy2014 ) and to $1.837 billion in budget authority ( $1.753 billion in outlays ) in year ten ( fy2019 ) .

this funding was expected to allow home visiting services to 50,000 families in the initial year of the program , rising to 450,000 new families by fy2019 .

under the administration's proposal , states would be expected to provide some matching funds to receive federal home visitation grants .

further , the administration would give priority to funding for models "that have been rigorously evaluated and shown to have positive effects on critical outcomes for families and children. .

accordingly , states , territories , and tribes seeking grants under the proposed home visitation program would be required to submit a plan describing , among other things , the program model they will follow , evidence for the effectiveness of the program model , and how the state will ensure that the proven program model is adhered to ( model fidelity ) .

funding related to programs with strong research evidence demonstrating their effectiveness would include technical assistance , monitoring , and evaluation to ensure fidelity of the model and for "evaluating effectiveness of these models as conditions change over time. .

the administration also anticipates that additional funds will support "promising programs" such as those based on some research evidence and those that are adaptations of previously evaluated programs .

funding for these programs would also include technical assistance , monitoring , and evaluation that focuses on developing these promising models and on "rigorous ( random assignment ) evaluations of effectiveness. .

finally , the administration proposed that no less than 5% of the program's overall funding be reserved for research , evaluation , training , technical assistance , monitoring , and administration .

based on its inclusion in the administration for children and families ( acf ) budget justifications , the obama administration expected this hhs agency to administer the new home visiting state grant program .

at the same time , the fy2010 budget request noted an effort to coordinate planning for the proposal across hhs agencies to ensure the most effective program structure .

it also added that "a coordinated strategy" involving the centers for disease control and prevention ( cdc ) , the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) , the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) , and acf will "enable hhs to respond to varying approaches that states may wish to use to implement this initiative. .

in late april 2009 , the house and senate approved a conference agreement on the fy2010 budget resolution ( s.con.res .

13 ) , which reconciles separate fy2010 budget resolution proposals passed earlier that month by the house ( h.con.res .

85 ) and senate ( s.con.res .

13 ) .

the fy2010 budget resolution is designed to set federal funding priorities across all purposes for the upcoming fiscal year .

according to the conference report on the budget resolution ( h.rept .

111-89 ) , the agreement includes a "deficit neutral reserve fund" for establishing or expanding home visitation programs .

health care reform bills passed , separately , in the house and in the senate would establish a program of grants to states to support expanded delivery of evidence - based home visitation services to families with young children and those expecting children .

the affordable health care for america act ( h.r .

3962 ) , as passed by the house on november 7 , 2009 , would appropriate $750 million over five years ( fy2010-fy2014 ) for the new grant program it authorizes .

on the senate side , the patient protection and affordable care act ( h.r .

3590 ) , as passed by the senate on december 24 , 2009 , would appropriate $1.5 billion over five years ( fy2010-fy2014 ) for the home visiting grants it authorized .

table 4 below compares major similarities and differences in these proposals .

there is no current law program that provides grants to states exclusively for the purpose of funding home visiting programs .

the first column of the table lists general provisions and primarily describes the substantively similar approaches taken .

the second and third columns describe aspects of the house and senate bills , respectively , that are related to that general provision but differ , to some degree , from each other .

differences may be substantive ( eg , different funding levels or different requirements ) , may be primarily a difference in wording ( eg , one bill more explicit or detailed than the other on purposes of the grant program ) or may reflect a different approach to the same issue ( eg , both bills support home visiting provided on voluntary basis only , but one bill requires a state to have a procedures to ensure participation is voluntary and another simply provides that states may not seek federal payment for services not provided on a voluntary basis ) .

separately , the proposal passed by the house ( h.r .

3962 ) would amend medicaid to clearly permit states to claim federal reimbursement for "nurse home visitation services" provided to certain medicaid eligible individuals .

the senate - passed bill ( h.r .

3590 ) does not include a comparable amendment to medicaid .

section 1713 of the house bill ( h.r .

3962 ) , would create a new optional medicaid benefit called "nurse home visitation services," and would permit states to seek federal reimbursement at their federal medical assistance percentage ( or fmap ) rate ( which may range from 50% - 83% ) for providing these services .

the bill would define "nurse home visitation services" as home visits by trained nurses to families with a first - time pregnant woman or a child ( under two years of age ) and who are otherwise eligible for medicaid , but only if hhs determines that there is evidence that these services are effective in one or more of the following areas: ( 1 ) improving maternal or child health and pregnancy outcomes or increasing birth intervals between pregnancies ; ( 2 ) reducing the incidence of child abuse , neglect , and injury , improving family stability ( including reductions in domestic violence ) , or reducing maternal and child involvement in the criminal justice system ; and ( 3 ) increased economic self - sufficiency , employment advancement , school readiness and other educational achievement , or reducing dependence on public assistance .

federal reimbursement for this new optional medicaid benefit would be effective for services offered on or after january 1 , 2010 .

h.r .

3962 would stipulate that creation of this new optional medicaid benefit must not be construed to prevent states from continuing to claim federal reimbursement for home visitation services under currently authorized medicaid care coordination and case management activities ( as an administrative activity or a benefit ) .

on june 9 , 2009 , the subcommittee on income security and family support of the house ways and means committee held a hearing on proposals to provide funds to states for early childhood home visitation programs .

witnesses included researchers , an administrator of state funding for home visitation programs , a former participant and current home visitor , and a nurse consultant .

the witnesses generally supported broader implementation of early childhood home visitation programs that are informed by evidence on efficacy .

most witnesses appeared to support availability of home visitation services to any family , without regard to any specific demographic or family risk factors , although one witness clearly favored providing services to low - income mothers .

at the same time , in responding to a question regarding which families they would target if limited funds were available , at least one witness cautioned against using demographic markers to select families , but suggested the importance of engaging families early , perhaps during pregnancy ( via prenatal clinics or obstetric offices ) or at birth ( via hospital ) .

another witness stressed first - time young mothers as an important group , and one where research to date has shown the greatest level of successful outcomes .

in their written testimony , at least two of the witnesses , both researchers , cautioned that supported programs — regardless of any prior demonstrated level of evidence — must have certain attributes to succeed .

both mentioned the need for ( 1 ) clearly linking program activities to expected program goals , ( 2 ) providing services ( engaging family ) with sufficient frequency and for a sufficient length of time to have an impact , and ( 3 ) employing well - trained home visitors whose work is evaluated / supervised on an ongoing basis .

other factors given as important to program success included solid organizational capacity and linkages to other community resources and supports .

appendix a .

selected federal programs that provide or support home visitation as discussed in the section on " existing federal , state , and local funding streams for home visiting ," a number of federal programs are already being used to support early childhood home visitation efforts .

federal statute for these programs may require some amount of home - based services ( eg , even start ) , explicitly permit home visiting as a possible activity ( eg , maternal and child health block grant ) , or allow home visiting under broad authorities or program goals ( eg , medicaid ) .

selected programs , arranged alphabetically , are briefly described below .

community - based grants for the prevention of child abuse and neglect ( cbcap ) title ii of the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta ) authorizes grants to support community - based services for the prevention of child abuse and neglect .

cbcap grants are distributed by formula to a lead entity in all states ( which may be a public agency , a quasi - public entity , or a nonprofit private organization ) .

the lead entity is charged with developing a continuum of community - based services for children and families that are designed to strengthen and support families to prevent child abuse and neglect .

core family resource and support services to be provided by community - based programs include voluntary home visiting services , parent education , community and social services referrals , and respite care services , among others .

in their fy2007 program summaries , the majority of state cbcap contacts indicated explicit support of home visiting services .

for fy2010 , the cbcap program received funding of approximately $42 million ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

cbcap is administered by the office of child abuse and neglect within the children's bureau of the administration for children and families at hhs .

early head start early head start is a federally funded community - based program for low - income expectant parents and families with infants and toddlers that seeks to ( 1 ) promote healthy prenatal outcomes ; ( 2 ) enhance the development of infants and toddlers ; and ( 3 ) promote healthy family functioning .

nationwide , there are more than 650 early head start programs providing child development and family support services , serving approximately 62,000 children under the age of three annually .

grantees select an early head start service delivery option ( typically center - based , home - based , or a combination ) to meet the needs of the children and families in their communities .

in 2006 , about half ( 51% ) of early head start slots were center - based , while 41% were in home - based programs .

children and families enrolled in center - based programs receive comprehensive child development services in a center - based setting , supplemented with limited home visits by the child's teacher and other early head start staff ( a minimum of two home visits a year to each family ) .

in home - based programs , children and their families are supported through weekly home visits of at least 90 minutes and bimonthly group socialization experiences .

combination programs provide a blend of center class sessions and 90-minute home visits ( regulations specify acceptable combinations of minimum numbers of class sessions and corresponding home visits ) .

home visits are conducted by professionals who receive training in child development , family development , and community building .

in fy2008 , the majority of early head start teachers ( 54% ) and home visitors ( 66% ) held a degree in early childhood education ( or a related field ) .

legislation that reauthorized the program in 2007 ( p.l .

110-134 ) required hhs to develop standards for early head start home visitors related to staff training and qualifications , as well as to conduct of home visits .

for fy2010 , hhs estimated that early head start programs would receive about $690 million out of the total appropriation provided for head start ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

in addition , early head start programs are expected to receive funds in fy2010 that were appropriated in the previous fiscal year as part of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) , p.l .

111-5 .

according to hhs , nearly $1.1 billion in early head start funds from arra remained unobligated at the end of fy2009 .

the program is administered by the office of head start within the administration for children and families ( acf ) at hhs .

even start even start programs are authorized by esea title i , part b , subpart 3 , and are intended to integrate early childhood education , adult basic education , and parenting skills education into a unified family literacy program .

funds are distributed to all states and must be subgranted to local education agencies working in collaboration with community based organizations .

even start programs generally serve children aged zero to seven and their parents .

services must include home - based instruction , adult literacy instruction , early childhood education , instruction to help parents support their child's education , participant recruitment , screening of parents , and staff training .

an assumption underlying even start is that children whose parents have low literacy or basic education levels are more likely to be educationally successful if , in addition to receiving early childhood instruction themselves , their parents receive educational services plus instruction in how to help their children learn .

the program is administered by the office of elementary and secondary education , within the department of education .

it was funded at the level of $66 million for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

healthy start the healthy start program provides funding through competitive grants or cooperative agreements to provide health and related services to high - risk pregnant women , infants , and mothers in communities with exceptionally high rates of infant mortality .

among other purposes , the program seeks to reduce racial and ethnic disparities in the proportion of pregnancy - related maternal deaths , preterm births , and infant mortality .

healthy start projects also work to ensure that the basic needs of mothers and infants ( including "housing , psychosocial , nutritional and education support , and job skill building" ) are met .

the program operates in 40 states ( including the district of columbia and puerto rico ) and reaches roughly 100 communities .

home visits are frequently a part of services offered under this program .

a 2003 survey of healthy start grantees ( n=95 ) found that 99% provided home visits to at least some of their clients , with most offering home visits to a majority of their pregnant or parenting clients: 76% of grantees provided home visits to at least three - fourths of their pregnant clients and 64% of grantees provided home visits to their inter - conceptional clients .

a little more than one - third of the grantees ( 35% ) used a specific schedule to provide these home visits , but most ( 64% ) reported scheduling visits in accordance with client need .

home visiting services provided to healthy start clients frequently included depression screening and treatment ( 84% ) , well baby care ( 75% ) , and smoking cessation and reduction services ( 73% ) .

the large majority of grantees ( 87% ) also conducted home visits to assess the home environment for infants and toddlers .

the program is authorized under the public health service act ( section 330h , as amended by p.l .

106-310 ) and is administered by the maternal and child health bureau within the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) of hhs .

for fy2010 , it received funding of approximately $105 million ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

infants and toddlers program , part c , idea the infants and toddlers program ( "part c" ) component of the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) provides grants to states to assist them in implementing statewide systems of "coordinated , comprehensive , multidisciplinary , interagency programs" that identify children ( ages birth through three ) that have or are at risk of physical , mental , or social skills developmental delays .

the part c program may be targeted toward children experiencing a developmental delay in one or more physical , mental , or social skill areas ; the idea requires that these part c services be delivered to the "maximum extent possible" in a child's "natural environment," and the very large majority of part c services are delivered in the home .

in fact , one report indicates that more than 80% of part c services are delivered in the home .

however , specific services are not based on any statutorily developed curriculum .

instead , they are provided pursuant to an individual family services plan ( ifsp ) that must be created to address the identified developmental delays .

the part c program is administered by the office of special education within the department of education .

the program received an appropriation of $439 million in fy2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

maternal and child health block grant the maternal and child health block grant ( title v of the social security act ) is a public health program that seeks to ( 1 ) ensure access to and improve the quality of health care for mothers and children , especially those with low income or limited availability of care ; ( 2 ) reduce infant mortality ; ( 3 ) provide and ensure access to comprehensive prenatal and postnatal care to women ( especially low - income and at - risk pregnant women ) ; ( 4 ) increase the number of children receiving health assessments and follow - up diagnostic and treatment services ; ( 5 ) provide and ensure access to preventive and child care services as well as rehabilitative services for certain children ; ( 6 ) implement family - centered , community - based systems of coordinated care for children with special health care needs ; and ( 7 ) provide toll - free hotlines and assistance in applying for services to pregnant women with infants and children who are eligible for medicaid .

states use title v block grant funds for a variety of purposes , including direct services ; efforts to build community capacity to deliver "enabling services" ( eg , home visiting , care coordination , transportation , and nutrition counseling ) ; personal and preventive health services ; and infrastructure - building services .

separately , title v funds community integrated service systems ( ciss ) .

these projects use six specified strategies to increase capacity and integration of local service systems , including through provision of maternal and infant home health visiting , health education , and related support services for pregnant women and infants up to one year old .

the title v program received fy2010 funding of $662 million ( p.l .

111-117 ) , the large majority of which is distributed to all states under the block grant .

however , some of these funds are provided for ciss grants and others are devoted to research via the special projects of regional and national significance ( sprans ) grants .

the title v block grant is administered by the maternal and child health bureau within the health resources and services administration ( hrsa ) at hhs .

new parent support program the military's new parent support program ( npsp ) was developed in recognition of the unique parenting challenges faced by military families ( eg , frequent deployments , long duty hours , moves to unfamiliar locations , and separation from extended families and friends ) .

npsp services are available to military families who are expecting a child , or who have a child or children up to three years of age ( or five years of age for the marine corps ) .

services offered may vary across military branches and installations , but all npsp programs include a home visiting component .

in addition , programs may include supervised playgroups , prenatal and parenting classes , hospital visits , and referrals to other resources .

home visitors provide parents with guidance on child growth and development and address topics such as breastfeeding , sleeping , nutrition , and behavior management .

the department of defense notes that home visits per family may be limited unless the family has been identified as being at high risk for child abuse .

every professional npsp program staff member is required to be licensed as a licensed clinical social worker ( lcsw ) , marriage and family therapist , or registered nurse ( rn ) .

in addition , all staff must complete a criminal background check .

the npsp program is a part of the military's family advocacy program ( fap ) .

parent information resource centers parent information and resource centers ( pircs ) help implement parental involvement policies , programs , and activities designed to improve student academic achievement and strengthen partnerships among parents , teachers , principals , administrators , and other school personnel in meeting the education needs of children .

the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) ( section 5563 ) requires the recipients of pirc grants to serve both rural and urban areas ; use at least half their funds to serve areas with high concentrations of low - income children ; and use at least 30% of the funds they receive to establish , expand , or operate parents as teachers ( pat ) programs , hippy programs , or other early childhood parent education programs .

projects generally include a focus on serving parents of low - income , minority , and limited english proficient ( lep ) children enrolled in elementary and secondary schools .

according to the most recent data available , nearly 60% of parents served in the 2006-2007 school year were from low - income families , and nearly 25% had limited english proficiency .

pirc funding is distributed through competitive grants to nonprofit organizations or a consortium of a nonprofit organization and a local education agency ( lea ) .

for fy2010 , pirc grants were funded at the level of $39 million ( p.l .

111-117 ) , of which about 30% ( roughly $11.7 million ) may go toward pat , hippy , or other early childhood parent education programs selected by the grantee .

pirc grants are administered by the office of innovation and improvement ( oii ) at the department of education .

promoting safe and stable families the promoting safe and stable families program ( pssf , title iv - b , subpart 2 of the social security act ) primarily authorizes funds to state child welfare agencies for provision of four categories of services .

the statute requires that states spend a "significant" amount of program funding on each of the categories: family support , family preservation , time - limited reunification ( for families whose children have been removed to foster care within the past 15 months ) , and adoption promotion and support .

for fy2010 , the pssf program received funding of $408 million , of which an estimated $64 million , at a minimum , should be made available for family support services .

home visitation is typically considered a family support service and the statutory definition of "family support services" for purposes of the pssf program is "community - based services to promote the safety and well - being of children and families designed to increase the strength and stability of families ( including adoptive , foster , and extended families ) , to increase parents' confidence and competence in their parenting abilities , to afford children a safe , stable and supportive family environment , to strengthen parental relationships and promote healthy marriages and otherwise to enhance child development. .

current data on the number of states using pssf dollars to support home visitation are not available .

the pssf program is administered by the children's bureau within the administration for children and families at hhs .

appendix b .

federal initiatives related to coordination of early childhood programs and services researchers have noted the importance of providing home visitation services in the context of other community supports intended to support and improve the well - being of young children and their families .

in recent years , a number of federal initiatives have been established that seek to improve coordination among early childhood health , education , and social services programs and which might be relevant to home visitation programs .

several are discussed below .

state advisory councils on early childhood education and care the 2007 reauthorization of head start ( p.l .

110-134 ) 2007 included a new requirement for governors to establish state advisory councils on early childhood education and care ( "state advisory councils" ) for children from birth to school entry .

these councils are intended to improve coordination across critical early childhood programs within each state and are expected to have representation from a broad spectrum of stakeholders , ranging from the state child care and education agencies to agencies responsible for health and mental health care .

state advisory councils must: conduct a statewide needs assessment ; identify opportunities for collaboration and coordination among entities carrying out federally funded and state - funded child development , child care , and early childhood education programs ; develop recommendations for increasing the participation of children in existing federal , state , and local early childhood education and child care programs ; develop recommendations for establishing a unified data collection system for publicly funded programs offering early childhood education , development , and services ; develop recommendations for a statewide professional development and career plan for early childhood education and care ; assess the capacity and effectiveness of two - and four - year public and private institutions of higher education toward supporting the development of early childhood educators ; and make recommendations for improvements in state early learning standards , as appropriate .

the head start act requires that governors officially "designate" a council to serve as the state advisory council and an individual to coordinate the activities of the council ( which might be a pre - existing advisory council ) .

the head start act allows hhs to award one - time start - up grants of $500,000 or more to states for the development or enhancement of high - quality systems of early childhood education and care designed to improve school preparedness .

funding ( $100 million ) was made available for these grants for the first time in fy2009 .

states have until the end of fy2010 to apply for these funds .

grantees are required to provide a 70% match .

all head start activities , including state advisory councils , are administered by the office of head start within the administration for children and families at hhs .

early childhood comprehensive systems state early childhood comprehensive systems ( eccs ) are funded via competitive grants to states , and are to ensure school readiness through creation of a seamless system of early childhood services for all children .

there are five core areas in which these systems , by fostering integrated efforts across health , human service , and education agencies , are meant to ensure delivery of services for young children .

the five areas are ( 1 ) access to health care and medical homes ; ( 2 ) assessment of and services to address socio - emotional development and mental health needs ; ( 3 ) early care and learning programs ; ( 4 ) parenting education ; and ( 5 ) family support services .

the initiative , which is supported with a part of the title v ( of the social security act ) maternal and child health block grant funding reserved for special projects of regional or national significance ( sprans ) , was first funded in fy2003 .

nearly all states have now received these grants and were developing or implementing these systems .

states have tended to focus eccs activities on state early care and learning policies and programs , and one analysis concluded that "most states need to give more importance to strategies that promote health , mental health , and family support. .

home visiting is one family support strategy that is generally consistent with the overall school readiness aim of the initiative and which has received specific attention by some eccs grantees .

in its announcement of fy2009 funding ( just over $7 million was made available ) , the maternal and child health bureau ( hrsa , hhs ) , stated that this phase of the initiative was expected to support continued implementation of the state early childhood strategic plans and "the integration of the eccs program with the substance abuse and mental health services administration's project launch [described below in this appendix] , the administration for children and families home visiting program [see " current acf home visiting initiative "] , and the state early learning councils mandated by the head start reauthorization legislation [described above in this appendix]. .

project launch the project launch ( linking actions for unmet needs in children's health ) initiative provides competitive grants for states and tribes to promote the wellness ( defined as positive physical , emotional , social , and behavioral health ) of children from birth to age eight .

grantees are charged with supporting evidence - based initiatives to achieve the overall goal of wellness .

in their applications for funds grantees have sometimes identified one or more specific home visitation models they intend to support .

these have included parents as teachers , healthy steps home visitation component , baby university nurse home visiting program , first born home visiting program , safe care , and "visitation to at - risk infants and parents by touchpoints trained visitors. .

in addition , grantees identified numerous additional parent training and family strengthening programs , along with programs focused on developmental assessments , mental health , and physical health .

among other requirements , grantees are required to create a state ( or territorial or tribal ) council on young child wellness and to include public agencies that administer health , education , and human services for young children ( including child welfare agencies ) .

in addition , grantees are specifically required to link their efforts to those of any hrsa - funded eccs grantee in the state as well as any acf home visitation grantee .

initial funding of just under $7.5 million was provided for fy2008 ( p.l .

110-161 ) under authority of section 520a of the public health service act ; for fy2009 congress provided $20 million for the initiative ( p.l .

111-8 ) and $25 million for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

the initiative now supports some 25 grantees , many of which are state health departments .

the program is administered by the center for mental health services within the hhs , substance abuse and mental health services administration ( samhsa ) .

interagency coordinating councils the individuals with disabilities education act ( idea ) requires that each state establish a state interagency coordinating council , appointed by the governor of the state , for the purpose of advising and assisting the state's lead agency in the implementation of the part c program .

states receiving funds under part c are expected to establish such a council .

the statute gives governors authority to appoint members to the council and goes on to specify a broad spectrum of early childhood stakeholders that should be included .

at least 20% of council members must be parents of children with disabilities , a requirement that emphasizes the role of family involvement in policy and program development .

the idea state councils are required to meet on a quarterly basis and council meetings may be open to the public .

state councils are responsible for advising and assisting the lead state agency in the identification of fiscal and other resources for early intervention programs .

moreover , the councils may advise and assist the lead agency and the state educational agency on the provision of appropriate services for children from birth through age five , including the transition to preschool .

the councils may also advise appropriate agencies in the state with respect to the integration of services for infants and toddlers with disabilities and at - risk infants and toddlers and their families , regardless of whether at - risk infants and toddlers are eligible for early intervention services .

the councils are also required to prepare an annual report on the status of the state's early intervention programs for infants and toddlers with disabilities and their families .

