the house and the senate approved h.rept .

111-89 , the conference report to accompany s.con.res .

13 , the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2010 , on april 29 , 2009 .

the fy2010 budget resolution includes reconciliation instructions directing the senate help committee and the house education and labor committee to report changes in laws within their jurisdictions to reduce the deficit by $1 billion for the period of fy2009 through fy2014 .

the instructions for the house specifically direct the education and labor committee to report a bill that invests in education while reducing the deficit by $1 billion over the fy2009-fy2014 period .

on july 21 , 2009 , the house education and labor committee marked up h.r .

3221 , the student aid and fiscal responsibility act of 2009 ; and on july 27 , 2009 , the committee reported h.rept .

111-232 to accompany h.r .

3221 .

on september 17 , 2009 , the house passed h.r .

3221 by a vote of 253 to 171 .

h.r .

3221 would amend the hea by making changes to existing programs and by establishing several new programs and benefits .

it would also establish several new non - hea programs .

major proposals made in h.r .

3221 include the following .

the authority to make loans under the ffel program would be terminated after june 2010 .

cbo estimates that this would reduce mandatory spending by $41.8 billion over the fy2009-fy2014 period , and by $86.8 billion over the fy2009-fy2019 period .

these savings would be large enough to achieve the spending reductions specified in s.con.res .

13 and to offset increases in mandatory spending that would result from other proposals in h.r .

3221 ( described below ) .

beginning july 1 , 2010 , all student loans made under title iv of the hea would be made under the william d. ford federal direct ( dl ) program .

contracts for the servicing of dl program loans would be awarded competitively , except in states served by not - for - profit servicers where contracts would be awarded to not - for - profit servicers that meet federal standards and agree to service loans at rates determined by the secretary to be commercially reasonable .

beginning july 1 , 2010 , a new federal direct perkins loan would be offered under the dl program ; and authority to make new loans under the current federal perkins loan program would end .

loan authority totaling $6 billion would be annually allocated among institutions of higher education ( ihes ) eligible to participate in the dl program .

beginning in fy2010 , indefinite mandatory appropriations would be provided for the federal pell grant program .

mandatory appropriations would supplement annual discretionary appropriations and would provide an increase above the annual appropriated pell grant maximum award .

beginning with award year ( ay ) 2011-2012 , annual increases to the pell grant award amount would be indexed to the percent change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( cpi - u ) , plus one percentage point .

effective for ay2011-2012 , the hea , title iv federal student aid need analysis methodology would be simplified and requirements for aid applicants to report certain asset - related financial information on the free application for federal student aid ( fafsa ) would be eliminated .

mandatory funding for hea programs serving historically black colleges and universities ( hbcus ) and other minority - serving institutions would be provided for fy2010 through fy2019 .

mandatory funding would be provided for programs in a new hea college access and completion innovation fund ( cacif ) .

cacif programs would include the college access challenge grant program , the state innovation completion grants program , and the innovation in college access and completion national activities program .

mandatory funding would be provided to establish and fund three modernization , renovation , and repair grant programs for school facilities .

these would include a program for the modernization , renovation , and repair of elementary and secondary school facilities ; a program of supplemental grants for louisiana , mississippi , and alabama ; and a program for community college modernization and construction .

mandatory funding would be provided to establish and fund an early learning challenge fund under which competitive grants would be awarded to states for the purpose of improving standards and the quality of state early childhood education programs .

mandatory funding would be provided to establish and fund the american graduation initiative grant program for the purpose of reforming community colleges , and to improve education and training for workforce development .

the "defund acorn act" would prohibit organizations that have run afoul of certain federal or state campaign finance , election , or voter registration laws from being awarded federal grants or contracts and from receiving federal funds .

cbo estimates the termination of ffel program lending would reduce mandatory spending by $41.8 billion over the fy2009-fy2014 period , and by $86.8 billion over the fy2009-fy2019 period .

these savings would be large enough to achieve the $1 billion reduction in spending specified in s.con.res .

13 , and to offset increases in mandatory spending that would result from the other new or expanded education programs and benefits proposed under h.r .

3221 .

overall , cbo estimates that h.r .

3221 , as reported in h.rept .

111-232 , would reduce mandatory spending by $13.3 billion over the fy2009-fy2014 period , and by $7.8 billion over the fy2009-fy2019 period .

cbo also estimates that enactment of the proposals reported in h.r .

3221 , if fully funded , would increase discretionary spending by $3.6 billion over the fy2009-fy2014 period , and by $13.5 billion over the fy2009-fy2019 period .

most of these discretionary costs would be for the administrative costs of increased dl program lending and for growth in the discretionary costs of pell grant awards that would increase due to changes in need analysis procedures and eligibility criteria .

table 1 shows amounts of mandatory funding that would be authorized and provided for programs that would be amended or newly authorized under h.r .

3221 , as passed by the house .

the remainder of this report provides brief descriptions of the programs that would be amended or established under h.r .

3221 .

it begins with a review of changes that would be made to programs authorized under the hea .

this is followed by a review of new non - hea programs that would be established and funded under h.r .

3221 .

this report will be updated as warranted to track legislative developments .

in addition to making changes to the higher education act , h.r .

3221 would authorize and appropriate funding for three categories of programs .

title iii of the safra would establish and fund modernization , renovation , and repair programs for elementary and secondary education , and higher education facilities .

title iv of the safra would establish and provide funding for the early learning challenge fund , focusing on early childhood education .

title v of the safra would establish and provide funding for the american graduation initiative , which would focus on improving community colleges .

h.r .

3221 would authorize three new grant programs for the modernization , renovation , and repair of education facilities .

title iii , subtitle a of the bill would authorize two new elementary and secondary education school facilities grant programs: grants for modernization , renovation , or repair of school facilities ; and supplemental grants for louisiana , mississippi , and alabama .

the authority to award grants under this subtitle would expire at the end of fy2011 .

title iii , subtitle b of the bill would authorize a new grant program of federal assistance for community college modernization and construction .

h.r .

3221 would annually provide $2.020 billion for fy2010 and fy2011 for the grants for modernization , renovation , or repair program .

the majority of funds would be distributed through formula grants to states made in proportion to the amount received by all local educational agencies ( leas ) in the state in the previous fiscal year under the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) , title i - a grants to leas program , relative to the total amount received by all leas in all states under the title i - a program .

after reserving up to 1% of their grants for administration , states , in turn , would award subgrants to leas in proportion to the amount received by each lea in the previous fiscal year under the title i - a program relative to the amount received by all leas in the state .

h.r .

3221 would annually provide $30 million for fy2010 and fy2011 for supplemental grants for louisiana , mississippi , and alabama .

supplemental grants would be provided to leas in proportion to the amount of infrastructure damage inflicted upon lea public school facilities by hurricanes katrina or rita , relative to the overall damage done to public school facilities in all relevant leas combined .

supplemental grant funds could be used for new construction as well as for modernization , renovation , or repair .

a series of general provisions would apply to both elementary and secondary education grant programs .

examples of key provisions are included below .

all iron , steel , and manufactured goods used by the leas under these grant programs must be manufactured in the united states .

leas must adhere to the wage rates in the davis - bacon act , as amended .

leas must use , at a minimum , a specified percentage of funds for projects that meet specific green building / energy rating standards ( 50% for fy2010 and 75% for fy2011 ) .

the secretaries of education and the secretary of labor are required to collaborate to provide opportunities for participants of the youth build and job corps programs and community college students in green building / energy rating certificate / degree programs to work on projects funded under these two programs .

h.r .

3221 would also establish a new higher education federal assistance for community college modernization and construction program .

this program would be a new formula grant program to states for the purpose of constructing , modernizing , renovating , and repairing ( 1 ) facilities at public or private , nonprofit two - year colleges and ( 2 ) facilities used by students seeking pre - baccalaureate degrees or certificates at public four - year ihes that award a significant number of pre - baccalaureate degrees and certificates .

for fy2010 , $2.5 billion would be appropriated and would remain available until expended .

the authority to award grants under this program would expire at the end of fy2010 .

the funds could be used to ( 1 ) reduce the financing costs of loans for construction , modernization , renovation , and repair ; ( 2 ) provide matching funds for capital campaigns for construction , modernization , renovation , and repair ; or ( 3 ) capitalize a revolving loan fund to finance construction , modernization , renovation , and repair of facilities at eligible institutions .

funds could only be used for facilities primarily used for instruction , student housing , or research , and 50% of the funds would have to meet specific green building / energy rating standards .

projects would be required to adhere to the wage rates in the davis - bacon act , as amended .

institutions would be prohibited from concurrently receive funding for construction , modernization , renovation , or repair through this program and any other program funded under the student aid and fiscal responsibility act of 2009 .

funds would be allocated to states in proportion to the number of students in eligible institutions seeking a pre - baccalaureate degree or certificate in each state , relative to the number of students in eligible institutions seeking pre - baccalaureate degrees or certificates in all states .

the following grant amount restrictions apply: a grant could not exceed 25% of the principal on loans whose financing costs would be reduced by the grant , nor could it exceed 25% of the private donations raised in a capital campaign for which grant funds would constitute matching funds .

h.r .

3221 would authorize a new early learning challenge fund to be jointly administered by the secretary of education and the secretary of health and human services .

this program would provide competitive grants to states to improve the standards and quality of state early learning programs serving children from birth to age five .

one billion dollars in mandatory funding would be appropriated annually for this program for fy2010-fy2017 .

grants would be distributed as quality pathways grants and as development grants .

quality pathway grants would be provided to states that have demonstrated significant progress in early childhood education .

these grants would be for up to five years and would be renewable .

development grants would be for states not currently able to meet the criteria for quality pathway grants .

grants would be for up to three - years and would be nonrenewable .

states receiving grants would be required to submit an annual report to the secretary , and would be required to meet maintenance of effort and matching requirements .

the secretary would be required to submit an annual report to the house committee on education and labor , and the senate committee on health , education , labor , and pensions .

from the total appropriated for this program , up to 2% would be reserved for program administration , and up to 3% for research and evaluation .

from amounts remaining after these reservations , 0.25% would be reserved for competitive grants to indian tribes .

all remaining funds would be allocated as competitive grants to states as quality pathways grants and development grants .

for fy2010 through fy2012 , no more than 65% of funds remaining after reservations could be used for quality pathways grants .

beginning with fy2013 , the percentage for quality pathways grants would increase to no more than 85% .

states would be required to prioritize the use of quality pathways grants for improving the quality of early learning programs serving low - income children .

beginning with the second fiscal year of a quality pathways grant , a state making sufficient progress ( as determined by the secretary ) would be permitted to reserve up to 25% of their grant to expand access for low - income children to the highest quality early learning programs that offer full - day services .

not less than 65% of the grant would be used to implement at least two initiatives intended to improve the quality of early learning programs serving disadvantaged children .

these initiatives may focus on improving the credentials of early learning providers tied to increased compensation ; improving early learning program quality ; providing financial incentives to undertake and sustain quality improvements ; implementing classroom observation assessments and data driven decisions to improve instructional practice , or classroom environment , and promote school readiness ; providing high - quality , comprehensive classroom - focused professional development , including professional development related to meeting the needs of diverse populations ; integrating state early learning and development standards into instructional and programmatic practices in early learning programs ; encouraging family involvement and enhancing parent knowledge of state early learning programs and ratings ; building the capacity of early learning programs to facilitate screening , referral , and provision of comprehensive services ; developmental delay , disability , and family support ; and implementing other innovative programs approved in advance by the secretary .

the remainder of a state's grant could be used for one or more of the following activities: implementing or enhancing the state's data system , including interoperability across agencies serving children , including unique child and program identifiers ; implementing or enhancing the state's oversight system , including implementation of a program rating system ; and developing and implementing measures of school readiness of children .

development grants would be awarded competitively to states that demonstrate a commitment to a system of early learning , but are not eligible , or are not awarded , a quality pathways grant .

states would use these grants to develop the components of an early learning system that would allow the state to become eligible for quality pathways grants .

priority would be given to improving the quality of early learning programs serving low - income children .

the secretary of education and the secretary of health and human services would jointly carry out the following activities: establishing a national commission to review and recommend benchmarks to improve state and federal early learning program quality ; conducting a national evaluation of funded grants ; supporting a research collaborative made up of appropriate federal agencies and other federal entities to support in - depth research into early learning that will facilitate improvements in early learning standards and licensing requirements ; and disseminating relevant research , and information on best practices .

not later than 18 months after passage of this act the national commission shall evaluate barriers to increasing access to high quality early learning programs for low - income children .

the national commission is to issue a report and disseminate its findings from the evaluation .

h.r .

3221 would establish two major grant programs to provide funding for community colleges , states , and related consortia to reform the community college system to improve education and training for workforce development .

the first program , grants to eligible entities for community college reform , would annually provide $630 million in competitive grants for fy2010 through fy2013 to fund community college programs that improve completion rates and train workers for skilled occupations .

the second program , grants to eligible states for community college programs , would annually provide $630 million in competitive grants for fy2014 through fy2019 to states to implement the reforms with demonstrated effectiveness from the first program of grants .

in addition to the two major grant programs , $50 million would be provided annually for fy2010 through fy2019 to fund online education programs ( open online education ) ; and $50 million would be provided annually for fy2010 through fy2013 to fund research , evaluation , and data system programs ( learning and earning research center ; and state systems ) .

the secretary of education would have responsibility for obligating and disbursing the funds for these grant programs but would be required to jointly administer these funds with the secretary of labor , based on an interagency agreement .

h.r .

3221 would annually provide $630 million in mandatory funds for fy2010-fy2013 to fund grants to eligible entities for community college reform .

under the program , grants would be awarded competitively , each at a minimum of $750,000 total and for a four - year period , to eligible entities to carry out "innovative programs" or programs with "demonstrated effectiveness" that lead to the completion of a postsecondary degree , certificate , or industry - recognized credential leading to a "skilled occupation" in a "high - demand industry. .

entities eligible to receive grant funding would include community colleges or districts , area career and technical education schools , public four - year institutions offering two - year degrees , tribal colleges and universities , public four - year institutions in partnership with any of the aforementioned entities , a state in partnership with any of the aforementioned entities , or a consortium of at least two of these entities .

in addition , the secretary of education would have the discretion to allow as eligible entities private nonprofit two - year institutions of higher education in puerto rico , the district of columbia , and the outlying areas .

grantees would be required to carry out at least two of the following 10 activities: implement programs to increase the attainment of bachelor's degrees by facilitating the transfer of academic credits between institutions of higher education ; create programs with sector partnerships or employers to provide training for skilled occupations in high - demand industries ; provide support services to students ; enact programs to provide a sequence of training courses leading to attainment of industry - recognized credentials ; strengthen linkages between secondary education and community colleges ; implement policies to increase degree and certificate completion rates , particularly for groups underrepresented in higher education , veterans , or members of the national guard or reserves ; improve the timeliness of the process to create degree and credential programs that are responsive to local , regional , and state workforce needs ; provide information technology training for students and the public through expanded access to community college facilities ; create or enhance programs that prepare students for skilled occupations in energy - related fields ; and create or enhance programs that prepare students for occupations critical to serving veterans .

the legislation would instruct the secretary to give priority to applications from eligible entities that focus on collaboration with business or labor organizations ; that serve low - income , nontraditional students , dislocated workers , or veterans or other low - income , nontraditional students who do not have a bachelor's degree ; that are eligible for assistance under title iii or title v of the hea ( i.e. , hbcus and other minority serving institutions ) ; or that are community colleges located in areas with high unemployment rates .

grantees would be required to develop quantifiable benchmarks to measure progress on program effectiveness .

in addition , community colleges receiving grants would be required , to the extent possible , to provide students with information on the transferability of credits from courses at the community college to four - year institutions in that grantee's state .

finally , the secretary would be directed to allocate a maximum of 2% of the funds in this section to the institute of education sciences ( ies ) to conduct program evaluations .

h.r .

3221 would annually provide $630 million in mandatory funds for fy2014-fy2019 to fund grants to eligible states for community college programs .

these grants would be awarded competitively , each for a six - year period , to eligible states to implement the "systematic reform" of community colleges by carrying out programs and policies that were shown to be effective in the evaluation of programs implemented under the grants for community college reform ( see previous section ) .

priority for grants under this section would be for states focusing on serving low - income , nontraditional students , dislocated workers , or students who are veterans and do not have a bachelor's degree .

states receiving a grant under this section of h.r .

3221 would be required to allocate not less than 90% of the grant funding to community colleges within that state .

grantees would be required to develop quantifiable benchmarks to measure progress on program effectiveness .

h.r .

3221 would annually provide $50 million in mandatory funds for fy2010-fy2019 for the grants for the open online education program .

the secretary of education would be authorized to award competitive grants to or enter into contracts with institutions of higher education , philanthropic organizations , or other entities to develop , disseminate , and evaluate "freely - available high - quality" online education and training courses .

h.r .

3221 also would annually provide $50 million in mandatory funds for fy2010-fy2013 for the grants for the learning and earning research center and the state systems programs .

these grants would be awarded for two purposes .

first , the ies director would award a grant , for a maximum of four years , to an organization to evaluate the effectiveness of community colleges , to measure outcomes of community college students , and to assist states in sharing information and best practices .

second , grants under the state systems section would be awarded to states or consortia of states to establish cooperative agreements with other states to develop and expand interoperable statewide longitudinal data systems , which would include building data systems and tracking outcome data from community colleges over time .

in addition to the development of the longitudinal data systems , the state systems grant would support a $1 million contract with the national research council for an evaluation and the development of a model that enables students to determine the transferability of credits between institutions of higher education .

title vi of h.r .

3221 would establish a series of prohibitions with regard to the awarding of federal grants , contracts , cooperative agreements , or any other form of federal funding to certain organizations if they have been indicted for a violation of federal or state campaign finance , election , or voter registration law ; have had their charter terminated for failure to comply with federal or state lobbying disclosure requirements ; or employ any individual who has been indicted for violation of certain federal or state election laws .

title v would apply these provisions specifically to the association of community organizations for reform now ( acorn ) and any acorn - related affiliate .

