this report provides a summary of some of the issues regarding the creation of a national land parcel database , or cadastre .

the report identifies some of the perceived needs for a national cadastre , legislative and administrative options that could lead to a national land parcel database , and some of the challenges and concerns .

it also summarizes and briefly discusses recommendations in a 2007 national research council ( nrc ) report , which concluded that "a national approach is necessary to provide a rational and accountable system of property records. .

the nrc report described why a national approach is needed , identified challenges to creating a national cadastre , and offered specific recommendations for achieving its vision: a distributed system of land parcel data housed with the appropriate data stewards but accessible through a web - based interface .

the federal government has direct and indirect responsibilities for coordinating and managing land parcel data on federal land .

an example of a direct responsibility is that of the department of the interior's ( doi's ) bureau of land management ( blm ) , which is steward of federal land parcel data .

an example of an indirect role is that of the federal geographic data committee ( fgdc ) , which serves to coordinate federal geospatial activities .

both are discussed further below .

legislative proposals spanning several congresses have attempted to address some of the issues involved in creating a national cadastre .

most recently , the federal land asset inventory reform act of 2011 ( h.r .

1620 ) , introduced on april 15 , 2011 , would require the secretary of the interior to develop a multipurpose cadastre of federal "real property. .

h.r .

1620 was referred to the subcommittee on energy and mineral resources of the house committee on natural resources , but there has been no action on the bill .

similar bills were introduced in the 111 th , 110 th , and 109 th congresses but were not enacted .

the 112 th congress faces the same issues regarding management and coordination of federal land parcel data as previous congresses .

one legislative option is to enact h.r .

1620 .

another option would be to investigate more deeply the findings from the 2007 nrc report and examine whether its recommendations should be implemented legislatively or administratively , or whether they should be implemented at all .

in addition , the 112 th congress may want to consider the potential costs of implementing the recommendations from the nrc report .

for more information on geospatial information generally , see crs report r40625 , geospatial information and geographic information systems ( gis ) : current issues and future challenges .

geospatial information , including land parcel data , is increasingly produced by private sector and other non - federal government sources .

consequently , the federal government's role has shifted from producing geospatial data to coordinating efforts , facilitating partnerships , and managing the vast amounts of geospatial information .

according to the national geospatial advisory committee ( ngac ) , the shift in geospatial data production from the federal government to the private sector and state and local governments has created an "... urgent need to reexamine the relationships between data providers and users to establish a fair and equitable geospatial data marketplace that serves the full range of applications. .

as an example , ngac noted that the census bureau had to develop a duplicate version of street centerlines in preparation for the 2010 census because it could not take advantage of the existing commercial data .

this duplication in effort was a result , in part , of prohibitions on disclosing or publishing private information that identifies an individual or business , per title 13 of the u.s. code .

further , "critical information about the use , value and ownership of property is needed by fema , the forest service , and hud , for emergency preparedness or response in times of hurricanes or wildfires — or even to monitor the current foreclosure problems. .

executive order 12906 and office of management and budget ( omb ) circular a - 16 created the fgdc and instigated efforts to create the nsdi , which includes cadastral data as one of the seven fundamental themes .

the fgdc designated blm as the steward for the federal land parcel data and the coordinator of cadastral data generally , and blm sponsors the fgdc subcommittee for cadastral data .

the cadastral subcommittee has made significant progress in establishing standards and coordinating cadastral data , according to the nrc .

some contend that data standards and specifications are no longer an issue or a barrier to implementation of a national land parcel database .

in addition to administrative imperatives contained within eo 12906 and circular a - 16 , legislation such as the e - government act of 2002 ( p.l .

107-347 ) contained provisions that specifically addressed reducing data redundancy and promoting collaboration and use of standards for government geographic information .

despite nearly 20 years of effort at coordinating geospatial information and land parcel data , however , the nrc observed: one could conclude that the united states has a comprehensive approach to parcel data .

however , a detailed analysis of the situation suggests the opposite... .

it is difficult to ascertain the status of parcel data within the various federal agencies , and it appears that none of the federal land management agencies have a comprehensive and complete parcel data set for the lands they manage... .

there is also evidence that many federal agencies that do not manage lands are acknowledging that they need parcel data to fulfill their missions and , in the absence of a national means to access the data nationwide , are creating data sets to meet their particular needs , often without coordination with other federal agencies that may have needs for the same or similar data .

as discussed above , the nrc found that a coordinated approach to a national land parcel database did not exist .

in its report , the nrc made nine recommendations that it asserted could lead to a coordinated and integrated national approach to land parcel data .

these nine recommendations are summarized and discussed briefly below: 1 .

two new positions should be established: a federal land parcel coordinator and a national land parcel coordinator .

the first would be responsible for federal lands and property ; the second would coordinate parcel data from all sources , both public and private .

nrc recognizes that blm is one organizational choice to coordinate the federal land parcel data , and it could serve both roles , but other agencies are also candidates .

the department of homeland security ( dhs ) , for example , could establish a national land parcel database as a homeland security issue .

the general services administration ( gsa ) already provides services for all federal agencies .

likewise , the census bureau and hud deal with property issues and need land parcel data to fulfill their missions .

nrc recommended that a panel be established to recommend agency leadership .

to date , no such panel has been established .

2 .

fgdc should identify the role of parcel data for the collection and maintenance of other data themes in the overall geospatial infrastructure: buildings and facilities , cultural resources , governmental units , and housing .

nrc recommended a systematic review of how these themes would be managed if an integrated national parcel database existed .

3 .

the federal land parcel coordinator should develop a single database for land parcels managed by the federal government .

this recommendation appears to call for the federal government to house and maintain a single database of federal property , as different from the national land parcel coordinator who would coordinate land parcel data from all sources , which may be housed and maintained in a variety of state , county , local , private , and other databases .

4 .

the national land parcel coordinator should develop and oversee a land parcel data business plan for the nation .

nrc pointed to the lack of a coordinated federal program for parcel data .

5 .

the office of the special trustee for tribal lands should establish an indian lands parcel coordinator to develop a land parcel database for indian trust parcels .

nrc indicated that this could reduce redundancies and duplication of effort in mapping indian lands , among other issues related to trust lands .

6 .

congress and the bureau of the census should explore policy options , including amending title 13 of the u.s. code , to allow its digital data on building addresses and their geographic coordinates to be placed in the public domain while maintaining privacy protections .

7 .

the national land parcel coordinator should adopt the 50-states initiative and require that each state formally establish a state parcel data coordinator .

the 50-states initiative was proposed by the national states geographic information council to develop statewide spatial data infrastructures ( ssdi ) for each state .

the 50-states initiative would potentially enable coordination between geospatial data producers and consumers at all levels within the state , and allow the state to share geospatial data with the national geospatial structure envisioned as the nsdi .

8 .

the national land parcel coordinator should develop a plan for an intergovernmental funding program for the development and maintenance of parcel data .

nrc recognized that the plan must provide financial incentives to local governments that produce and maintain the majority of the parcel data .

additionally , nrc stated that the program would require new funding in addition to existing funding for current federal programs that require parcel data .

9 .

local and state governments should be required to make certain aspects of their parcel data available in the public domain , as a prerequisite for participating in federal geospatial programs .

several challenges to a coordinated and integrated national approach to land parcel data have been identified , such as confidentiality , cost , collaboration and data sharing , and incentives for state and local governments to participate in a national cadastre .

of the range of potential challenges and concerns , the nrc concluded , the financial and technical issues are minor compared to the organizational and political ones .

with thousands of counties or other governmental entities as potential producers of parcel data , the organizational issues are complex .

it is not a simple task to assemble parcel data that span several counties or states .

overcoming organizational boundaries even among federal agencies has been difficult , as evidenced by the fact that there is no single inventory of federal lands .

several of the legislative and administrative options discussed above address organizational challenges , as do several of the nine nrc recommendations .

the nrc also identified political challenges confronting a coordinated and integrated national approach to parcel data: " ... the lack of political will may be the most difficult hurdle of all. .

nrc lists a range of political challenges: return on investment .

determining how to calculate the benefits and costs of creating a national approach to parcel data is difficult .

nrc stated that the real benefits of a nationally integrated system accrue to groups larger than local government agencies seeking improved tax compliance or improved local government efficiency .

nrc contended that a national system would result in reduced fraud , fairer tax assessments , more effective emergency management and response , improved economic development , and other benefits .

motivation at the local level .

what does and could motivate local governments , which manage land parcel systems for local needs , to participate in a national program ? .

according to the nrc , some local governments assume that a national system could never be as accurate as their own data , and that they also fear releasing information to the public domain that the local government paid for .

unfunded mandates .

the nrc noted that local governments face many budget restrictions , and some distrust the forced sharing of data with nothing tangible in return .

private sector benefits .

the nrc reported a widespread perception that many private firms are harvesting data collected by local governments for commercial gain , without any perceived benefits flowing back to the local government .

other local political realities .

the nrc acknowledged that local political leaders may struggle with approving budget requests for large technical projects , such as county participation in a national effort to create an integrated land parcel database , especially when the benefits to the local government are not clear .

lastly , the nrc concluded that "with more than 3,000 counties , tribes , and other local government entities as potential producers of parcel data , the organizational issues are complex. .

some of these concerns have been echoed by the national states geographic information council ( nsgic ) ; however , nsgic also embraces the need for better coordination and for a national spatial data infrastructure , which would include a national land parcel component .

the states are sensitive to being imposed upon by a federal program , however , and are more likely to work in partnership with the federal government .

nsgic recommends its 50-states initiative to meet the needs of the states while also sharing land parcel data with the national program .

the nrc also recommended that a national land parcel coordinator adopt the 50-states initiative .

the western governors' association ( wga ) has also supported federal , state , tribal , and local coordination of gis activities and encouraged regional , state , and interstate data sharing .

further , wga recognized that blm is working with state and local governments to develop current and standardized digital representations of the public land survey system and parcel data , and has referred to this collaboration as the cadastral national spatial data infrastructure ( cadastral nsdi ) .

the western governors called on congress to provide the funding necessary for blm to complete , enhance , and maintain the cadastral nsdi in coordination and partnership with state , tribal , and local governments .

one estimate of funding to implement the wga recommendation is $350 million over three years , followed by a smaller amount in each succeeding year to maintain and enhance a cadastral nsdi .

