the higher education act of 1965 ( hea ; p.l .

89-329 ) , as amended , authorizes a broad array of federal student aid programs that assist students and their families with paying for or financing the costs of obtaining a postsecondary education .

these federal student aid programs are authorized under title iv of the hea .

requirements applicable to the administration of title iv federal student aid programs are specified in title i of the hea , as well as in title iv .

the hea also authorizes many other types of programs , including programs that make federal aid and support available to institutions of higher education ( ihes ) .

the department of education ( ed ) administers programs authorized under the hea .

in 2008 , the hea was reauthorized under the higher education opportunity act ( heoa ; p.l .

110-315 ) ; and in 2009 technical amendments to the hea were made under p.l .

111-39 .

institutions that participate in one or more title iv programs , or that seek to begin participating in these programs , are subject to a wide range of requirements under the act to report or disclose information to the secretary of education ( the secretary ) , to students , to the public , or to other entities .

as part of the amendments made to the hea , the heoa added numerous additional requirements for the reporting and disclosure of information , many of which are applicable to ihes .

this has resulted in a sizable expansion of reporting and disclosure requirements with which ihes must comply as a condition of their participation in hea , title iv federal student aid programs .

this report responds to requests by members of congress for an in - depth examination of the reporting and disclosure requirements applicable to ihes that participate in title iv federal student aid programs .

specifically , it identifies and describes the reporting and disclosure requirements specified under title i and title iv of the hea that applied to institutions prior to the enactment of the heoa and those that were amended or newly established by the heoa .

it has been prepared to serve as a resource to assist members of congress and their staff in overseeing the department of education's implementation of amendments to the hea made by the heoa .

this report is designed to provide a thorough presentation of provisions in the hea that require ihes to report or disclose information , while also highlighting those provisions that were added or amended by the heoa .

in general , the organization of this report follows the statutory framework of the hea .

with respect to a number of subject areas , substantially similar requirements for the reporting or disclosure of information are specified in more than one part or section of the hea .

for example , similar requirements for the disclosure of information about student loans are specified in several areas of the hea ; and certain requirements for the reporting or disclosure of information may be specified in the program participation agreement , as well as in other sections of the hea .

while the secretary has latitude to streamline similar requirements in implementation , in this report , such requirements are generally identified as they appear in the act .

this report attempts to be comprehensive , but not necessarily exhaustive , in its scope .

it is designed to identify and describe requirements in the hea for ihes to report or disclose information .

it does not attempt to identify every instance in which an ihe may be required to respond to a federal statutory or regulatory requirement .

for example , it does not examine all requirements that are primarily operational in nature for ihes to provide information related to federal student aid programs , such as the exchange of information through ed's common origination and disbursement ( cod ) system , nor the requirement of ihes to verify student aid application information .

it also does not examine requirements for ihes to retain documentation of their compliance with hea or regulatory provisions that have no associated requirement for them to report or disclose information .

this report also does not address response burden , nor non - hea requirements and regulations that may impact ihes .

the heoa requires the secretary to enter into an agreement with the national research council to conduct a study to determine the number and scope of all the federal regulations and reporting requirements applicable to ihes , and the associated response burden .

the heoa also requires the government accountability office ( gao ) to conduct a study on ihes' time and cost burdens associated with completing the integrated postsecondary education data system ( ipeds ) surveys .

both of these studies are required to be completed by august 2010 .

the secretary of education ultimately is responsible for determining which hea reporting and disclosure requirements are applicable to ihes that participate in title iv and for promulgating regulations to implement those requirements .

in july and august , 2009 , ed published proposed regulations to implement the heoa amendments to the hea in the federal register .

the heoa also amended the hea , effective july 1 , 2010 , to require the secretary to provide ihes with a list of all the reports and disclosures required under the act .

the list that must be prepared by the department of education must include the following: the date the report or disclosure is required to be completed and submitted , made available , or disseminated ; the required recipients ; any required methods for transmittal or dissemination ; a description of the content of each report or disclosure sufficient to allow the ihe to assign responsibility to staff ; references to applicable statutes , regulations , and guidance ; and any other pertinent information relating to the reporting or disclosure requirement .

the remainder of this report identifies and describes requirements for institutions to report or disclose information to the secretary , to students , to the public , or to other entities , such as lenders , guaranty agencies , and consumer reporting agencies , as specified in the hea and department of education regulations .

it begins with generally applicable requirements as specified in hea , title i — general provisions ; title iv , title g — general provisions ; and title iv , part h — program integrity , and concludes with title iv program - specific requirements for the federal student loan and campus - based programs .

information on requirements to report or disclose information as part of the ipeds surveys is presented in the appendix .

the report generally follows the statutory framework of the hea , and is organized by title and part .

brief general descriptions are provided for each of the major requirements for ihes to report or disclose information .

these descriptions are followed by tables which present the pre - heoa requirements for ihes to report or disclose information , a statutory or regulatory citation for the requirement , and the designated recipient of the information .

the tables also show any corresponding changes made by the heoa to these requirements .

for instance , the tables highlight additional new requirements , as well as changes to the content of what was required to be reported under previously exiting requirements .

prior to the reauthorization of the hea in 2008 , title i of the hea included four parts , which established general provisions for the remainder of the hea: ( 1 ) part a: definition of an institution of higher education , ( 2 ) part b: additional general provisions , ( 3 ) part c: cost of higher education , and ( 4 ) part d: administrative provisions for delivery of student financial assistance .

several of the provisions included in title i specifically affected ihes' participation in the title iv federal student aid programs .

only part b , however , included specific reporting requirements for institutions .

part c included implicit reporting requirements such as those related to ipeds , which is an annual series of surveys administered by ed .

the requirement for institutions to participate in ipeds was and continues to be included in the program participation agreement ( ppa ) requirements included in hea , § 487 .

the heoa amends the institutional reporting requirements included in part a , part b , and part c. the heoa adds a new set of institutional reporting requirements to part c with a focus on transparency in college costs for consumers and textbook information .

the heoa also adds a new part e: lender and institution requirements relating to education loans , which contains a series of requirements for ihes to disclose information about student loans , which are in addition to requirements specified separately under title iv , part b — the federal family education loan ( ffel ) program ; title iv , part d — the william d. ford federal direct loan ( dl ) program ; and title iv , part e — the federal perkins loan program .

this section of the report examines the reporting requirements specified in title i , part a , part b , and part c of the hea prior to and after enactment of the heoa .

it also examines requirements specified in title i , part e of the hea that were enacted by the heoa amendments .

title iv , part g includes a broad array of requirements and other provisions applicable to institutions that participate in title iv programs .

part g provisions which establish requirements for ihes to report or disclose information may be categorized into the following major areas .

student eligibility requirements applicable to the receipt of federal student aid , including determination of eligibility and need , and verification of immigration status .

information about the institution and its programs ; the availability of , procedures to apply for , and descriptions of federal student aid programs ; the institution's transfer of credit policies ; and penalties for drug - related offenses .

entrance and exit counseling for borrowers of ffel and dl program loans ; and verification of borrower information in the national student loan data system ( nslds ) .

information on athletic programs and students who receive athletically related student aid ; and completion or graduation rates , both for recipients of athletically related aid and for all students .

information on campus security , campus crime , fire safety , and missing persons procedures .

information required as part of program participation agreements , including the reporting or disclosure of institutional and financial assistance information , information collected as part of the ipeds surveys , information on student loan codes of conduct , and information on student loan preferred lender lists .

this part of this report identifies and describes provisions specified in title iv , part g that require the reporting or disclosure of information by institutions that participate in title iv programs .

part h of title iv specifies the roles and responsibilities for the three aspects of the program integrity triad: ( 1 ) state authorization , ( 2 ) accreditation by an accrediting organization recognized by the secretary of education , and ( 3 ) eligibility and certification by ed .

the triad is intended to provide balance in assuring the eligibility of institutions for title iv programs .

the state role is primarily one of consumer protection , while the accrediting agencies are intended to function as a quality assurance mechanism .

these two legs of the triad were developed independently of the federal government .

the federal government has historically relied on them to avoid generating concerns about federal interference in educational decision - making .

ed is responsible for the third leg of the triad , oversight of compliance ; that is , protecting the administrative and fiscal integrity of the federal student aid programs .

most of the reporting requirements in part h are imposed in response to the third leg of the triad .

these requirements , however , are generally specified in regulations rather than statutory language .

while most requirements for the reporting or disclosure of information , as specified in title i , or part g and part h of title iv , are applicable to ihes as a condition of their participation in one or more title iv programs , several title iv programs contain specific requirements for ihes to report or disclose certain program - specific information to the secretary , to students or borrowers , or to other entities .

some of these requirements are substantially similar to requirements specified elsewhere in the hea .

also , in some instances , these requirements are operational in nature ; for example , calculating financial need for borrowers and forwarding this information to lenders , or notifying lenders of a change in the status of a borrower .

in other instances , these requirements pertain to the application to participate in a program and the use of funds for that program , as with the fiscal operations report and application to participate ( fisap ) for the campus - based programs .

this part of this report examines program - specific reporting and disclosure requirements applicable to ihes that participate in the ffel program , the dl program , and the three campus - based programs — the fseog program , the fws program , and the federal perkins loan program .

most requirements for institutions to report or disclose information with respect to the ffel and dl programs are specified in the hea under title i or part g — general provisions , and part h — program integrity of title iv ( see above ) , and in regulations implementing these provisions .

however , the hea also specifies several institutional requirements for the reporting or disclosure of information in statutory language authorizing the ffel and dl programs .

in accordance with ffel program requirements specified in title iv , part b , institutions are required to comply with several reporting and disclosure requirements which are primarily operational in nature .

for each borrower of a stafford loan , institutions must provide eligible ffel program lenders with a statement showing relevant need analysis data used in determining the borrower's eligibility for the loan ( eg , efc , coa , and efa , as applicable ) , the loan amount , and a disbursement schedule .

institutions must also provide information on changes in a borrower's permanent address , when the student ceases to be enrolled at least half - time , and any other change in status to the lender or the guaranty agency .

the heoa did not amend these ffel program requirements .

these requirements are presented in table 15 .

in accordance with dl program requirements specified in title iv , part d , institutions are required to provide timely and accurate information to the secretary concerning the status of student borrowers while in attendance and after they leave school , for purposes of servicing and collecting on loans .

this requirement is similar to the ffel program requirements described above .

the heoa amended the hea to establish requirements for institutions that participate in the dl program to comply with the student loan disclosure requirements specified in hea , § 433 that are applicable to lenders of ffel program loans , including disclosures before disbursement and before repayment .

dl program reporting and disclosure requirements are presented in table 16 .

the federal supplemental educational opportunity grant program , the federal work - study program , and the federal perkins loan program are collectively referred to as the campus - based programs .

these programs are authorized under title iv , part a , subpart 2 ; part c ; and part e , respectively .

they are need - based federal student aid programs under which students may receive aid made available through the institution they attend .

campus - based aid is funded through a combination of federal allocations to institutions and institutional matching funds .

institutions that participate in the campus - based programs are subject to a number of program - specific reporting requirements specified in the statute or regulations .

as its name implies , the fisap is a data collection instrument used to gather program and fiscal information from institutions that have participated in one or more of the campus - based programs in a prior award year , and to gather information used in the allocation of funds to institutions that intend to participate in one or more of the campus - based programs in the subsequent award year .

the fisap is intended to ensure the proper and efficient administration of funds that institutions receive from the secretary .

information reported on the fisap includes identifying information and characteristics of the ihe , the ihe's request for funds to participate in each applicable program , enrollment information for undergraduate and graduate students arrayed according to income level , fiscal and program data for each applicable program ( eg , allotment of funds , aggregate student financial need , perkins loan cohort default rate data , employment in fws community service , transfer of funds between programs , etc .

 ) , the distribution of campus - based program aid recipients by student type and income level , and administrative costs .

the fisap form contains more than 200 line items , and many of these line items have multiple data elements .

fisap forms are made available by july 1 of each year and completed fisaps are due to ed by october 1 of each year .

institutions submit completed fisaps to ed electronically via the student aid internet gateway .

requirements specified in the hea for the reporting of information that is collected via the fisap for the fseog , fws , and federal perkins loan programs are presented in table 17 , table 18 , and table 19 , respectively .

the heoa made relatively few changes to the campus - based programs and these tables show the additional information that ihes will likely be required to report on the fisap .

institutions or groups of institutions may use fws funds to operate job location and development programs for currently enrolled students .

each institution that operates a job location and development program must enter into an agreement with the secretary stating that the institution will submit an annual report on the use of the funds under the program and an annual evaluation of the effectiveness of the program in benefitting the institution's students .

 ( hea , § 446 ( b ) ( 6 ) ) .

under the federal perkins loan program , institutions make loans directly to students .

in their capacity as lenders , institutions are required to disclose certain information about the terms and conditions of perkins loans to borrowers prior to making a loan , as part of the loan agreement , and also prior to the commencement of repayment .

in addition , institutions must disclose information about borrower's perkins loans to consumer reporting agencies , including information about the disbursement and repayment of loans , loan defaults , and the rehabilitation of defaulted loans .

requirements for institutions to report or disclose information about the terms and conditions of perkins loans to borrowers , and the repayment of loans to consumer reporting agencies is presented in table 20 .

in addition , as a requirement of program participation agreements ( see previous discussion ) , institutions must report information on perkins loans to the national student loan data system ( nslds ) .

under title iv , part g , as part of program participation agreements , ihes are required to respond to ipeds or any other federal postsecondary institution data collection effort , as specified by the secretary , in a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the secretary .

there are multiple postsecondary data collections that are conducted by ed on either an annual basis ( eg , ipeds ) or every few years ( eg , npsas ) .

for some of these data collection efforts the participation of all ihes is required ( eg , ipeds ) , while for others a sample of ihes are selected for participation ( eg , the national postsecondary student aid study ( npsas ) ) .

because ipeds is an annual , mandated reporting requirement for all ihes , this appendix provides a detailed depiction of the ipeds reporting requirements .

a review of other postsecondary data collections is beyond the scope of this report .

integrated postsecondary education data system ipeds is the primary postsecondary education data collection program for the national center of education statistics at ed .

through ipeds , data are collected from all primary providers of postsecondary education in the u.s. through surveys .

data are collected from academic , vocational , and continuing professional education programs that are provided by institutions open to the general public .

all ihes that participate , or are authorized to participate , in any of the federal student aid programs authorized by title iv of the hea are required to respond to ipeds .

other institutions may choose to participate in ipeds .

selected data for any institution that responds to ipeds are included in the college navigator website .

ipeds data are collected through a series of eight survey components: institutional characteristics , degree completions , 12-month enrollment , human resources ( including fall staff and salaries ) , fall enrollment , finance , financial aid , and graduation rates .

most surveys are conducted annually .

examples of data collected on each of these surveys are provided below .

institutional characteristics: institutional contact information , educational offerings , mission statement , control , affiliation , admissions requirements , and student charges .

degree completions: level or type of degree ( degree programs ) and length of program ( non - degree programs ) .

12-month enrollment: unduplicated headcounts and instructional activity , and full - time equivalent ( fte ) enrollment .

human resources: employees assigned by position , including full - or part - time status , function , or occupational category ; and faculty status and tenure status ; as well as data on fall staff and salaries .

fall staff: full - time faculty by contract length and salary intervals , non - faculty employed full time by primary occupational activity and salary class intervals , tenure of full - time faculty , and number of new hires by primary occupational activity ( data collected biennially in odd - numbered years from ihes with 15 or more full - time employees ) .

salaries: number of full - time instructional staff by rank , gender , and length of contract ; total salary outlay ; and fringe benefit information ( data are collected from degree - granting institutions only ) .

fall enrollment: number of full - and part - time students enrolled in the fall , students in courses creditable toward a degree , and students enrolled in courses that are part of a vocational or occupational program ; residence of students ; and age of students .

finance: revenues by source , expenses by function , physical plant assets and indebtedness , and endowment investment .

financial aid: number of students receiving federal grants , state and local government grants , institutional grants , and loans ; and average amount of aid received by type of aid .

graduation rates: number of students entering the institution , number of students completing their program within 150% of the normal period of time , number of students who transferred , and number of students who received athletically related student aid .

it should be noted that not every survey is administered to every institution each year , and that not every student is included in various data elements .

for example , the fall staff survey component is conducted only in odd years .

the salaries survey component is required to be completed only by degree - granting institutions .

financial aid data are collected for full - time , first - time , and degree - and certificate - seeking students only .

in calculating graduation rates , only full - time , first - time , and degree - or certificate - seeking students are counted in the initial calculation of the number of students entering an institution during a particular year .

in addition , different versions of various surveys are administered to ihes depending on whether the ihe is a four - year , two - year , or less - than - two - year institution ; on whether the ihe is a public , private nonprofit , or private for - profit institution ; and on other institutional factors such as the institution's number of full - time employees .

the individual survey components are administered in either the fall , spring , or winter .

for the 2008-2009 academic year , the following components were administered in each of these time periods .

fall 2008: institutional characteristics , completions , and 12-month enrollment winter 2008-2009: human resources , fall enrollment , and finance spring 2009: graduation rates and student financial aid , as well as fall enrollment and finance ( for ihes that did not finalize these data during the winter data collection ) table a - 1 provides an overview of the survey items to which a public , four - year institution would be required to respond .

as previously discussed , the specific survey components , survey items , and number of survey items varies based on institutional characteristics , such as institutional level and control .

