shortly after combat operations began pursuant to the congressional authorization to use military force in response to the terrorist attacks of september 11 , 2001 , president bush issued a military order ( m.o. ) .

authorizing trial by military commission of non - citizens suspected of terrorist acts or associations who were to be designated as subject to the m.o .

president bush subsequently determined that 20 of the detainees at the u.s .

naval station in guantánamo bay held in connection with the conflict were subject to the m.o. , and 10 were eventually charged for trial before military commissions .

the m.o .

specified that persons subject to it would have no recourse to the u.s. court system to appeal a verdict or obtain any other sort of relief , but the supreme court essentially invalidated that provision in its 2004 opinion , rasul v. bush .

military commissions are courts usually set up by military commanders in the field to try persons accused of certain offenses during war .

they may also try persons for ordinary crimes in cases of martial law or military occupation , where regular civil courts are not able to function .

past military commissions trying enemy belligerents for war crimes directly applied the international law of war , without recourse to domestic criminal statutes , unless such statutes were declaratory of international law .

historically , military commissions have applied the same set of procedural rules that applied in courts - martial .

by statute , military commissions have long been available to try "offenders or offenses designated by statute or the law of war. .

for the most part , military commissions have been employed where u.s. armed forces have established a military government or martial law , as in the war with mexico , the civil war , the philippine insurrection , and in occupied germany and japan after world war ii .

president bush's military order establishing military commissions to try suspected terrorists was the focus of intense debate both at home and abroad .

critics argued that the tribunals could violate any rights the accused may have under the constitution as well as their rights under international law , thereby undercutting the legitimacy of any verdicts rendered by the tribunals .

the bush administration established rules prescribing detailed procedural safeguards for the tribunals .

these rules were praised as a significant improvement over what might have been permitted under the language of the m.o. , but some continued to argue that the enhancements did not go far enough .

critics also noted that the rules did not address the issue of indefinite detention without charge , as appeared to be possible under the original m.o. , or that the department of defense ( dod ) may continue to detain persons who have been cleared by a military commission .

the pentagon reportedly stated that its inspector general ( ig ) looked into allegations , made by military lawyers assigned as prosecutors to the military commissions , that the proceedings were rigged to obtain convictions , but the ig did not substantiate the charges .

congress took no action with respect to military commissions until after the supreme court's rasul decision .

at the end of december 2005 , congress enacted the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( dta ) .

the dta did not authorize military commissions , but amended title 28 , u.s. code to revoke all judicial jurisdiction over habeas claims by persons detained as "enemy combatants," and it created jurisdiction in the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit to hear appeals of final decisions of military commissions .

the supreme court , in hamdan v. rumsfeld , invalidated the military commission system established by presidential order , holding that although congress had in general authorized the use of military commissions , such commissions were required to follow procedural rules as similar as possible to courts - martial proceedings , as required by the uniform code of military justice ( ucmj ) .

in response , congress promptly passed the military commissions act of 2006 ( mca ) to authorize military commissions and establish procedural rules that are modeled after , but depart from in some significant ways , the ucmj .

the department of defense issued regulations for the conduct of military commissions pursuant to the mca .

one detainee , david matthew hicks of australia , was convicted of material support to terrorism pursuant to a plea agreement in 2007 .

in 2008 , salim hamdan was found guilty of one count of providing material support for terrorism and sentenced to 66 months' imprisonment , but credited with five years' time served .

ali hamza ahmad suliman al bahlul of yemen was found guilty of multiple counts of conspiracy and solicitation to commit certain war crimes and of providing material support for terrorism in connection with his role as al qaeda's "propaganda chief. .

he refused representation and boycotted most of his trial , and was subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment .

on january 22 , 2009 , president barack obama issued an executive order requiring that the guantanamo detention facility be closed no later than a year from the date of the order .

the order requires specified officials to review all guantanamo detentions to assess whether the detainee should continue to be held by the united states , transferred or released to another country , or be prosecuted by the united states for criminal offenses .

during the review period , the secretary of defense is required to take steps to ensure that all proceedings before military commissions and the united states court of military commission review are halted , although some pretrial proceedings have continued to take place .

fifteen detainees currently stand charged under the mca , while charges were dismissed without prejudice against five other detainees , one of whom has been ordered released by a federal judge .

one case was moved to a federal district court .

in may , 2009 , the obama administration announced that it was considering restarting the military commission system with some changes to the procedural rules .

the department of defense informed congress about modifications to the manual for military commissions , to take effect july 14 , 2009 .

president obama's detention policy task force issued a preliminary report july 20 , 2009 , reaffirming that the white house considers military commissions to be an appropriate forum for trying some cases involving suspected violations of the laws of the war , although federal criminal court would be the preferred forum for trials of detainees .

the disposition of each case referred is to be assigned to a team comprised of doj and dod personnel , including prosecutors from the office of military commissions .

appended to the report was a set of criteria to govern the disposition of cases involving guantanamo detainees .

this protocol identifies three broad categories of factors to be taken into consideration: strength of interest , namely , the nature and gravity of offenses or underlying conduct ; identity of victims ; location of offense ; location and context in which individual was apprehended ; and the conduct of the investigation .

efficiency , namely , protection of intelligence source and methods ; venue ; number of defendants ; foreign policy concerns ; legal or evidentiary problems ; efficiency and resource concerns .

other prosecution considerations , namely , the extent to which the forum and offenses that can be tried there permit a full presentation of the wrongful conduct , and the available sentence upon conviction .

federal prosecutors are to evaluate their cases under "traditional principles of federal prosecution. .

the military commissions act of 2006 ( "mca" ) grants the secretary of defense express authority to convene military commissions to prosecute those fitting the definition under the mca of "alien unlawful enemy combatants. .

the secretary delegated the authority to a specially appointed "convening authority," who has responsibility for accepting or rejecting charges referred by the prosecution team , convening military commissions for trials , detailing military commission members and other personnel , approving requests from trial counsel to communicate with the media , approving requests for expert witnesses , approving plea agreements , carrying out post - trial reviews and forwarding cases for review , along with other duties spelled out in the mca or in dod's regulation for trial by military commission .

the mca eliminates the requirement for military commissions to conform to either of the two uniformity requirements in article 36 , ucmj , which president bush's military commissions were held in hamdan to violate .

instead , it establishes chapter 47a in title 10 , u.s. code and excepts military commissions under this chapter from the requirements in article 36 .

it provides that the ucmj "does not , by its terms , apply to trial by military commissions except as specifically provided in this chapter. .

while declaring that the enacted chapter is "based upon the procedures for trial by general courts - martial under [the ucmj]," it establishes that "[t]he judicial construction and application of [the ucmj] are not binding on military commissions established under this chapter. .

it expressly exempts these military commission from ucmj articles 10 ( speedy trial ) , 31 ( self - incrimination warnings ) and 32 ( pretrial investigations ) , and amends articles 21 , 28 , 48 , 50 ( a ) , 104 , and 106 of the ucmj to except military commissions under chapter 47a .

other provisions of the ucmj are to apply to trial by military commissions under chapter 47a only to the extent provided therein .

one bill has been introduced in the 111 th congress to amend the mca .

for additional legislation pertaining to detainees and habeas corpus , see crs report r40419 , analysis of selected legislative proposals addressing guantanamo detainees , by [author name scrubbed] .

sec .

1031 of the national defense authorization act for fy2010 ( "ndaa fy2010" ) , s. 1390 , 111 th cong , 1 st sess .

 ( 2009 ) , ( as passed by the senate ) , would replace chapter 47a of title 10 , u.s. code , as enacted by the mca 2006 .

some key differences between § 1031 of s. 1390 and the mca 2006 include: military commissions would have jurisdiction over "alien unprivileged enemy belligerents," defined somewhat differently from "alien unlawful enemy combatants" in the current law .

the definition eliminates references to al qaeda and the taliban .

military commissions would have express authority to determine their own jurisdiction .

while mca offenses remain substantially unchanged , the amendment requires that offenses occurred "in the context of and associated with armed conflict. .

crimes that occurred prior to enactment of the bill would be prosecutable only to the extent that they are codifications of crimes traditionally triable by military commissions .

 ( the mca currently declares all covered offenses to be codifications of existing crimes ) .

confessions allegedly elicited through cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment prohibited by section 1003 of the detainee treatment act of 2005 ( 42 u.s.c .

§ 2000dd ) would be inadmissible , regardless of when the statement was made .

the mca bars the use of such confessions only if they were made after the enactment of section 1003 .

 ( this change codifies an amendment to the manual for military commission already made under the obama administration ) .

in the case of hearsay evidence , the party offering the evidence would have the burden of demonstrating that it is reliable , whereas under current law , the opponent has the burden of proving that it is unreliable .

 ( this change also codifies an amendment to regulations already made under the obama administration ) .

the court of appeals of the armed services ( caaf ) rather than the court of military commission review would serve as the exclusive appellate court .

all trials that produce a guilty verdict would be referred automatically for review by the caaf , unless waived where permitted .

the caaf's scope of review would include questions of fact as well as law , and the caaf would have the authority to order charges dismissed .

the court of appeals for the d.c .

circuit would have no appellate role .

the supreme court would retain discretionary jurisdiction through writ of certiorari .

the obligation to disclose exculpatory information would include mitigating evidence , and the obligation would extend to all information that is known or reasonably should be known to any government officials who participated in the investigation and prosecution of the case .

this amendment essentially codifies the rules in the manual for military commissions applicable to discovery , which defines "exculpatory information" to include evidence that tends to reduce the degree of guilt of the accused of an offense charged or reduce the punishment .

further , "evidence known to trial counsel," includes evidence that the prosecution would be required to disclose in a trial by general court - martial , which covers information under the control of the government .

the obama administration has proposed some amendments to section 1031 of s. 1390 .

it proposes excluding all involuntarily given statements by the accused , rather than just those obtained through the use of torture or cruel , inhuman , or degrading treatment .

the voluntariness standard would entail taking into account the "challenges and realities of the battlefield and armed conflict. .

it does not propose a requirement that battlefield captives be warned that their statements can be used against them , as is the case in ordinary criminal prosecutions in u.s. courts .

the obama administration would retain language asserting that offenses are codifications of the common law of war , but would eliminate the material support charge .

the administration supports the senate proposal for treating hearsay evidence , but would adopt a somewhat different standard as to when the exception should apply , based on whether the hearsay evidence is more probative than other evidence that could be procured through reasonable efforts , rather than strictly on the availability of the witness to testify .

the administration proposes keeping the present appellate structure intact , but modifying the role of the court of military commissions review to make it more like one of the services courts of criminal appeals , empowering it to address questions of fact as well as law .

the administration would include a five - year sunset provision for the m.c.a .

the following charts provide a comparison of the military tribunals under the regulations issued by the department of defense , standard procedures for general courts - martial under the manual for courts - martial , and military tribunals as authorized by the military commissions act of 2006 .

chart 1 compares the legal authorities for establishing military tribunals , the jurisdiction over persons and offenses , and the structures of the tribunals .

chart 2 , which compares procedural safeguards incorporated in the mca to court - martial procedures and to proposed amendments , follows the same order and format used in crs report rl31262 , selected procedural safeguards in federal, military , and international courts , by [author name scrubbed] , in order to facilitate comparison of the proposed legislation to safeguards provided in federal court , the international military tribunals that tried world war ii crimes at nuremberg and tokyo , and contemporary ad hoc tribunals set up by the un security council to try crimes associated with hostilities in the former yugoslavia and rwanda .

for a comparison with previous rules established under president bush's military order , refer to crs report rl33688 , the military commissions act of 2006: analysis of procedural rules and comparison with previous dod rules and the uniform code of military justice , by [author name scrubbed] .

