amid signs that the global economy is emerging from the worldwide recession of late 2008 and 2009 , african economies appear to be recovering from the crisis with the potential to significantly increase growth rates in the coming year .

imf director dominique strauss - kahn stated in march 2010 that african economies were recovering faster than expected from the global downturn .

africa's apparent economic resilience can be explained by a variety of complex factors .

many african governments , particularly those of resource - rich and middle - income countries , lessened the economic blow of the recession by implementing economic stimulus and / or financial sector rescue packages .

sizable assistance by international financial institutions , with u.s. support , also played an important stabilizing role .

still , the drop in economic growth experienced in most african countries in 2008 and 2009 is thought to have significantly negatively affected african countries' ability to make progress in reducing poverty .

moreover , africa's continued reliance on commodity exports could blunt the expected recovery .

many investors reportedly view africa's growth in 2010 as stemming from an expected rise in mining activity following its collapse in late 2008 , combined with recent gains in communications infrastructure and political stability .

african economies also appear to be benefiting anew from investment and trade with large emerging economies such as china , india , russia , and brazil , which appear to have recovered more quickly from the global recession than traditional industrialized nations .

in august 2009 , the obama administration notified congress that four african countries — ghana , liberia , tanzania , and zambia — would benefit from funds appropriated by congress in 2009 for "assistance for vulnerable populations in developing countries severely affected by the global financial crisis," with various eligibility requirements .

a total of $255.6 million in economic support funds ( esf ) were appropriated for this "crisis fund" in the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-32 ) .

as of early 2010 , $32.5 million had been obligated for programs in ghana , $25.2 million for liberia , $37.9 million for tanzania , and $25 million for zambia .

amid signs that the crisis has peaked , policymakers' attention has again shifted toward emphasizing longer - term policies to ensure that growth increases and contributes to broad socio - economic development .

in november 2009 , u.n. secretary - general ban ki - moon stated that africa's future economic prosperity would require industrialization , improved access to global markets , and a "green agricultural revolution. .

international attention has also focused on stemming africa's illicit economies , including bribery , theft , money laundering , and trafficking in people , narcotics , and weaponry .

a march 2010 study by global financial integrity showed illicit capital outflows from africa totaled $854 billion between 1970 and 2008 , creating a "staggering" negative economic impact .

what began as a bursting of the u.s. housing market bubble has ballooned into a global financial and economic crisis , leading to the most severe global recession since the great depression of the 1930s .

starting in september 2008 , credit flows froze , lender confidence dropped , and economies around the world dipped toward recession .

having begun in industrialized countries , this financial crisis quickly spread to emerging market and developing economies .

investors pulled capital from countries , even those with small levels of perceived risk , and caused values of stocks and domestic currencies to plunge .

slumping exports and commodity prices have added to developing countries' woes .

the international monetary fund ( imf ) estimated that the global economy would contract by 1.1% in 2009 , but that it could rebound to 3.1% growth in 2010 .

developing economies may not have played a major role in the onset of the crisis , but they may have less resilient economic systems that can be highly affected by actions in global markets .

most industrialized countries have been able to finance their own rescue packages by borrowing domestically and in international capital markets , but many emerging market and developing economies have insufficient sources of capital and have turned to help from regional development banks , the imf , the world bank , and traditional donors such as the group of eight ( g - 8 ) .

many analysts were initially optimistic that the impact of the global financial crisis on sub - saharan africa ( henceforth , "africa" ) would be negligible .

african economies are among the least exposed to the global financial system of any world region , and african banks hold few of the "toxic assets" that helped spark the crisis .

however , as the financial crisis has deepened into a global economic recession , african economies are experiencing strong negative effects due to a contraction in global trade , including reduced demand for african commodity exports , tighter financing conditions overseas , and a drop in foreign direct investment and other capital inflows .

additional revenue streams such as tourism and remittances from african workers abroad are also expected to fall , and foreign aid is predicted to decrease , particularly if the crisis persists .

in its most recent regional economic analysis on africa , the imf estimated that average economic growth in africa would slow from an average of 6.5% per year between 2002 and 2007 — a historic high — to 1% in 2009 , before recovering to 4% in 2010 .

the crisis is expected to dampen prospects for reducing african poverty , as at least 7% annual growth is generally considered necessary for outpacing population growth and making significant progress in alleviating the toll of hunger , unemployment , and disease .

anticipated negative growth in some countries , including in africa's largest economy by far , south africa , may have further ripple effects for smaller neighboring economies who depend on regional powerhouses for trade , remittances , and employment .

unemployment — already high in all african countries — is expected to rise , with potential implications for political stability .

the obama administration has emphasized african economic growth as a foreign policy goal .

secretary of state hillary clinton stated in october 2009 that the administration seeks to "help create the right conditions" for growth through improvements in trade , development and agriculture aid , energy security , public private partnerships , and good governance .

the global recession has affected most african countries through a variety of mechanisms , or channels , including a decline in global trade , a drop in investment , falling remittances from overseas workers , and possible cuts in foreign aid .

these channels are largely connected to africa's "real" economy , rather than its financial sector .

economic growth in africa began to decrease in the second half of 2008 , with average growth falling from nearly 7% in 2007 to just under 5.5% in 2008 , according to the imf .

african countries with relatively developed financial markets — such as south africa and nigeria — were the first to feel the effects of the crisis .

the imf projected average economic growth in africa would plunge from 6.5% per year between 2002 and 2007 to 1% in 2009 .

at the same time , average growth rates for the region largely reflect africa's largest economies , including oil exporters and middle - income countries ( of which south africa is the largest ) , where the impact of the crisis has been strongest .

median annual economic growth was expected to decelerate from 4.75% on average between 2002 and 2007 to 2.5% in 2009 .

while some observers argue that merely sustaining positive average growth ( as opposed to a recession ) means the impact of the crisis on africa will be relatively minor compared to other regions , others contend that africa's developing economies require high levels of growth to outpace demographic trends and translate into significant poverty alleviation .

for example , per - capita average gdp in africa was projected to decline by nearly 1% in 2009 .

the imf reported in mid - october that most african economies "nonetheless seem to be responding to this storm better than those of the past," having "generally avoided the major macroeconomic stabilities that followed previous global slowdowns. .

according to the imf , africa is projected to experience an economic recovery in 2010 , rebounding to 4% growth on average .

such an outcome would represent a rapid bounce - back compared to sluggish recoveries following previous global recessions .

this scenario has led some observers to speak of africa's underlying economic "resilience," pointing toward robust domestic demand and the lasting effects of macroeconomic reforms .

in late september 2009 , world bank president robert zoellick stated , "over time , africa can also become a pole of growth… coming out of the crisis , there could be a new opportunity. .

there is strong congressional interest in african socioeconomic development and regional stability .

congressional interest in fostering u.s. economic ties with african countries is evidenced in recent hearings , such as that held in june 2009 by the house committee on energy and commerce , subcommittee on commerce , trade , and consumer protection and the house committee on foreign affairs , subcommittee on africa and global health , on "u.s. - africa trade relations: creating a platform for economic growth" ; in pending legislation , such as h.con.res .

128 , "expressing the sense of congress that africa is of significant strategic , political , economic , and humanitarian importance to the united states" ( referred to the house foreign affairs committee in may 2009 ) ; and in existing laws and programs such as the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) .

a consideration of the impact of the crisis may affect bilateral and regional aid levels and programs , u.s. trade policy toward africa , and analyses of regional and country - level political trends , among other areas .

the u.s. government has announced several new policies to aid developing countries affected by the crisis , though it has not , to date , formulated a policy specifically aimed at addressing the impact on africa .

the supplemental appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-32 , passed into law on june 24 , 2009 ) , includes $255.6 million in economic support funds ( esf ) for "assistance for vulnerable populations in developing countries severely affected by the global financial crisis," with certain eligibility criteria .

however , while an initial house report on the legislation provided that five african countries — ghana , liberia , mozambique , tanzania , and zambia — should "receive priority consideration," along with several other countries outside the region , the subsequent conference report did not include such specifications .

in july 2009 , the obama administration noted the impact of the economic crisis on developing countries in announcing its commitment to double u.s. agricultural development assistance to more than $1 billion in 2010 , and to provide at least $3.5 billion over the next three years .

the initiative is global , not uniquely focused on africa , though the administration cited the u.s. comprehensive africa agriculture development program ( caadp ) as a "model. .

u.s. responses to date have focused on support for multilateral lending and grant initiatives .

moving forward , this may include increased financial support to the international financial institutions to which african countries are expected to apply for economic support during the crisis .

in the 2009 supplemental ( p.l .

111-32 ) , congress approved u.s. participation in a range of measures designed to increase the amount of financial assistance the imf may provide to its member states in the wake of the economic crisis .

the afdb has also requested an increase in financing by the g - 20 .

relevant legislation includes s. 955 , the african development fund replenishment act of 2009 .

