the federal antitrust laws are directed at insuring that markets remain competitive , with the ultimate goal of securing consumer welfare .

antitrust is a means of governing market behavior that is , in essence , the flip side of market regulation accomplished via regulatory oversight .

any proposed health care reform scheme , therefore , is likely to contain latent conflicts with existing federal law .

there could be disagreement , for example , with the primary antitrust laws of the united states , as well as the "unfairness" provision of the federal trade commission ( ftc , commission ) act , and possibly , the pricing mandates of the robinson - patman ( r - p ) antidiscrimination act .

the consolidation or integration of health care entities , or other behavior by them ( collusive and / or unilateral ) , even if prompted by or taken in furtherance of achieving some level of joint functioning deemed necessary to achieve the stated goals of health care legislation , could create cause for antitrust concern ; and any of the named statutes might , depending on the circumstances of the behavior , be deemed applicable .

joint negotiation over fees or terms of reimbursement by physicians or other providers is an example of joint or collusive behavior that might implicate the antitrust laws .

as then - ftc commissioner thomas leary noted in a 2003 article discussing the antitrust implications of 'clinical integration,' "providers have a legitimate incentive to engage in collective actions that will increase their bargaining power on issues that relate to the quality of care .

[on the other hand,] providers also have a less legitimate incentive to engage in collective action that will increase their income. .

to illustrate his point , leary cites ftc v. superior court trial lawyers ass'n .

 ( 493 u.s. 411 ( 1990 ) ) .

that case is discussed in fn 6 to the crs report cited in note 4 , supra .

two minnesota bills to authorize collective bargaining by minnesota health care cooperatives became law despite the commission's negative assessment of their likely antitrust or consumer - related consequences , as did a new york measure to mandate or prohibit certain behavior by pharmacy benefit managers ( pbms ) .

in both instances , the ftc comments were solicited by members of the state legislatures , and concluded that the likely result of passage would be an increase in health care costs and / or a reduction in insurance coverage .

with respect to the proposed pbm legislation , the commission noted that to the extent the bill "appear[ed] to try to prevent possible conflicts of interest that a pharmacy benefit manager could have in managing the drug benefit program for a health plan," it was both unwise , and probably unwarranted .

the bill's requirements , the comment noted , "will limit the ability of health plans and [pbms] to reach cost - effective relationships .

in turn , those increased costs likely will raise the cost of prescription drug coverage" without any offsetting benefit because the "perceived problems [the bill] seeks to address are not widespread. .

nevertheless , as the discussion on pages 4-5 and accompanying notes indicate , the antitrust agencies are aware that certain activities which at first glance would appear to violate the antitrust laws may be saved by the fact that they are consumer - friendly as necessary to achieve either improvement in health care delivery or reduced cost and / or greater availability of health insurance , or all of them .

notwithstanding the court's conclusion in usps v. flamingo industries that the antitrust laws do not , and were probably not meant to , apply to the federal government , the applicability of the antitrust laws to specific entities created by the government may remain an issue .

moreover , although there may be antitrust concerns with government participation in the market as a competitor of private enterprise ; or with the antitrust legality of actions taken by private entities , either in cooperation with , or at the behest of the federal government , we are not aware of any decision that directly addresses those issues .

first , the way in which an entity established by congress is characterized may determine the success of an antitrust challenge , i.e .

 , what may decide at least some issues is the way in which congress chooses to style whatever entity is designated as a competitor to existing health plans or health insurers .

certainly , the language in flamingo industries seems to suggest that only in instances where congress has specifically designated a corporation established by it as an agency of the united states government ( in the case of the united states postal service , an "independent establishment of the executive branch of the united states government" ) would a court find the antitrust laws inapplicable .

instances in which congress has chosen to create corporations which specifically are not agencies of the federal government , and whose actions are , therefore , amenable to the antitrust laws , include the regional rail reorganization act , which created the national railroad passenger corporation , and the communications satellite act of 1962 , which created comsat .

a second , separate but related , issue concerns the antitrust treatment of purportedly private entities working either in concert with the federal government or at the behest of the government .

the first challenge on the way to deciding whether an entity is liable under the antitrust laws for behavior alleged to violate those laws may be , as one court has observed , that [i]n antitrust cases , courts have often found it difficult to determine whether actors should be treated as public agencies or private entities .

the dividing line is neither sharply drawn nor easily perceived .

with respect to instances where it has been determined that an entity acting at the behest of , if not in actual concert or partnership with , the federal government is , in fact , a private actor , analogy to the "state action" doctrine would seem to suggest that the private entity will benefit from the government's antitrust immunity .

the analog to a "clearly articulated" state policy might be congressional ( although not necessarily statutory ) recognition of the beneficial aspects of certain activity .

short of legislation granting antitrust immunity to private entities , however , there could not be any categorical assurance that no court would ever find such an activity carried out by a private participant to be an antitrust violation , but there are opinions addressing challenges to state - level activities that would seem to make such an outcome unlikely .

in a case in which a federal district court refused to decide in favor of an antitrust challenge to the participation of certain new york city theaters in an urban - renewal project carried out under the direction of the new york state urban development corporation ( udc ) , the "state action" doctrine was key to the court's reasoning .

after first noting that the udc , as a creation of the state of new york , was "exempt from antitrust scrutiny," the court stated: it would be anomalous indeed to hold that the udc and the city are exempt from antitrust scrutiny because they made their conditional designations pursuant to state authorization , and to hold at the same time that the developers who merely applied for and received those designations are not .

when the opinion was affirmed on appeal , the u.s. court of appeals for the second circuit expanded on that point: for the same reasons , the private appellees acting in concert with the udc are also entitled to state immunity .

this participation was actively encouraged by the legislature .

in fact , one of the fundamental goals of the act was to have the udc attract private investors and developers .

when the udc accomplishes its goal in a protected manner , and the participation of private third parties was reasonably contemplated by the legislature , allowing successful tangential attacks on the udc 's activities through suits against the third parties would effectively block the efforts of the udc .

more than a decade later , another federal appeals court emphasized the same point: [r]ecognizing that the state action doctrine protects state action , not state actors , these courts reason that to allow suits against private parties for actions immunized as to municipalities would allow plaintiffs to circumvent the state action doctrine and challenge protected municipal decisions through artful pleading .

it seems difficult to imagine that the rationale for those cases could result in tolerance at the state level for activities that would be prohibited at the federal level .

thus , although there appears to be little likelihood that either an organization deemed "an agency or establishment of the united states government" or a private entity operating with the specific approval or authorization of the federal government would be found liable for violating the antitrust laws , there can be no ironclad assurance of a contrary judicial result .

to the extent the legislative intent is to assure the antitrust immunization of either , it would seem prudent to correctly characterize and / or specifically immunize the entities deemed integral to the operation of a health care system .

