congress established the federal election commission ( fec ) via the 1974 federal election campaign act ( feca ) amendments .

the six - member independent regulatory agency is responsible for civil enforcement of the nation's campaign finance law .

the commission also administers public financing of presidential campaigns ( applicable to participating candidates ) and presidential nominating conventions .

in addition to enforcement and regulatory duties , the fec conducts a variety of outreach and educational activities .

under feca , no more than three commissioners may be affiliated with the same political party .

in practice , the commission has been divided equally among democrats and republicans .

affirmative votes from at least four commissioners are required to ( among other duties ) : make , amend , or repeal rules , issue advisory opinions ( aos ) , and approve enforcement actions .

 ( for the purposes of this report , enforcement actions can include finding "reason to believe" feca has been violated , which can prompt an enforcement investigation. ) .

matters without at least four votes for or against an action can have the effect of leaving questions of law , regulation , or enforcement unresolved , as some view the issues in question as having been neither approved nor rejected .

throughout its history , the commission has been criticized for failing to reach at least a four - vote consensus on some key policy and enforcement issues , resulting in what are commonly termed deadlocked votes .

the issue of deadlocked votes has received renewed attention since late june 2008 , when most of the current commissioners took office ( see table 1 ) , and following a six - month loss of the agency's policymaking quorum .

some deadlocked votes among current ( and previous ) commissioners were marked by controversy and apparently staunch , public disagreement .

for example , two enforcement cases — one involving the 527 organization the november fund and another involving arjinderpal sekhon , a former congressional candidate — featured an exchange of sharply worded "statements of reasons" articulating commissioners' justifications for their votes .

in the november fund case , which focused on whether the organization should have registered with the commission as a political committee , a deadlock resulted in the commission rejecting an already - signed conciliation agreement .

in the sekhon case , a deadlock forced the commission to refund a civil - penalty check that had already been submitted .

amid deadlocks in these and other cases , some members of congress , media organizations , and interest groups began to comment on what was characterized as the "increasingly public and acrimonious" nature of deadlocked votes .

in august 2009 , citing deadlocks and other issues , senators feingold and mccain introduced legislation ( s. 1648 ) to restructure the agency .

deadlocks also reportedly motivated congressional concern about fec nominations .

although the topic of deadlocked votes arises frequently , empirical analyses of the phenomenon are rare .

those that exist rely on older data .

nonetheless , it is clear that deadlocked votes are sometimes controversial and are a regular topic of interest among those who monitor the commission .

what is less clear , however , is whether deadlocks are common or whether deadlocks fall along party lines .

both points are commonly cited ( although often without quantitative data ) in anecdotal accounts .

this report addresses those questions by exploring deadlocks in rulemakings , enforcement matters , and aos during the current commission's first year in office — from july 2008 through june 2009 .

in doing so , the report presents data on how many issues — and which ones — resulted in deadlocked votes .

matters ( rulemakings , enforcement actions , or advisory opinions ( aos ) ) voted on by the commission are the unit of analysis .

as such , the quantitative analysis that follows is based on the number of rulemakings , enforcement actions , and aos the commission considered during the period — not the number of individual votes that occurred on each issue .

although this report examines deadlocks that can occur during rulemakings , enforcement matters , and aos , it is not intended to provide an exhaustive account of commission operations , procedures , or processes .

as such , detailed discussion of commissioners' deliberations , the fec enforcement process , or other issues that might be relevant for the broader context in which some deadlocks arise is beyond the scope of this report .

the following analysis is based on data provided by the fec and on other publicly available fec documentation .

although certain matters remain outside the public record ( eg , votes on negotiations over civil - penalty amounts ) , the data presented here account for all publicly available deadlocks that occurred during the year under review .

the analysis also provides an overview of the policy or legal issues considered in each of those deadlocks .

the data show that although deadlocks occurred throughout the year , they occurred in a minority of the matters the commission considered .

those issues on which deadlocks occurred , however , featured strong disagreement among commissioners and reflected apparently unsettled positions on some major policy questions , such as: political committee status , when particular activities triggered filing requirements or other regulation , and questions related to investigations and other enforcement matters .

in addition , the deadlocks that did occur always fell along partisan lines .

if congress chooses to examine fec deadlocked votes , a variety of perspectives and options could be relevant , as discussed at the end of this report .

during the first year of the current commission , no substantive deadlocks occurred on rulemaking issues .

during the period , the fec held votes on four rulemakings: reporting bundled campaign contributions , extension of the administrative fine program ( afp ) , repealing increased contribution limits following the supreme court's invalidation of the so - called millionaire's amendment , and adjusting certain penalties for inflation .

although the fec was able to reach agreement on these four issues , the lack of deadlocks does not necessarily indicate that no conflicts exist on rulemakings .

in fact , only one of the four rulemakings ( the bundling regulations ) approved during the period was controversial .

other rulemaking matters remain open — perhaps because consensus has not been reached .

in short , it might be expected that no deadlocks occurred on rulemakings given that commissioners appear to value consensus surrounding rulemakings and might , therefore , postpone formal consideration of proposed rules until at least a four - vote majority can be attained .

as the data in table 2 and figure 1 show , evaluating the frequency of substantive deadlocks depends on what segment of the data is analyzed .

fec enforcement actions are handled through three mechanisms: the administrative fine program ( afp ) , alternative dispute resolution ( adr ) , and matters under review ( murs ) .

it is perhaps unsurprising that no substantive deadlocks occurred in afp cases , which are limited to comparatively simple matters involving late filings .

similarly , although adr cases can involve a variety of issues , the program is designed to facilitate negotiation that leads to relatively speedy resolution on fairly simple cases .

both the administrative fine and adr programs typically involve cases that can be closed with little controversy and without the complexity and potential litigation involved in some murs .

by contrast , murs can be complex and cumbersome .

they may entail lengthy investigations or audits , protracted negotiations between the commission and respondents , substantial civil penalties , or litigation — although the pace can vary depending on individual circumstances .

votes on each of those elements ( where applicable ) — and others — can generate deadlocks if the questions under consideration are controversial .

unlike adr and afp matters , murs are also likely to involve cases in which facts or substantial questions or law or policy are in dispute .

substantive deadlocks occurred in approximately 13% of publicly available murs closed between july 2008 and june 2009 .

substantive deadlocks occurred in about 6% of cases during the period if the data are combined to include action on murs , afp , and adr cases .

advisory opinions ( aos ) allow requesters to ask the commission for guidance about how campaign finance law applies to a specific situation .

typically , requesters use aos to determine whether a planned campaign activity is permissible .

the degree to which aos are controversial can vary substantially depending on the request and complexity of the issues involved .

as table 3 shows , substantive deadlocks affected 5 of 29 ( 17.2% ) aos considered during the period .

in three of those cases , however , the commission was able to reach sufficient agreement to issue partial guidance .

it is unclear whether substantive deadlocks occurred because of party affiliation , but every deadlock during the review period involved party - line votes .

as noted previously , commissioners bauerly , walther , and weintraub are widely regarded as democratic appointees ; commissioners hunter , mcgahn , and petersen are widely regarded as republican appointees .

notes accompanying the fec data and a review of the individual vote certifications make clear that in every instance in which a deadlock occurred — whether on murs or aos — democratic and republican commissioners voted in partisan blocs ( although not every commissioner voted in every case ) .

in addition , in each case of a deadlocked vote in a mur , democratic votes would have resulted in additional enforcement action , while republican votes would not .

in most cases , this meant that democratic commissioners "voted to approve" office of general counsel ( ogc ) enforcement recommendations , while republican commissioners voted against those recommendations .

in some cases , however , democratic commissioners voted to pursue additional enforcement despite ogc recommendations to the contrary .

as noted previously , especially in complex matters , the commission can hold multiple votes on various issues associated with particular cases .

in enforcement matters , for example , the commission might vote on whether to: proceed with an investigation , accept factual and legal analyses , accept proposed conciliation agreements , etc .

motions , made by commissioners , determine exactly what the commission is considering during individual votes .

for example , in the american future fund case ( mur 5988 ) , the commission deadlocked 3-3 on a motion containing six elements , including finding "reason to believe" that multiple provisions of feca and fec regulations had been violated , approving a factual and legal analysis , and other issues .

deadlocks on aos were also typically complicated ; in some cases , disagreement occurred over competing drafts or amendments .

exploring the intricacies of individual motions and votes is beyond the scope of this report .

it is clear , however , that deadlocks are not confined to a single policy issue .

table 4 provides an overview of the 24 murs in which substantive deadlocks occurred ; table 5 does so for the five aos .

 ( multiple murs listed on one line in table 4 indicate that the commission handled those issues as a single matter. ) .

as the tables show , deadlocks occurred throughout the year and involved a variety of respondents and issues .

deadlocks affected murs on a variety of campaign spending issues and political committee status ( eg , whether groups regulated primarily under sections 527 or 501 ( c ) of the internal revenue code ( irc ) should have registered with the commission as political committees ) , and other issues .

the aos in question also concerned various issues , particularly questions related to how campaign funds could be raised or spent .

because most cases involved multiple elements , the information in the tables is provided for illustrative purposes , but is not intended to provide a detailed overview of each case .

in addition , in some cases , deadlocks appear to have had more to do with whether an investigation should proceed or whether a penalty was appropriate than with the substance of the policy or legal issue in the mur or ao .

therefore , although the tables note the major policy or legal issues affected by deadlocks , those issues were not necessarily the cause of the deadlocked vote that halted commission action .

the data presented above suggest that substantive deadlocks occurred throughout the current commission's first year in office , but commissioners reached consensus far more frequently than not .

between july 2008 and june 2009 , substantive deadlocks occurred in about 13% of murs and about 17% of aos .

no deadlocks occurred on rulemakings .

nonetheless , substantial disagreement occurred on some issues .

deadlocks always occurred in partisan blocs , and the tone of debate surrounding deadlocks received prominent attention in congress and the media .

a variety of options are available to congress if it chooses to address the deadlocks issue , ranging from maintaining the status quo to clarifying those areas of the law on which deadlocks occur or restructuring the agency .

