qui tam is a whistleblower concept .

it is the process whereby an individual sues or prosecutes in the name of the government and shares in the proceeds of any successful litigation or settlement .

although frequently punitive , it is generally a civil procedure .

unlike antitrust , racketeering , and other federal punitive damage , private attorney general provisions , the individual need not have been a victim of the misconduct giving rise to the litigation .

the name qui tam is the shortened version of an oft abbreviated latin phrase which roughly translates to "he who prosecutes for himself as well as for the king. .

qui tam comes to us from before the dawn of the common law .

reviled at various times throughout the ages as a breeding ground for "viperous vermin" and parasites , legislative bodies have authorized it when they consider the enforcement of some law beyond the unaided capacity or interest of authorized law enforcement officials .

best known of the contemporary members of the line is the federal false claims act ( 31 u.s.c .

3729-3733 ) .

from 1986 until expansion of the act in 2009 , false claims act recoveries totaled an amount in excess of $20 billion .

since then , they have totaled an additional $13.3 billion .

this is a brief discussion of the constitutional questions raised by qui tam provisions ; of the history of such provisions ; and of the two existing , active federal qui tam statutes: the false claims act and in indian protection provisions .

in vermont agency of natural resources v. united states ex rel .

stevens , the supreme court identified four contemporary federal qui tam statutes: the false claims act , the patent act , and two indian protection laws .

one of the indian protection statutes has since been amended so that it no longer authorizes a qui tam action .

the leahy - smith america invests act replaced the patent act qui tam provision with one that affords victims a cause of action .

of the two survivors , the false claims provision is by far the more often invoked .

congress has enacted a number of other statutes , beyond those with obvious qui tam markings , which might be similarly characterized .

the supreme court observed in united states ex rel .

marcus v. hess that "statutes providing for a reward to informers which do not specifically either authorize or forbid the informer to institute the action are construed to authorize him to sue. .

the suggestion encouraged environmentalists to bring qui tam actions based on an informer - reward provision in the rivers and harbors act .

the lower courts were not particularly receptive to the suggestion .

in fact thus far , they have generally refused to recognize the authority to bring a qui tam action under the rivers and harbors act .

yet the court mentioned the suggestion again in vermont agency of natural resources v. united states ex rel .

stevens , and in citing the existing qui tam - specific statutes , pointed out two of the qui tam - silent informer - reward statutes .

the lower federal courts , however , continue to maintain that "congress must explicitly create qui tam statutes. .

section 201 dates from 1834 and authorizes qui tam actions for violations of five separate statutes: ( 1 ) unlawful purchase of land from an indian nation or tribe ; ( 2 ) driving livestock to feed on indian land ; ( 3 ) settling on or surveying indian land ; ( 4 ) setting up a distillery in indian country ; and ( 5 ) trading in indian country without a license .

qui tam actions under section 201 are relatively rare and appear to have arisen most often under the unlicensed trading and grazing ( livestock on indian land ) provisions .

in the hall unlicensed trader case , the relators' action survived a standing challenge , but was dismissed for failure to join an indispensible party — the tribe , which had contracted for gambling equipment and services from the unlicensed supplier .

in keith , the relator's action was dismissed after the court concluded that "bureaucratic nonfeasance" made it impossible to obtain the required trader's license .

relators were somewhat more successful in hornell , where the court upheld recovery of the monetary penalty , but declined to affirm confiscation of the station wagon that was the object of the unlicensed sale .

section 179 prohibits grazing horses , mules , or cattle on indian land without permission and sets the penalty at $1 per head .

the circuits are divided over the question of whether the secretary of the interior may by regulation set the penalty at $1 per head for each day of violation .

federal district courts have jurisdiction exclusive of the states for enforcement of the penalties under section 179 , but they may abstain from exercising jurisdiction in favor of enforcement in a tribal court of jurisdiction .

there may be some question whether the monetary penalty established in section 177 may be enforced by a qui tam action under section 201 .

section 201 , however , applies to "penalties which shall accrue under title 28 of the revised statutes," ( i.e. , rev .

stat .

§§2039-2157 ) .

section 177 appears in title 28 of the revised statutes as section 2116 .

thus , on its face , section 201 permits a qui tam action to recover the penalties accruing under section 177 .

in harlan , however , the eighth circuit stated in dicta that "25 u.s.c .

§177 appears to deal directly with cases where , as here , a person attempts to lease tribal lands without express approval of the federal government... .

the statute makes violators subject to a fine of $1,000 , but has no provision entitling relators to bring actions under it .

see james v. watt , 716 f.2d 71 ( 1 st cir .

1983 ) . .

the issue in harlan was whether the qui tam provisions then found in 25 u.s.c .

81 , relating to contracts for services which required government approval , extended to sharecrop agreements .

the court referred to section 177 "simply ... to demonstrate that a broad and general policy to oversee all contracts by indians need not be accomplished through 25 u.s.c .

§81 alone. .

the james case , which the court cites , held that an individual tribal member , suing as a victim of a violation of section 177 , may only do so as a representative of his tribe and not on his own behalf .

it says nothing of whether he may do so on behalf of the united states qui tam .

the application of section 201 to the penalties under section 177 seems clear on its face , but the contrary statement in harlan seems equally clear .

qui tam evokes constitutional issues of two classes .

first , to what extent may qui tam defendants claim the constitutional protections available to defendants in criminal cases ? .

second , is qui tam compatible with the constitution's allocation of powers among the three branches of government ? .

at first glance , the first question seems the least troubling .

the rights available in criminal proceedings exist precisely because the proceedings are criminal .

the sixth amendment rights – the right to counsel ; to call and confront witnesses ; to informed of the nature of the charges against him ; to trial in the place where the offense occurred ; and to a speedy and public trial before an impartial jury — apply only to "the accused" in criminal proceedings .

thus , they are inapplicable to federal qui tam proceedings which are civil in nature .

rights found elsewhere in the constitution , however , often turn upon whether the government's action may be or must be considered punitive .

here the answers are bit less clear .

for double jeopardy purposes , the supreme court in hudson v. united states said the question is: "whether congress , in establishing the penalizing mechanism , indicate[] either expressly or impliedly a preference for one label or the other .

second , where congress has indicated an intention to establish a civil penalty , [was] the statutory scheme ... so punitive either in purpose or effect as to negate that intention .

in regard to this latter inquiry , we have noted that only the clearest proof could suffice to establish the unconstitutionality of a statute on such a ground. .

the court has looked to the due process standards listed in kennedy v. mendoza - martinez , when defendants seek to satisfy the daunting "clearest proof" test .

although hudson was not a qui tam case , later lower federal court qui tam cases consider it dispositive .

the eighth amendment states that "[e]xcessive bail shall not be required , nor excessive fines imposed , nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted. .

in other contexts , the supreme court has determined that the excessive fines clause "does not constrain an award of money damages in a civil suit when the government neither has prosecuted the action nor has any right to receive a share of the damages awarded. .

the clause does apply to "the government's power to extract payments ... as punishment for some offense. .

the critical question is not whether the procedure for extracting the payment is classified as civil or criminal or whether it serves some additional remedial purposes ; if the payment constitutes punishment , it is a "fine" and as a general matter may not be excessive .

a fine is excessive , in the eyes of the court , "if it is grossly disproportionate to the gravity of the defendant's offense. .

in the qui tam context , some lower courts treat false claims act qui tam penalties as punishment and consequently subject to excessive fines clause analysis .

they have generally concluded , however , that the fines imposed in the cases before them were not excessive for eighth amendment purposes .

in young v. united states ex rel .

vuitton et fils s.a . , young and vuitton were engaged in trademark litigation which had resulted in the issuance of an order enjoining young from manufacturing or distributing counterfeit versions of vuitton's product line .

upon a showing of probable cause to believe that young had violated the injunction , the court appointed vuitton's lawyers to prosecute the criminal contempt .

five members of the supreme court agreed that young's subsequent conviction should be overturned because , "counsel for a party that is the beneficiary of a court order may not be appointed as prosecutor in a contempt action alleging a violation of that order. .

four members of the court felt this was so because the appointment of an interested prosecutor constituted error which undermined confidence in the integrity of the criminal proceeding .

one of the four went so far as to assert that the failure to appoint a disinterested prosecutor constituted a due process violation .

a fifth justice merely concurred in the result , because he felt that the lower court's appointment of a prosecutor — disinterested or not — was invalid on separation of powers grounds .

lower federal courts thereafter confronted with due process challenges to qui tam have rejected them based on the fact that relators press their claims as private civil litigants and thus do not exercise government power subject to due process clause restrictions on criminal prosecutions .

other due process challenges have occasionally arisen over the retroactive amendments to qui tam legislation , sometimes in conjunction with an ex post facto challenge .

ex post facto challenges have failed because the courts considered the statute insufficiently penal to trigger such concerns .

retroactivity due process challenges have failed because the courts concluded that rational legislative purposes justified retroactive application .

is qui tam legislation compatible with the constitution's allocation of powers among the three branches ? .

the constitution allocates federal governmental authority among three coordinated branches .

it vests all legislative powers in congress , executive power in the president , and the judicial power of the united states in the federal courts .

the supreme court has said that this "system of separation of powers and checks and balances ... was regarded by the framers as a self - executing safeguard against the encroachment or aggrandizement of one branch at the expense of the other[s]. .

yet , in this interwoven fabric of governmental authority , the framers realized that "[w]hile the constitution diffuses power the better to secure liberty , it also contemplates that practice will integrate the dispersed powers into a workable government .

it enjoins upon its branches separateness but interdependence , autonomy but reciprocity. .

commentators and litigants have questioned whether the qui tam is at odds with these basic constitutional principles .

their concerns are three .

first , the constitution grants the federal courts the judicial power over "cases and controversies. .

this is thought to require at least two parties with conflicting interests , presented in a context suitable for judicial resolution , i.e .

 , standing in a case or controversy .

yet , relators come to court with no interest of their own , only a contingent personal interest .

second , the constitution instructs the president to see that the laws are faithfully executed .

yet , without his approval or unrestricted control , relators may initiate and prosecute litigation .

third , the president is vested with the authority to appoint officers of the united states and , with the courts and heads of departments , to appoint inferior officers .

yet , relators , who engage in activities otherwise reserved to officers and inferior officers of the united states , are appointed neither by the president , the courts , nor by the head of any department .

standing requires ( 1 ) a concrete injury to the plaintiff's interest , ( 2 ) attributable to the defendant , ( 3 ) and amenable to judicial relief .

when it put standing challenges to rest in vermont agency of natural resources v. united states ex rel .

stevens , the supreme court observed that "[t]he long tradition of qui tam actions in england and the american colonies ... is particularly relevant to the constitutional standing inquiry since .. .

article iii's restriction of the judicial power to "cases" and "controversies" is properly understood to mean "cases and controversies of the sort traditionally amenable to , and resolved by , the judicial process. .

on the more perplexing matter of the relator's injury , the stevens court found the injury to the united states sufficient to establish false claims act relator standing .

with respect to the government's share of the fruits of successful litigation , the court found standing in the relator as an agent of the defrauded united states .

with respect to the relator's share , it considered him the assignee of that portion of the interest of the united states .

relator standing is in greater doubt in cases where tangible injury to the united states is less obvious .

in the case of the false marking section of the patent act , at least one court has held that the relator must show either an injury to himself or an injury to the united states for which he might be the agent / assignee , i.e .

 , "an actual or imminent injury in fact to competition , to the united states economy , or [to] the public that could be assigned to him as a qui tam plaintiff or be vindicated through this litigation. .

the stevens court resolved the issue of qui tam standing , but it "express[ed] no view on the question of whether qui tam suits violate article ii , in particular the appointments clause of §2 and the 'take care' clause of §3. .

the appointments clause issue in qui tam cases flows from apparently contradictory language in two supreme court cases .

in the more recent , buckley v. valeo , the court seemed to conclude that only officers appointed under article ii could be vested with conducting civil litigation on behalf of the united states: "we hold that these provisions of the act , vesting in the commission primary responsibility for conducting civil litigation in the courts of the united states for vindicating public rights , violate art .

ii , §2 , cl .

2 , of the constitution .

such functions may be discharged only by persons who are 'officers of the united states' within the language of that section. .

yet , earlier court decisions suggested that the appointments clause applied only to those purported to hold an "office of the united states," and that congress might authorize the performance of services in the name of the united states by those who did so without the attributes of office , selected other than under article ii .

the court later affirmed the buckley assertion that only officers appointed in conformity with article ii could "exercis[e] significant authority pursuant to the laws of the united states. .

yet in freytag , it acknowledged the existence of various classes empowered other than by article ii appointment who performed services in the name of the united states .

although the court has thus far "express[ed] no view on the question of whether qui tam suits violate article ii , in particular the appointments clause of §2," the lower federal courts generally see no appointments clause impediments , because they do not consider qui tam relators officers of the united states .

unlike the appointments clause , the take care clause does not vest authority in the president .

instead , it imposes a responsibility upon him .

the framers , however , allocated powers among the branches so as to prevent congress or the courts from undermining or unduly interfering with the president's ability to perform his constitutional duties , including the duty to take care to see that the laws are faithfully executed .

morrison v. olson presents a question perhaps most closely analogous to the one of whether qui tam statutes undermine or unduly interfere with the president's ability to fulfill his responsibilities under the take care clause .

it was suggested that the act impermissibly "reduc[ed] the president's ability to control the prosecutorial powers wielded by the independent counsel," both specifically when it precluded removal of the special prosecutor except for cause and as a general matter .

the court disagreed .

lower court false claims act qui tam cases decided in morrison 's shadow generally reached the same conclusion — the false claims act affords the executive branch sufficient control to turn aside a take care clause challenge — although they often concede that the control factors of the two were not the same .

