the federal budget deficit totaled $1.4 trillion in fy2009 , which was the first time it ever topped $1 trillion .

it remained over $1 trillion for the next three fiscal years .

the government's ability to finance a budget deficit depends on the size of the economy .

for this reason , and to compare the deficit to historical or foreign deficits , it is more meaningful to measure the deficit relative to gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

by this measure , the deficits since 2009 are unusual but not unprecedented .

the deficit was above 10% of gdp in 2009 , 9% of gdp in 2010 , 8% of gdp in 2011 , and 7% of gdp in 2012 .

seven previous times in u.s. history the federal budget deficit has exceeded 10% of gdp , these being during or following the civil war ( 1865 ) , world war i ( 1918 , 1919 ) , and world war ii ( 1942-1945 ) .

before 2009 , it had not exceeded 7% of gdp since 1946 .

federal budget deficits cause the publicly held federal debt to increase .

the fy2009 deficit of 10% of gdp , in a year when gdp fell , caused the debt - to - gdp ratio to rise by 12.6 percentage points .

the debt has increased from 41% of gdp in 2008 to 73% of gdp in 2012 .

this was the highest the debt has been relative to gdp since world war ii , when it peaked at 109% of gdp .

the current policy debate on the "fiscal cliff" occurring at the end of 2012 has raised the question of whether a deficit of the current magnitude is manageable and what risks it poses to the economy .

since deficit reduction could have a contractionary effect on the economy in the short run at a time when the economy is still fragile , restoring fiscal sustainability poses another set of risks that must be balanced against the risks of continuing an unsustainably large deficit .

this report will evaluate sustainability issues .

for an overview of projected deficits under current policy and options for addressing them , see crs report r41778 , reducing the budget deficit: policy issues , by [author name scrubbed] .

some economists worry that if the public debt keeps rising , it will become unsustainable .

by definition , the debt becomes unsustainable when private investors are no longer willing to hold it , at least at normal interest rates .

private investors become unwilling to hold a nation's debt when they become convinced that the government will either default on ( in other words , renege on promises to repay ) or monetize the debt ( in other words , finance it through money creation ) in a way that would result in rapidly increasing price inflation that reduces the existing debt's relative value .

although it is not possible to establish a threshold level at which a country's debt becomes unsustainable , the trend that causes unsustainability is well known: a country cannot continually increase its debt at a rate that exceeds the growth rate of the economy .

when it does , it causes debt service to absorb more and more of national income .

as private investors observe that the government is unable or unwilling to make policy changes to prevent the debt burden from increasing , they will decide to flee the country's debt before the point where the government is forced to default or monetize .

the decision by some investors to flee the debt will make it more onerous for the government to finance the debt , because it will now have to offer higher yields to attract new buyers , and higher yields will result in a larger deficit and more borrowing .

this phenomenon is sometimes referred to as a "debt spiral. .

thus , unsustainability tends to be triggered rapidly , as no investor wants to be the one still holding the debt when eventual default or hyperinflation occurs .

the exact point when investors choose to flee depends on psychological factors that are hard to predict and likely to vary by country .

because it is the upward trend in debt that leads to unsustainability , investors may accept very large deficits for a few years , as long as they are convinced that in the future the government will reduce the deficit to a sustainable level before it is too late .

for example , governments are often able to finance large deficits in wartime — the largest deficits relative to gdp in u.s. history occurred as a result of the civil war , world war i , and world war ii — because investors expect a rapid decline in the deficit once peacetime leads to a rapid decline in military spending .

investors' willingness to accept large deficits for a time will depend in part on the current level of debt relative to gdp .

in that regard , the 16 percentage point reduction in debt to gdp between 1993 and 2001 left the united states in a relatively good starting position to absorb the 30 percentage point increase in debt to gdp that has occurred since 2001 .

although the increase in debt in 2012 brings the federal debt as a share of gdp to its highest level since 1950 , it will remain at less than three - quarters of its world war ii peak .

policymakers are currently faced with a dilemma .

reducing the deficit too quickly could have a contractionary effect on the economy at a time when the economy is still far below full employment .

but leaving the deficit at an unsustainable size retains the risk that the budget could at some point enter a debt spiral , in which treasury yields rose sharply and suddenly .

whether this risk is worth taking depends on two factors — how great the risk is of entering a debt spiral ( a risk considered by most to be very small ) , and how serious the economic effects would be .

assuming the government were to enter a debt spiral , the economic effects would be expected to be negative and potentially severe .

how severe would likely depend on how much spillover there would be to other financial markets .

most economists believe that the 2007-2009 recession was the deepest and longest since the great depression because it was accompanied by a financial crisis .

moreover , financial crises seem to leave long - lasting effects after the initial crash — economists reinhart and reinhart find that in the decade following a financial crisis the median decline in annual gdp growth is one percentage point and unemployment often does not return to its pre - crisis level .

the direct effect of higher interest rates stemming from greater credit risk would be to reduce the market value of existing federal debt , as investors would be willing to pay a lower price ( i.e. , demand a higher yield ) for treasury securities to compensate for the greater credit risk .

this would cause a negative "wealth effect" for debt holders , and debt holders would be expected to reduce their spending in response , although initially by a much smaller factor than the loss of wealth .

since the publicly held debt is projected to reach $10 trillion by the end of fy2011 , the wealth effect could potentially be large .

the fact that roughly half of this debt is held by foreigners or the federal reserve mitigates the wealth effect on domestic spending .

the most potentially damaging wealth effects for the broader economy could come from financial institutions that hold treasury securities .

at the end of third quarter of 2012 , commercial banks held over $300 billion of treasury securities , while insurance companies , gses , and broker / dealers held over $400 billion .

as demonstrated during the 2008 financial crisis , leveraged financial firms can potentially respond to losses that reduce their capital base by contracting credit by a multiple of the amount of losses , a process known as deleveraging .

these "leveraged losses" can lead to a credit crunch that affects the economy as a whole .

the potential severity of the effects on the economy would come from indirect effects that are of a more uncertain nature .

for example , money market mutual funds held about $450 billion of treasury securities at the end of the third quarter of 2012 .

these funds are typically set up to mimic a bank account , in that account balances are quoted with a stable principal that never rises or falls .

in the current low interest rate environment , capital losses on treasury holdings , particularly for funds that are concentrated in treasury securities , would not have to be that large to cause a fund to "break the buck," meaning that principal would be reduced .

when a money market fund broke the buck in september 2008 , it set off a $250 billion run on money market funds that was viewed as a significant factor in the worsening of the financial crisis , and was only brought to an end by a temporary government guarantee of money market funds .

treasury securities are also widely used as collateral for short - term borrowing in the repurchase agreement ( "repo" ) market .

the treasury borrowing advisory committee estimated that treasury securities are used as collateral for $4 trillion of borrowing , and that this market is an important source of liquidity for leveraged financial firms , such as investment banks .

were the creditworthiness of treasury securities to be placed in doubt by a debt spiral , lenders could become less willing to accept them as collateral or reduce the amount they were willing to lend against them .

either way , credit would contract and firms' access to liquidity would be harmed if that borrowing could not be replaced in other markets .

a key issue in determining the effects on the broader economy is whether a spike in treasury yields spilled over into a spike in private yields on corporate bonds , bank lending rates , and consumer credit .

treasury yields are often considered a benchmark lending rate that other private rates are based on ( albeit not on a one - to - one basis ) , although that does not guarantee that they would continue to be if perceptions of sovereign credit risk changed .

if financial markets perceived that higher credit risk for the u.s. government did not alter the credit risk of u.s. corporations or households , then private yields would not necessarily rise with treasury yields .

on the other hand , investors may believe that government credit risk implies significant risk for private corporations , in terms of potential financial instability , exchange rate risk , and an inability of the federal government to provide obligated funds or indirect support ( such as the resources necessary to maintain financial stability in the event of systemic risk ) .

if so , private yields would rise with treasury yields .

a debt spiral could also result in the federal government undertaking a contractionary fiscal policy in the form of higher taxes or lower spending .

in the mainstream economic model , the direct effects of such a policy would be to further reduce overall spending in the economy in the short run , although in a debt spiral some believe that it might improve confidence in financial markets that partly or wholly offsets the contractionary effects .

this is the rationale for countries such as greece to undertake austerity measures to restore stability .

an obvious limitation to estimating how serious the economic effects of a debt spiral would be is that the united states has not experienced one in modern times .

there are examples of foreign countries that have recently become caught in debt spirals , however , and in those countries the contraction in output and employment has typically been deep .

in iceland , gdp fell 11% peak to trough , and in greece , gdp has already fallen 18% from its peak and is projected to continue falling .

by contrast , gdp fell by 2.6% in the united states in the recent recession , which was the deepest since the great depression .

it is noteworthy that these economic effects have occurred before default occurred , and in cases where financing from neighbors or international institutions such as the international monetary fund has allowed the countries to avoid default altogether .

looking more broadly , an imf study analyzed 148 sovereign defaults between 1824 and 2004 , and found that gdp growth declines on average by 2.6 percentage points in the first year after a default .

it also worth noting that , typically , countries have eventually bounced back economically — the negative effects have not been permanent .

the imf study found no statistically significant effects on gdp growth after the first year .

to gauge the likelihood of whether a sudden spike in treasury yields would spill over to the broader economy , a useful analogy might be the recent financial crisis .

while the crisis was complex and multi - faceted , the crisis was set off by the unexpected rise in mortgage default rates that caused a broad and widely held class of securities , aaa - rated mortgage - backed securities , to suddenly plummet in value and lose liquidity .

the loss in value and liquidity was caused by a reassessment by investors that a security , previously believed to be very safe , in fact faced significant credit risk .

the loss in value of these securities was significant enough that it caused financial markets to doubt the solvency of the firms holding the assets .

this caused widespread illiquidity for financial firms , and ultimately , some failed .

before the crisis , most economists and policymakers assumed that monetary policy could be employed to contain any systemic risk event , but that proved not to be the case .

assuming that the government is able to continue to finance the deficit smoothly , do large deficits have any effect on the economy ? .

when the economy is at full employment ( meaning practically all labor and capital resources are in use ) , government budget deficits "crowd out," or compete with , private investment spending in the standard macroeconomic model .

setting aside foreign capital flows for the moment , borrowing can only be financed through saving , and government borrowing competes with business borrowing for the same pool of national saving .

by increasing the demands on that pool of national saving , government borrowing pushes up the cost of all borrowing through higher interest rates , causing businesses to finance less capital spending than they otherwise would .

business borrowing finances capital spending on plant and equipment , and lower capital spending results in lower potential gross domestic product , and hence lower future national income , than would otherwise occur .

in the current context , the economy is not at or near full employment .

in this context , government deficits are unlikely to significantly crowd out private business borrowing .

on the contrary , business investment was contracting until the fourth quarter of 2009 and has remained low as a share of gdp since , either because investment demand declined or businesses are credit constrained .

this greatly reduced the potential for large government deficits to crowd out private investment spending .

as discussed above , low interest rates support the view that the deficit is currently causing little crowding out to occur .

 ( of course , this could change if investor concern about sustainability pushed up interest rates. ) .

in this case , the decline in aggregate spending caused by falling investment spending can be offset , at least in part , by the rise in ( deficit - financed ) government spending , which directly increases gdp , and ( deficit - financed ) tax cuts , which directly increase after - tax income .

most economic forecasters projected that the rise in the budget deficit , on balance , increased gdp over the last few years , despite a possible crowding out effect .

indeed , it is the increase in the deficit that is the primary reason that the stimulus act ( p.l .

111-5 ) was projected to stimulate the economy in standard macroeconomic models .

with international capital mobility , borrowing can also be financed by foreign saving .

in the standard macroeconomic model with perfect capital mobility , the boost in aggregate spending from the stimulus would cause the trade deficit to rise as foreign capital is attracted to higher domestic interest rates .

the availability of foreign credit would avoid the crowding out of domestic capital investment .

but the boost to aggregate spending from the budget deficit would be negated ( or "crowded out" ) by the higher trade deficit .

the united states relies heavily on foreign borrowing , and this is another reason that large budget deficits could be less effective at stimulating the economy .

the lack of perfect capital mobility , and the large output gap at present , in the united states means that a larger trade deficit is unlikely to completely negate the stimulus as theory would suggest , but it is likely to make it less effective at boosting aggregate spending .

since the recession began , the trade deficit has fallen substantially , so a problem of crowding out from the trade deficit is not apparent at this time .

it should also be noted that if capital spending is financed by foreigners , the income generated by that capital will accrue to foreigners instead of to americans .

as the economy returns to full employment , large budget deficits will no longer stimulate aggregate spending .

at that point , crowding out will become a more serious concern if the budget deficit is not reduced .

by accounting identity , domestic investment must equal national saving plus net borrowing from abroad .

in the years before the crisis ( 2000 to 2007 ) , domestic investment averaged about 20% of gdp , as seen in table 1 .

because national saving averaged about 15% of gdp , three - quarters of this investment was financed by national saving and one - quarter was financed by borrowing from abroad .

the federal budget deficit modestly reduced national saving during most of that period .

in 2008 , national saving fell to 12.6% of gdp , in part because the budget deficit rose to 3.2% of gdp .

despite the fall in national saving that year , net borrowing from abroad remained relatively steady because investment spending fell to 17.5% of gdp .

the budget deficit averaged 9.3% of gdp from fy2009 to fy2011 , more than half the size of total private saving , which is the sum of household and business saving .

although investment was low in 2009-2011 because of the recession and subsequent sluggish recovery , it can be expected to rebound when the economy recovers .

at that point , even if the deficit were to fall by half as a share of gdp , either private saving would need to rise significantly above its average over the past 10 years or net borrowing from abroad would have to be significantly higher than the 2000 to 2007 average , which was already at a historical high .

private saving has risen from a range of 14% to 16% of gdp from 2000 to 2007 to an average of 18.9% of gdp in 2009 to 2011 , some of which may prove lasting , but many economists question whether it would continue to rise enough to offset the rise in the budget deficit .

in other words , even before the rise in the budget deficit , the combination of low rates of national saving and high rates of borrowing from abroad to finance domestic investment spending was unsustainable in the long run .

if the budget deficit remains at elevated rates , national saving will be even lower , requiring either lower rates of domestic investment ( that would reduce gdp from what it otherwise would have been ) or higher rates of borrowing from abroad .

the willingness of private foreign investors to buy u.s. assets in the future will depend not only on the desirability of u.s. investment opportunities , but also on investment opportunities abroad .

here too , future trends may point to a shift away from u.s. assets .

even if foreign investors were unconcerned about the sustainability of u.s. debt , foreign countries may find more internal demand for their saving as the world economy recovers .

u.s. public debt will also be competing to attract funds with a large increase in borrowing by foreign governments .

the imf projects that public debt in the advanced economies will rise from 80% of gdp in 2008 to 110% of gdp in 2012 .

as noted above , many u.s. assets have been bought by foreign governments in the past decade , which may have accumulated u.s. assets for political reasons that cease in the future .

another concern that has been raised is that large deficits will lead to high inflation .

inflation is related to changes in the money supply ; the federal reserve controls the money supply independently of the treasury and its financing needs .

large deficits would lead to higher inflation if the fed finances unfunded government operations by increasing the money supply .

under current law , this is prevented by section 14 of the federal reserve act , which forbids the federal reserve from purchasing debt directly from the treasury , and section 2a , which mandates that the fed keep inflation low , among other goals .

in a well - known article , economists thomas sargent and neil wallace pointed out some "unpleasant arithmetic," however .

they observed that in order to avoid the economic effects of government default , a central bank might ultimately be forced to monetize the debt if private investors became unwilling to finance it and the government refuses to raise taxes or cut spending .

investors may perceive this future outcome and raise their inflationary expectations today .

if investors anticipate that the debt will be monetized , they will require higher interest rates to finance it in the meantime , so inflation will ultimately be higher than if the deficit had been monetized from the outset .

in that example , future inflation is a function of fiscal decisions as well as monetary decisions taken today .

to date , there is no evidence that inflation expectations have risen significantly .

