health care reform is at the top of the domestic policy agenda for the 111 th congress , driven by concerns about the growing ranks of the uninsured and the unsustainable growth in spending on health care and health insurance .

improving access to care and controlling rising costs will require changes to both the financing and delivery of health care .

experts point to a growing body of evidence of the health care system's failure to consistently provide high - quality care to all americans .

in a november 2008 report outlining its goals for health reform , the national priorities partnership , representing all the major stakeholder groups in the health sector , identified four major challenges to the delivery of high - quality care .

the first is to improve patient safety by eliminating medical errors and other adverse events .

these errors mostly result from faulty systems , processes , and conditions that lead to mistakes .

the second challenge is to eradicate disparities in care .

racial and ethnic minorities and low - income groups face disproportionately higher rates of disease , disability , and mortality , largely because of variations in access to care , and quality of care .

the third challenge is to reduce the burden of chronic disease , which affects almost half of all americans and accounts for three - quarters of health care spending .

the final challenge is to eliminate unnecessary and ineffective care that compromises quality , drives up costs , and neglects the needs of patients .

according to the institute of medicine , an estimated 30% - 40% of health care spending is wasted on unnecessary and even unsafe care .

on july 14 , 2009 , representative dingell ( d - mi ) introduced a comprehensive health reform bill , the america's affordable health choices act of 2009 ( h.r .

3200 ) .

the legislation was jointly developed by the house committees on ways and means , energy and commerce , and education and labor , which share jurisdiction over the federal health statutes .

all three committees have held markups — in each case focusing on the titles in the bill that fall under the committee's jurisdiction — and ordered the legislation to be reported , as amended .

each committee considered an amendment in the nature of substitute to h.r .

3200 , offered by the chairman ( the "chairman's mark" ) .

h.r .

3200 consists of three divisions .

division a addresses private health insurance , including the establishment of an insurance exchange and the creation of a public option .

division b primarily deals with changes to the medicare and medicaid programs .

finally , division c , entitled "public health and workforce development," includes a series of provisions intended to increase the primary care and public health workforce , promote preventive services , and strengthen quality measurement , among other things .

this report summarizes the workforce , prevention , quality , and other provisions in division c , as amended and ordered to be reported by the energy and commerce committee .

additional related provisions from the versions of the legislation that were ordered to be reported by the other two committees are included , as noted .

the report groups the bill's provisions under the following headings: ( 1 ) public health investment fund ; ( 2 ) health centers ; ( 3 ) health workforce , including programs authorized under the public health service act ( phsa ) and under other statutes ; ( 4 ) health care quality ; ( 5 ) health disparities ; ( 6 ) prevention and wellness ; ( 7 ) food and drug administration ; ( 8 ) emergency care ; ( 9 ) behavioral health care ; ( 10 ) pain care and management ; and ( 11 ) miscellaneous .

in most instances , each section begins with some background on current law and practice so as to provide context for the subsequent brief descriptions of the bill's provisions .

unless otherwise stated , references to "the secretary" refer to the secretary of health and human services ( hhs ) .

a list of all the acronyms used in the report is in the appendix .

the following crs products discuss the insurance , medicare , and medicaid provisions in h.r .

3200 : crs report r40724 , private health insurance provisions of h.r .

3200 , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

crs report r40804 , medicare program changes in h.r .

3200 , america's affordable health choices act of 2009 , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40821 , medicaid and children's health insurance program ( chip ) provisions in america's affordable health choices act of 2009 ( h.r .

3200 ) , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] .

crs report r40601 , factors affecting the demand for long - term care insurance: issues for congress , by [author name scrubbed] .

this report includes a brief discussion of an h.r .

3200 provision that would establish a national insurance program for purchasing community living assistance services and supports ( class ) .

the house legislation would amend numerous phsa programs whose appropriations authority has expired , though many of the programs continue to receive an annual appropriation .

the legislation includes new authorizations for appropriations to fund most of those programs , typically through fy2014 .

the house legislation also would create a multi - billion dollar public health investment fund to provide additional funds for the programs .

as described below , the legislation includes several provisions authorizing the appropriation of amounts from the fund for specified phsa programs .

these amounts would be in addition to any amounts provided through regular appropriations .

to ensure that the fund is used to supplement and not supplant regular appropriations , the authority to appropriate amounts from the fund would be contingent on maintaining a certain level of regular appropriations for the programs .

four workforce - related provisions were added as an amendment to the legislation that was ordered to be reported by the education and labor committee .

the first provision , addressing long - term care and family caregiving , would amend the older americans act ( oaa ) .

the remaining three provisions would amend the workforce investment act , administered by the department of labor .

under general authorities in phsa title iii and title iv , nih established the pain consortium to enhance pain research and promote collaboration among researchers across various nih institutes and centers that have programs and activities addressing pain .

in addition , phsa sec .

403 requires the nih director to submit to the president and congress a biennial report that includes , among other things , a summary of the research activities throughout the agency organized by category ; the chronic disease category includes pain and palliative care .

the house legislation includes the following three sections that would address pain research , education , and awareness for the purposes of recognizing pain as a national public health problem .

phsa sec .

330i authorizes four - year grants for telehealth networks and for telehealth resource centers .

phsa sec .

330l authorizes grants to provide incentives to coordinate telemedicine licensure among states .

appropriations authority for the two programs , which are administered by hrsa's office for the advancement of telehealth ( oat ) , expired at the end of fy2006 .

this section would amend phsa sec .

330i by reauthorizing grants for telehealth networks and telehealth resource centers .

with regard to telehealth network grants , the section would permit oat to award such grants for projects that demonstrate how telehealth technologies may be used to reduce health disparities , and it would add skilled nursing facilities , among others , to the list of facilities that are eligible to participate in a network .

it also would expand the list of activities for which funds may be used to include developing projects to use telehealth technology to facilitate collaboration between health care providers , promoting telenursing services , and promoting patient understanding and adherence to national guidelines for personal health care .

in addition , the section would establish new criteria for giving funding preference to eligible applicants for both the telehealth network grants and the telehealth recource center grants .

finally , it would amend existing reporting requirements to require an annual report on the progress and accomplishments of the telehealth grant programs .

the section would authorize the appropriation of the following amounts for each of the two sec .

330i telehealth grant programs , and for the sec .

330l grants to coordinate telehealth licensure among states: $10 million for fy2010 , and ssan for each of fy2011 through fy2014 .

this section would require the secretary to award grants for demonstration programs to study the feasibility of using elementary and secondary schools as influenza vaccination centers .

it would require the secretary , in carrying out the grant program , to coordinate with the secretaries of labor and education , state medicaid agencies , state insurance agencies , and private insurers , to ensure that children have coverage for the costs of influenza vaccinations , including purchasing and administering the vaccine outside of the physician's office in a school or other related setting .

the participation of any school or individual would be voluntary .

the grant program would cover the costs of influenza vaccine and its administration for children who are not otherwise covered by an existing federal program or private insurance .

children eligible to receive influenza vaccines under existing federal programs would not be covered under this program .

the secretary would be required to award: ( 1 ) a minimum of 10 grants in 10 different states to eligible partnerships that each include one or more public schools serving primarily low - income students ( as defined ) ; and ( 2 ) a minimum of five grants in five different states to eligible partnerships that each include one or more public schools located in a rural local education agency .

partnerships would be required to use grants provided to conduct a demonstration program over a period of two consecutive school years .

within 90 days of its completion , the secretary would be required to report to congress on the effect of the program on influenza vaccination rates , including an assessment of the utility of using elementary and secondary school vaccination programs to respond to seasonal influenza and an influenza pandemic .

the section would authorize the appropriation of ssan to carry out the program .

this section would amend phsa sec .

1509 by reauthorizing the wisewoman program .

this program , which is administered by cdc , provides supplemental grants for demonstration programs to provide preventive health services ( such as blood pressure and cholesterol screenings ) and appropriate follow - up to low - income women .

only states that receive funding to provide breast and cervical cancer screening services to low - income women ( authorized under phsa sec .

1501 ) are eligible for these grants .

appropriations authority for the wisewoman program expired at the end of fy2003 , but the program has continued to receive funding .

although phsa sec .

1509 authorizes grants in no more than three states , currently 19 states and two tribal organizations are receiving funding , under the secretary's general authority to award grants for public health and disease prevention programs in phsa title iii .

the section would remove the three - state limit and authorize the appropriation of the following amounts for the wisewoman program: $70.0 million for fy2010 , $73.5 million for fy2011 , $77.0 million for fy2012 , $81.0 million for fy2013 , and $85.0 million for fy2014 .

this section would add a new phsa sec .

317u , creating a state grant program for evidence - based education programs to reduce teen pregnancy or sexually transmitted diseases .

the amount of funding provided to each state would be based on the proportion of the nation's low - income children residing in that state .

states would be required to provide $1 in matching funds or in - kind contributions for each $4 of grants funds , and use no more than 10% of the grant funds for an independent evaluation of the program .

the secretary would be required , within 180 days of enactment , to develop and periodically update a registry of evidence - based , medically and scientifically accurate , age - appropriate programs , from which the states would choose the programs they intend to use .

the section would authorize an appropriation of $50 million for each of fy2010 through fy2014 .

phsa title iii , part r , comprising secs .

399aa - 399ee , authorizes several programs related to autism spectrum disorder ( asd ) and other developmental disabilities .

sec .

399aa authorizes grants for the collection , analysis , and reporting of state epidemiological data on asd and other developmental disabilities , and directs the secretary to establish regional centers of excellence in asd epidemiology .

sec .

399bb requires the secretary to establish and evaluate activities to increase public awareness of asd and other developmental disabilities , research and promote early screening , and support evidence - based interventions .

the secretary is further directed to provide culturally competent information about asd and other developmental disabilities to meet the needs of individuals with these conditions and their families through federal health , education and welfare programs .

sec .

399cc requires the secretary to establish an interagency autism coordinating committee to track asd - related research , monitor federal asd activities , make recommendations to the secretary , and submit an annual asd research plan to congress .

sec .

399dd requires the secretary to submit to congress a progress report on activities related to asd and other developmental disabilities , as outlined in the combating autism act of 2006 , no later than four years after its enactment .

sec .

399ee authorizes appropriations for the activities authorized under secs .

399aa , 399bb , and 399cc through fy2011 .

this section would amend phsa title iii , part r by adding at the end a new sec .

399ff – national training initiative , requiring the secretary , in consultation with the interagency autism coordinating committee , to award national training supplemental grants to qualifying university centers for excellence in developmental disabilities or other qualified entities .

these grants would expand and develop interdisciplinary training and continuing education initiatives for parents , health , allied health , vocational , educational , and other professionals , and develop model services and supports that demonstrate evidence - based practices .

the secretary also would be required to reserve up to 2% of the appropriated funds to make a grant to a qualified national organization for training and technical assistance to university centers for excellence in developmental disabilities .

this organization would assist in national dissemination of specific information from these centers ; compile and disseminate technical assistance materials ; assist in the coordination of grantees under this section ; and serve as a research - based resource for policymakers , among other activities .

the section would authorize to be appropriated $17 million for fy2011 , to be equally divided among existing university centers of excellence for developmental disabilities , and ssan for fy2012 through fy2015 .

if the appropriation in any fiscal year were less than $17 million , the secretary would be required to award competitive grants to individual centers of not less than $250,000 per grant .

finally , the section would require the secretary to award up to four additional grants for university centers of excellence in developmental disabilities to expand the capacity of the existing national network and to enhance the number of training facilities serving minority institutions with a primary focus on asd and related developmental disabilities .

it would authorize to be appropriated $2 million for each of fy2011 through fy2015 for these grants .

this section would require the secretary , acting through the director of ahrq , to provides grants to support medication management ( mtm ) services provided by licensed pharmacists .

currently , medicare part d sponsors are required to establish mtm programs , in cooperation with licensed pharmacists , to ensure that covered part d drugs are used appropriately and reduce adverse drug interactions .

part d plans have significant flexibility in structuring their mtm programs and deciding which targeted populations are appropriate for mtm services .

in a july 2008 study , cms examined the attributes and features of mtm models currently in use and concluded that it is too soon to tell how the various mtm models contribute to clinical outcomes .

the section would require ahrq to establish an mtm grant program by may 1 , 2010 .

grantees would have to provide various specified mtm services to targeted individuals such as ( 1 ) assessing patients' health and functional status ; ( 2 ) formulating a medical treatment plan ; ( 3 ) administering appropriate medication therapy ; ( 4 ) monitoring and evaluating patient response to therapy ; ( 5 ) documenting the care delivered and communicating essential aspects to appropriate care providers ; ( 6 ) providing education and training to enhance the appropriate use of medications ; and ( 7 ) coordinating and integrating mtm services in broader health care management .

mtm services provided by licensed pharmacists under this program would be targeted at individuals who take four or more prescribed medications , take high - risk medications , have two or more chronic diseases , or have undergone a transition of care or other factors that are likely to create a high risk of medication - related problems .

the secretary would be required to assess and evaluate specified aspects of the program and report to congress .

this section would amend phsa title iii , part p by adding a new sec .

399v authorizing the secretary , in collaboration with cdc and other federal officials as appropriate , to award grants to public and nonprofit private entities ( including fqhcs and public health departments ) to promote positive health behaviors for populations in medically underserved communities through the use of community health workers .

grants would be used to provide training support to community health workers , subject to federal guidelines .

those workers , in turn , would provide education , guidance , and outreach to communities on health problems that are prevalent in the medically underserved ; effective strategies to promote positive health behaviors ( including mental health and oral health ) ; enrollment in available health insurance programs , including chip and medicaid ; referral to appropriate health care agencies and community - based programs and organizations ; and access to home visitation services to promote maternal health and prenatal care .

the secretary would be required to give priority to grant applicants that propose to target geographic areas with a high percentage of residents who are eligible for health insurance but are uninsured or underinsured , a high percentage of residents who suffer from chronic diseases , and a high infant mortality rate .

the secretary also would be required to prioritize applicants with experience in providing health and social services to underserved individuals and engaging community health workers .

the secretary would be required to encourage funded programs to implement an outcome - based payment system that rewards community health workers for connecting underserved populations with the most appropriate and timely services .

finally , the secretary would have to report to congress regarding specified aspects of the program not later than four years after grants are first awarded .

there would be authorized to be appropriated $30 million to carry out the grant program for each of fy2010 through fy2014 .

this section says that a state would be eligible for federal funds authorized under the phsa only if it agrees , as an employer , to adhere to the requirements in division a of this bill , and assures that all political subdivisions in the state do the same .

this section would require the secretary to conduct a study and , within one year of enactment , report to congress whether any of the grant programs established in division c of this bill are duplicative of one or more hhs grant programs .

the secretary would be required , to the maximum extent appropriate , to terminate any grant program deemed to be duplicative not later than 180 days after the report is issued .

this section would require the secretary to report to congress , within one year of enactment , on the epidemiology of , impact of , and appropriate funding required to address neglected diseases of poverty , including a number of specified parasitic diseases .

the report should provide the information necessary to enhance health policy to accurately evaluate and address the threat of those diseases .

this section would require the secretary to conduct a study addressing , among other things: ( 1 ) the projected need for primary eye and vision care , including among underserved , rural , and senior populations ; ( 2 ) the role and impact of optometrists in the early diagnosis and treatment of glaucoma , cataracts , diabetes , and other conditions ; ( 3 ) whether optometrists should be recognized and supported as primary care providers ; ( 4 ) the existence and extent of barriers to the recruitment and participation of underrepresented minorities in optometry , including the potential role played by the lack of eligibility of optometrists , optometry students , and facilities for certain federal health programs ; and ( 5 ) federal support for clinical optometric education and options for enhancing that support to address barriers to underrepresented minority recruitment and participation in optometry and to improve access to primary eye and vision care , especially in underserved and rural areas .

the secretary would be required , within 18 months of enactment , to report to congress regarding findings of the study , comments received from consulting stakeholders , and any recommendations .

