when farm commodity prices fall and costs of production rise , farmers can get caught in a "farm price - cost squeeze. .

the potential for such a financial bind dates to the first half of the 20 th century when farmers began purchasing more of their farm inputs such as fertilizers , improved seeds , and feed concentrates .

since the 1930s , u.s. agriculture has been supported through the ups and downs of the market by federal farm policy , most recently set under the 2008 farm bill .

in 2009 , some farmers found themselves in difficult financial circumstances , following high farm prices and relatively prosperous times in 2007 and 2008 .

livestock , dairy , and poultry producers faced particularly low or negative returns based in part on input prices , primarily for feedstuffs , that did not fall as fast as output prices .

in order to survive , many farmers have been drawing on equity built up in recent years .

meanwhile , producers of crops , both federally supported ones such as grain , oilseeds , and cotton and non - program crops such as fruits and vegetables , continue to deal with volatile costs of energy and fertilizer , which are affecting their returns .

in some instances , members of congress and policymakers in the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) are being asked by farm groups to consider additional support to farmers .

this report discusses the current farm price - cost squeeze , how it varies across commodities , and the factors behind the current situation .

the report also considers the cyclical nature of agricultural markets , effects on producers , and the government's role in addressing the situation .

the cyclical nature of agricultural markets plays a large role in the farm price - cost squeeze .

the cause of short - term cycles is often weather .

periods of good weather can result in large crop yields that drive down prices .

conversely , widespread drought can create shortages that drive up farm prices .

when prices rise and remain elevated , following poor weather or strong demand , for instance , periods of profitability typically ensue , eventually encouraging producers to add more acreage , increase inputs such as fertilizer , or buy additional cows to produce more milk .

once additional supplies enter the marketplace , prices tend to retreat .

these cyclical price movements are captured in the commodity marketing adage that states "the cure for high prices is high prices. .

the saying makes the economic argument that the circumstance of high prices will eventually change once high prices attract additional production resources .

similar economic reasoning applies once the cycle turns down .

in this case , as profitability declines or goes negative , farmers no longer have the economic incentive to produce as much , so they cut back on the volume or quality of inputs or , if financial conditions are bad enough , go out of business altogether .

as economists , commodity marketers , and farmers alike have generally found , prices eventually turn higher , profitability returns , and the cycle repeats .

over the long run , farmers find ways to stay in business , sometimes by taking another job so they can continue to operate their farm enterprises even at a loss .

others , less willing or unable to find ways to survive unprofitable situations , will exit the industry .

the farmers' role in the cyclical nature of commodity markets was noted more than 50 years ago by agriculture secretary ezra t. benson .

after declaring that farmers were in a "serious price - cost squeeze," he said that farmers could work their way out of the situation by making production and marketing decisions that would solve the current surplus and low price problems .

the role of government policy and farm commodity subsidies is also debated and advocated to respond to cycles in agricultural markets .

some say it preserves farms that otherwise would fail at the low point of a cycle ; other say it disproportionately helps large farms to the detriment of small farms .

these policy issues are addressed later in this report .

rising productivity has also contributed to the cyclical nature of agricultural markets .

over the decades , the adoption of new technology — both mechanical ( eg , better farm equipment ) and biological ( eg , improved seed varieties ) — and management approaches have resulted in farmers producing more commodities with relatively fewer inputs .

as additional product arrives on the market , prices fall until consumer demand catches up with advances in supply .

along the way , weather can create short - term market disruptions and price volatility .

in general , large economies of scale in u.s. agriculture encourage producers to expand their operations in order to spread fixed costs over more acreage , take advantage of technology , and reduce per - unit input costs through bulk purchasing .

this boosts output and reduces profit margins ( a phenomenon seen in many other industries as well ) .

these technology - driven economies of scale put tremendous economic pressure on small operators who are unable to take advantage of them .

over time , the end result of continued advancements in farm productivity is declining farm prices , when adjusted for inflation .

consequently , farm profits are difficult to sustain .

under this repeated market volatility , farmers who are not able to reduce their costs struggle to remain viable as a business operation , causing some to go out of business .

farm sector performance , right down to the individual producer , depends to a large extent on supply and demand factors .

together these factors establish overall price levels , for commodities which farmers sell and for inputs they buy .

changes in agricultural supply and demand stem from many sources .

because u.s. agriculture is a major net exporter of agricultural products , developments in the international market help determine prices farmers receive for most products .

domestic market changes are also key , such as increased consumer demand for certain fruits and vegetables ( eg , avocados , berries , and peppers ) , income growth that affects demand for meat , or the demographics of an aging population .

on the farm input side , energy costs , primarily for fuel and fertilizer , are determined largely in the global oil market .

prevailing wages can also dramatically affect costs for farms using large amounts of manual labor ( eg , fruits and vegetables ) .

finally , all farms likely incur costs , either directly or indirectly , associated with environmental compliance requirements .

overall price levels and other factors — such as technology , government policy , transportation , and marketing issues — together affect a farmer's decision to increase or decrease investments in his or her operation .

importantly , in the most difficult times , farm program payments and other support from the government , as well as off - farm income for the farm household , may prove decisive for farm profitability when business survival is at stake .

farm profitability is specific to a farm's cost structure and marketing ability .

a small farm , for example , may have relatively high per - unit costs because overhead , such as buildings and maintenance , is spread over fewer units of output .

or , considering marketing skills , some farmers may be more adept than others at maximizing prices received from the market .

when considering both the revenue and cost sides of a farm business , the range of per - unit costs and prices received can vary considerably by producer .

further complicating the assessment of financial prospects for an individual farm is its commodity mix , preferences for risk , and levels of equity and debt , among other financial variables .

because of the potential for differences across farms , a simplified measure is often needed by policymakers and analysts as a rough gauge of the farm price - cost squeeze , especially when market conditions are changing rapidly .

the most basic way to measure the farm price - cost squeeze is to directly compare prices received by farmers with prices they pay for inputs .

by ignoring the volume of a farm's sales and input purchases , the comparison only considers how current prices for each relate to one another , which can be particularly insightful for policymakers over a short period ( eg , less than three years ) when financial fortunes reverse .

over longer periods of time , however , technology changes and efficiency gains make such comparisons less relevant .

determining whether or not a sector is actually encountering a price - cost squeeze can sometimes be a matter of opinion .

instead , knowing how much worse ( or better ) conditions are relative to the recent past can be helpful when policymakers are trying to get a sense of how particular groups of farmers are faring financially .

concerned policymakers can monitor the economic situation of u.s. farmers on a monthly basis by observing the farm price - feed ratios and the prices received and prices paid indices .

across agriculture in 2009 , the price - cost squeeze was most evident in the livestock sector , particularly dairy .

when farm prices fail to keep pace with the cost of inputs , individual farmers begin making business decisions that affect the farm's output .

the collective decision by farmers translates into a sector - wide supply response which , because of substantial lags in the production cycle for both crops and livestock , plays a large part in prices that farmers receive in future months .

u.s. agriculture is also governed in part by federal polices that affect the markets and farmers' production decisions .

finally , farmers often depend on off - farm income to help insulate their household from financial difficulties their farms may encounter .

u.s. farm numbers declined from more than 6 million farms in the early 20 th century to just 2 million in recent decades ( figure 11 ) .

the transition was most apparent in the 1950s .

farm numbers dropped sharply as mechanization continued to reduce the need for farm labor , efficiency gains from large farm size increased dramatically , and off - farm employment became more available and relatively more attractive .

as policymakers developed farm programs to support the farm sector , technological gains over time have resulted in farm production in excess of market demand , leading to a farm price - cost squeeze and a decline in farm numbers .

some would say the price - cost squeeze is essentially due to keeping the same amount of land in production , but with yield - enhancing technology boosting production .

economics would dictate that resources ( eg , people ) need to exit the sector if supply is out of balance .

the evidence would suggest that this has occurred .

while overall u.s. farm numbers have stabilized since the late 1980s , there has been a shift away from the medium - sized farms considered to be modest family operations ( sales between $10,000 and $99,999 ) ( figure 12 ) .

offsetting this decline is growth in the numbers of larger farms ( sales at least $100,000 ) , which can push their costs even lower from gains in economies of scale , and small operations with sales less than $10,000 — referred to as "hobby" or "lifestyle" farms — that are not as dependent on farm income because ample off - farm income supports their farm lifestyle .

today , relatively large , economically efficient farms provide the bulk of u.s. production .

in 2007 , according to the census of agriculture's definition of a farm ( any place from which $1,000 or more of agricultural products were produced and sold ) , the total number of farms was 2.2 million , while less than half a million farms had sales of $50,000 or greater .

the trend has been a declining number of commercial farms driven by economies of scale and technology .

in 2007 , only about 125,000 of the largest farms ( 5.7% of total farms ) accounted for 75% of the nation's farm sales .

just five years earlier , in 2002 , 144,000 farms accounted for 75% of farm sales .

in 1992 , more than 232,000 farms accounted for 75% of farm sales ( table 1 ) .

since the great depression , federal farm policy has attempted to help farmers weather financial difficulties inherent in the industry .

more than 75 years ago , when the federal government started addressing low returns in farming , the political thrust was to enact legislation that would offset some of the volatility of agricultural markets and prop up income for a rural population that was highly dependent on the farm economy .

in general , the goal has been to help farmers survive market downturns .

all the while , farmers have adopted technology that has resulted in a sector - wide transition from a large number of producers , some being high - cost , to a smaller number of lower - cost producers .

most public support for agricultural subsidies stems from the public's desire to help "family farmers. .

historically , public support for farm programs has benefited from the country's agrarian roots and generally favorable perception of farmers as being hard workers , honest , and subject to market forces and weather that are beyond their control .

however , recent farm bill debates , which occur roughly every five years , have seen heated discussions over levels of payments and eligibility .

as for public opinion , a poll by program on international policy attitudes at the university of maryland indicates that while the public would oppose eliminating farm subsidies in general , the desired scope of subsidies is more narrow than provided under current policy , with a preference for payments to small farmers rather than large farmers .

while there are exceptions , government programs for farmers , as currently designed , generally benefit farmers in proportion to their production .

some large operations continue to receive payments even though they may not necessarily need them for economic survival .

this in turn creates an economic incentive for a farm to either become a larger commercial operation in order to survive , or contract in size to one that is more manageable , with household income possibly supplemented by off - farm income so the farm can remain in operation regardless of its financial circumstances .

simultaneously , there are general economic and technological pressures — separate from government intervention — that encourage farms to consolidate or become larger , as discussed earlier in this report .

when farmers are caught in farm price - cost squeeze , the question for policymakers has been couched , perhaps incorrectly , critics say , in terms of preserving the nation's ability to produce food .

this assumes that poor economic returns will result in less overall food production .

while some portions of agriculture undoubtedly decline during these times , or would contract substantially if government policy would no longer be protecting it , a wholesale departure from current food production levels is not necessarily at risk , according to agricultural economists .

instead , most resources in agriculture — land , labor , and capital — generally remain in the sector because these resources are relatively abundant in the united states ( with the exception of labor , to a certain degree ) and do not have a better alternative use .

unless these resources are diminished , say by soil erosion , the nation's capacity for producing food remains intact .

resources continue to shift , though , among the subsectors as well as in and out of the sector as economics and government policies allow .

importantly , gains in productivity mean resources can leave the sector without resulting in an overall reduction in food output .

another concern — and major farm policy question — is one of industry structure .

should federal policy address the long - term trend of large farms producing an increasing share of u.s. agricultural production ? .

more pointedly , who will or should farm ? .

should the united states government let family farmers fail financially , or should the federal government support them in a way that slows the transition to farms that may be more economically efficient ? .

shaping this issue is a belief , at least historically , that agriculture is a special segment of the u.s. economy , elevated by its rich history , dedicated people , and role in rural communities .

in contrast , others recognize that commercial farming is a business like any other , and federal policy should treat it accordingly .

farm programs fit into a larger policy context that has changed since farm policy was first developed .

in the early - and mid - 20 th century , farm policy was rural policy because of the importance of agriculture in the rural economy .

now , growth in other rural industries has reduced farming's relative importance in the rural economy .

that leaves the larger policy question for both critics and advocates of current farm policy: how does farm policy complement or contradict the goals policymakers have with respect to rural communities and life in what has historically been important agricultural areas ? .

some critics have questioned whether current farm policy is reinforcing or accelerating trends in u.s. farm structure , intensifying the farm price - cost squeeze that some farmers are experiencing .

others say government assistance is critical in supporting agriculture so that farms can continue operating even when economic conditions are poor and before market prices turn higher .

