the u.s. department of the treasury ( treasury ) is responsible for issuing federal government debt .

debt issuance is a core component of treasury's role as the manager of government operations , as it is needed when tax revenue collections are insufficient to meet the demand of federal obligations .

the primary objective of treasury's debt management strategy is to finance the government's borrowing needs at the lowest cost over time .

to accomplish this treasury adheres to three principles: ( 1 ) to issue debt in a regular and predictable pattern , ( 2 ) to provide transparency in the decisionmaking process , and ( 3 ) to seek continuous improvements in the auction process .

within the treasury , the office of debt management ( odm ) makes all decisions related to debt issuance and the management of the united states debt portfolio .

when federal spending exceeds revenues , the odm directs the bureau of the fiscal service to borrow the funds needed to finance government operations by selling securities to the public and government agencies through an auction process .

the bureau of the fiscal service manages the operational aspects of the issuance of treasury securities , including the systems related to and the monitoring of security auctions .

the ongoing economic recovery and concerns over the long - term fiscal outlook of the united states illustrate the importance of treasury's role in financing the obligations of the country .

in addition , long - term obligations resulting from the retirement and rising health care costs of the baby boomer generation , in the absence of policy changes , are projected to cause large increases in future federal debt .

given these challenges , the ability to maintain efficient and stable debt markets to ensure confidence and liquidity will remain an issue going forward .

treasury's debt management strategy can be complicated by challenges associated with approaches of total federal debt levels to the statutory debt limit .

when the total amount of federal debt approaches the statutory debt limit , congress may authorize the treasury secretary to invoke "extraordinary measures" to prevent the limit from binding .

those measures may compromise treasury's ability to reach its borrowing objectives as it seeks to avoid the potential adverse effects associated with a binding debt limit .

as the amount of money owed by the united states to holders of treasury securities rises , interest payments can become a greater burden on taxpayers .

if investors choose to purchase treasury securities , less money is available to fund private sector investments and other financial instruments .

to the extent that these securities are held by foreign governments or individuals abroad , those investors will be the beneficiaries of the interest payments .

this report examines treasury's debt management practices , focusing on the auction process , how prices and interest rates of securities are determined , and the role of market participants in the process .

it also addresses the role of debt in influencing present and future budget outcomes .

congress holds the authority to issue debt on behalf of the united states through power granted in article i , section 8 of the constitution .

while this power was delegated to the secretary of the treasury in 1789 , congress retains ultimate control over spending through the budget and appropriations process , and revenue levels through tax legislation .

if spending exceeds revenues , treasury determines what type of debt instruments are used to finance the borrowing necessary to fulfill all obligations .

the primary objective of treasury's debt management strategy is to fulfill the government's borrowing needs at the lowest cost over time .

beyond financing the federal government , the success of treasury's debt management strategy also affects global markets due to the influential role of the united states in the world economy .

as noted earlier , treasury adheres to three debt management principles: ( 1 ) to issue debt in a regular and predictable pattern , ( 2 ) to provide transparency in the decisionmaking process , and ( 3 ) to seek continuous improvements in the auction process .

adoption of this strategy helps to maximize government contributions to growth and efficiency in both the domestic and global capital markets .

development of modern debt management dates to the passage of the second liberty bond act of 1917 .

as amended , that legislation designated the treasury secretary as the principal authority to determine the types of issues , terms , and techniques most appropriate to manage public debt .

before this measure , interest rates and maturity periods of bonds were set by legislation and congressional authority .

further refinements in debt management policy came when treasury established the bureau of public debt within the office of fiscal service in june 1940 .

in the late 1980s , odm , formerly known as the office of market finance , became the central office responsible for the decision making behind treasury's borrowings .

the bureau of the public debt and the financial management service ( fms ) merged in 2012 to form the bureau of the fiscal service .

the bureau of the fiscal service now oversees the operational aspects of the federal government borrowing process , accounts for and services federal debt , and provides reimbursable support services to federal agencies under the authority of the treasury franchise fund .

it also conducts auctions of treasury securities to allow individuals , institutions , and financial professionals to invest in treasury bills , notes , bonds , inflation - protected securities ( tips ) , and floating rate notes ( frns ) .

the federal reserve ( fed ) works alongside the treasury in the debt management process , acting as treasury's fiscal agent .

the fed was created in 1913 to institute stability in the banking sector following a time of financial panic .

initially , the fed's role was primarily to oversee the money supply and supervise the banks during a time of increased borrowing needs as the united states sought ways to finance world war i expenses .

for the first several decades of its existence , the fed worked closely with treasury to implement fiscal policy goals .

since the early 1950s , however , the fed has operated independently from treasury and uses its open market operations to manage the amount of money and credit in the economy via monetary policy .

the fed also provides banking services to the federal government by maintaining deposit accounts for treasury , paying u.s. government checks drawn on the treasury , and issuing and redeeming savings bonds and other government securities .

during the mid - 1970s , the economy experienced a period of rising nominal federal budget deficits , which increased debt issuance and disrupted financial markets .

at that time , treasury decided that it needed a new strategy to provide greater transparency and regularity in debt management .

the resulting debt management process modernized the market for treasury securities , realizing the benefits of predictability in an environment of large deficits .

the modernization also induced policymakers to improve institutional practices .

as a result , treasury was able to raise large amounts of money with a minimal impact on the financial markets .

these policies also extended the average maturity of the national debt and produced a better defined yield curve .

the treasury secretary manages revenue , works to improve public credit , and provides for on - time revenue collection and payment of debts .

if federal government finances are not well managed , financial stability and economic growth could be at risk .

throughout the year , the balance held by treasury can fluctuate significantly as a result of higher or lower revenue collections or issuance of more or less debt during certain periods .

as a result , treasury must ensure that adequate funds are available , either via revenue streams or borrowing , to finance obligations .

in order to finance the government's obligations while minimizing borrowing costs , treasury must accurately project what cash requirements will be needed on a daily basis to cover government payments especially given these variations .

the total amount of debt issued over the fiscal year depends in large part on the decisions made by congress and the priorities it chooses in its annual budget and appropriations process .

recently , treasury has issued increasing amounts of debt as a result of the government response to the most recent economic downturn , along with other budgetary initiatives .

over the longer term , these priorities could change as the economy recovers and decisions on how to finance the promises to retirees for healthcare and other benefits may increase the demands on treasury's debt issuance .

treasury's financing needs generally follow a predictable seasonal pattern in response to changes in the level of public debt .

growth in public debt is typically lowest in april , due to the filing of personal income tax returns paid during that month , and highest in september , as a result of the need to meet obligations due at the end of the fiscal year .

in addition to funding the needs of the government , treasury manages the accounts of government agencies through the bureau of the fiscal service .

loans are provided to departments or agencies in order to meet obligations , such as payments owed to eligible beneficiaries of social service programs .

fms disburses payments to individuals and businesses , collects federal revenue , and issues government - wide financial reports .

investors examine several key factors when deciding whether they should purchase treasury securities .

as with all types of investments , price , expected return , and risk play a role in this process .

treasury securities provide a known stream of income and offer greater liquidity than other types of fixed - income securities .

prices are determined by investors who place a value on treasury securities based on the characteristics of safety and liquidity afforded by this investment option .

because they are also backed by the full faith and credit of the united states , they are often seen as one of the safest investments available , though investors are not totally immune from losses .

the behavior of the market can lead to price changes , changes in interest rates , or inflation , which does create some investment risk .

despite the current economic conditions and financial market volatility , treasury securities have remained attractive to investors .

legislative activity can affect treasury's ability to issue debt and can impact the budget process .

the statutory limit on the debt can constrain debt operations , and , in the past , has hampered traditional practices when the limit was approached .

the accounting of asset purchases in the federal budget has created differences between how much debt treasury has to borrow to purchase assets and how much the same purchases will impact the budget deficit .

if budget deficits continue to rise , thereby requiring devotion of more resources to paying interest on the debt , fewer funds are available to spend on other federal programs , all else equal .

some economists have expressed concerns that persistent deficits could drive up interest rates , making it more expensive for the government , businesses , and consumers to borrow money .

the government cannot add infinitely to the national debt without facing market consequences or hindering future ability to borrow .

in recent testimony to congress , federal reserve chairman janet yellen warned that failing to address the government's growing debt will likely cause the united states to face higher interest rates , lower levels of investment , and reduced productivity growth in future years than it otherwise would have with more manageable levels of federal debt .

part of treasury's mission is to secure america's economic and financial future .

in part , this is achieved by maintaining a regular and predictable debt management strategy as well as ensuring global trust and confidence in u.s. currency .

however , treasury's actions are affected by congress , the fed , and different types of investors , as well as economic conditions .

as long as the united states continues to issue treasury securities to finance government operations , the actions of the treasury will continue to play a key role in maintaining stability in the financial and credit markets and the u.s. economy .

