premium conversion allows employees to pay their share of employment - based health insurance premiums on a pre - tax basis .

although plans vary , on average employers pay about 84% of the premium for single coverage and 73% of the premium for family coverage , leaving employees to pay the remaining portion .

the employer share is always excluded from the employees' income and employment taxes ( i.e. , social security and medicare taxes ) .

in contrast , the employee share is paid either in after - tax dollars without premium conversion or in pre - tax dollars with it .

paying with pre - tax dollars results in tax savings for both the employee and the employer .

for example , consider an employee whose share of the premium is $1,000 .

if the employee were in the 15% federal tax bracket , the employee would need to earn $1,293 in wages to have $1,000 left over after paying $194 in income taxes and $99 in employment taxes .

with premium conversion , the $1,000 is not subject to taxes , reducing the taxable part of the $1,293 to $293 and income and employment taxes to $66 , a tax savings of $227 .

to some , premium conversion seems like an accounting trick .

it is difficult for people who are not tax experts to follow the calculations or understand the rationale .

rules limiting its use strike some as arbitrary and unfair .

premium conversion is sometimes referred to as premium only or section 125 plans , causing further confusion .

this report provides more explanation of premium conversion and requirements for its use .

it summarizes the statutory and regulatory background and briefly discusses whether it is sound public policy .

finally , it discusses two policy issues , whether premium conversion should include retirees and what role it might play in health care reform .

premium conversion is authorized by section 125 of the internal revenue code , a section entitled "cafeteria plans. .

in general , the section allows taxpayers to choose among taxable and nontaxable benefits offered by an employer without paying taxes if they select the latter .

as a rule under tax law , when taxpayers are offered a choice between taxable and normally nontaxable income they will be taxed on whichever they choose ; they will be deemed to be in "constructive receipt" of the taxable income whether or not they take it .

section 125 makes an exception to the constructive receipt rule for benefits such as health insurance that meet the section's requirements .

cafeteria plans can be established only by employers .

they must always offer a choice of taxable and nontaxable benefits .

the taxable benefit usually offered is cash , but it might include benefits normally purchased with after - tax dollars , such as group term life insurance .

allowable nontaxable benefits include accident and health insurance , health care flexible spending accounts , accidental death and dismemberment insurance , dependent care assistance , adoption assistance , and others .

certain nontaxable employer benefits may not be offered , such as scholarships , education assistance programs , and long - term care insurance or services .

in addition , cafeteria plans cannot offer benefits that defer compensation to a later year aside from 401 ( k ) account contributions .

short carryover periods ( i.e. , several months ) are permitted .

some cafeteria plans offer employees choices among a number of benefits ( hence the name ) , whereas others limit the choice to cash and one specific nontaxable benefit .

premium conversion is an example of the latter .

it is possible for employers to offer both premium conversion and a separate plan with choices among other benefits .

the cash option may be wages .

under salary reduction agreements , employees in effect agree to work for reduced wages in exchange for having their employer provide an equivalent amount of nontaxable benefits .

premium conversion uses these agreements: employees are given the choice of receiving taxable wages or reducing their wages by their share of the health insurance premium ( $1,000 in the earlier example ) and having the employer use that sum to pay the premium .

taxable wages are thus converted to an employer payment for a nontaxable benefit .

premium conversion can apply both to health plans chosen by employers ( which is the usual case ) as well as insurance that individual workers obtain on their own .

if employers allow the latter , they must ensure that payments they make in fact are used for health coverage .

like all cafeteria plans , premium conversion plans must be in writing .

they must be limited to employees , though former employees may be included provided the plan is not maintained predominantly for them .

employee elections must be irrevocable for the plan year aside from changes due to changes in family status , in alternative coverage for family members , and other limited circumstances .

employers must file a report each year with the department of labor ; separate irs reporting requirements were suspended in 2002 .

all cafeteria plans must meet nondiscrimination tests .

plans may not discriminate in favor of highly compensated employees with respect to eligibility to participate , nor as to employer contributions or actual use of benefits .

in addition , the nontaxable benefits of key employees cannot exceed 25% of the aggregate nontaxable benefits provided all employees under the plan .

finally , cafeteria plans must comply with the nondiscrimination requirements for the benefit in question .

thus , coverage under employers' self - insured accident and health plans must meet the additional nondiscrimination standards in section 105 ( h ) .

section 125 ( g ) includes a safe - harbor test ( a simplified test providing one way to meet the standards ) for all accident and health plans , and the proposed regulations include another for premium - only plans .

nonetheless , applying the rules can be complex if not all employees are allowed to participate ( eg , part - time workers ) , if many eligible workers do not participate , or if participants choose different benefits .

the complexity of nondiscrimination rules is one reason that small firms generally do not use cafeteria plans .

in particular , the rule regarding key employees would preclude use by many small companies since those employees would often account for more than 25% of the nontaxable benefits .

the complexity contributes to the administrative cost of establishing plans and ensuring they remain in compliance .

in addition , owners of small businesses reportedly are reluctant to establish cafeteria plans if they are sole proprietors , partners , or more than 2% owners of s - corporations .

these owners are not classified as employees under the tax code and thus cannot participate in employee benefit programs .

section 125 was included in the internal revenue code by the revenue act of 1978 ( p.l .

95-600 ) .

it has been amended a number of times , especially in the first decade after enactment .

nearly all of the current text consists of provisions dealing with qualified benefits and nondiscrimination .

detailed rules regarding cafeteria plans appear not in the statute but in irs guidance , particularly proposed rules issued in 1984 and 1989 .

these rules were never finalized , but they remained the position of the irs and employers relied upon them .

the 1984 and 1989 rules were withdrawn when the irs issued comprehensive proposed rules on august 7 , 2007 .

benefit choice did not originate with section 125 or the irs guidance ; instead , the statutory and regulatory rules were in response to plans starting to spread among employers .

in particular , there reportedly was an increase in employers offering cash - or - deferred arrangements ( codas ) , which allow workers to choose between receiving cash or having employers contribute to a qualified retirement trust without being taxed on the latter until withdrawals occur in later years .

the irs had previously issued revenue rulings supporting these arrangements , but in 1972 it proposed to tax workers at the time of the contribution if it were made in return for a reduction in wages or in lieu of an increase in wages .

in response , congress included a provision in the employee retirement income security act of 1974 ( erisa , p.l .

93-406 ) , that temporarily blocked application of the proposed rule for plans in existence on june 27 , 1974 , until it could study the issue .

the provision was extended several times before the revenue act of 1978 added section 125 .

the conference report on erisa explicitly states that the provision applied not just to codas but also to cafeteria plans .

although neither erisa nor section 125 mentions premium conversion , they establish authority for its tax treatment .

premium conversion probably became more common after the 1970s when , in the face of rising costs , employers sought to limit health plan contributions and help employees manage their own .

employers might obtain results similar to premium conversion by restricting wage growth and using the savings to increase what they pay for premiums .

many probably follow this strategy even if they are reducing the percentage of the premium they pay ( i.e. , they are still increasing the dollar amount of their contributions ) .

for workers who have employer - provided health care , the effect of premium conversion and restrictions on wage growth could be roughly the same , depending on how the employer changes the wage levels ( it might not be the same dollar amount for all workers ) .

however , restrictions on wage growth would be less advantageous for workers who decline employment - based coverage , either because they do not value it highly or because they have better coverage through a spouse .

only premium conversion allows them the flexibility to individually opt out of a wage reduction that otherwise would be imposed across the board .

whether premium conversion is sound public policy has received little attention .

it might be criticized since workers' tax savings depend upon their marginal tax rate , allowing higher - income workers to benefit more .

in addition , because only employees are eligible for premium conversion , people who purchase insurance on their own cannot benefit .

however , these criticisms apply generally to the exclusion for employer - provided health insurance , of which premium conversion is a minor part .

if one were concerned solely about equity , one might limit or end the entire exclusion , not just premium conversion .

moreover , if only premium conversion were limited , employers could always obtain the same tax benefits for themselves and most of their employees by restricting wage growth and using the savings to pay premiums , as described in the previous paragraph .

in recent years , the principal premium conversion issue before congress has been whether it should be extended to federal retirees .

if health care reform were enacted , consideration may also be given to what role premium conversion might play .

retirees sometimes complain that they cannot take advantage of premium conversion .

the barrier is not section 125 , for as indicated above cafeteria plans may include former employees provided the plan is not maintained predominantly for them .

instead , the restriction is due to an irs determination that distributions from qualified retirement plans are always subject to taxes , aside from several minor exceptions .

the irs ruling precludes former employees from recasting pension payments as pretax income , as active workers can recast their wages .

it might appear that this rule is unfair to retirees since in general their income is lower than current workers who have premium conversion .

the outcome seems to conflict with the equity principles underlying cafeteria plan nondiscrimination rules .

however , it is important to recognize that employer payments for retiree health insurance are excluded from taxes , just as they are for active workers .

for many retirees , the employer pays much of the premium and tax savings on this share would generally be two to three times the additional tax savings from premium conversion .

while allowing retirees the additional advantages of premium conversion would treat them like active workers , it would then seem even more unfair to retirees without access to employer coverage .

the latter retirees are likely to have lower incomes yet .

in the 111 th congress , h.r .

1203 ( van hollen ) and s. 491 ( webb ) would allow federal retirees to pay their share of federal employees health benefits program ( fehbp ) premiums on a pre - tax basis .

besides the equity discussion in the previous paragraph , it might seem difficult to justify extending premium conversion to federal retirees and not retirees with private sector or state or local government retiree health insurance .

extending premium conversion to other retiree groups would greatly increase the revenue loss of this proposal .

massachusetts enacted a broad health care reform law in april 2006 called chapter 58 .

among other things , the law requires employers with 11 or more full - time equivalent ( fte ) workers to establish premium conversion plans , which it calls section 125 plans .

the plans must be set up whether or not employers offer health insurance and whether or not they contribute to the cost of coverage .

as mentioned above , premium conversion is allowed for insurance that individual workers obtain provided employers ensure that payments they make ( including those by premium conversion ) in fact are used for that purpose .

the massachusetts provision benefits workers of employers that previously had not offered premium conversion or extended it to all workers .

their employers would also save on employment taxes .

the public cost of the provision is borne primarily by the federal government through reduced income and employment tax revenue , though massachusetts would experience a small reduction in its own income tax revenue .

chapter 58 also requires employers with 11 or more fte workers to make a fair contribution to their health insurance costs or pay a penalty of $295 per worker .

some observers think that once the reforms are well established smaller employers may be asked to make some contribution and set up premium conversion arrangements .

however , some small employers might have difficulty meeting the nondiscrimination requirements that were described above .

massachusetts cannot by itself exempt employers from federal requirements .

a similar requirement for premium conversion might be considered in the reform legislation now before congress .

the tax savings could help employers and employees pay for the coverage that would be available through the exchanges the bills envision .

unlike massachusetts , however , which could obtain an additional federal subsidy at little cost , the federal government would be the primary payer for this benefit .

in addition , some in congress are considering limiting the tax exclusion for employer - provided coverage , not expanding it .

if congress were to require or encourage employers to adopt premium conversion , consideration may be given to enabling more small businesses to take advantage of it .

legislation introduced in the 111 th congress by senator snowe ( s. 988 , the simple cafeteria plan act of 2009 ) would remove some of the barriers discussed above .

if premium conversion were included in health care reform , consideration may also be given to modifying the statutory and regulatory nondiscrimination rules .

as described above , premium conversion is covered by rules applying to cafeteria plans generally , though the august 2007 proposed irs rules would allow a simplified test .

these rules originate in a concern reflected in a number of parts of the tax code that people with high income or influence over employer policies can take advantage of nontaxable benefits while others cannot .

for example , if low - wage workers cannot afford to give up cash wages , then most of the tax subsidy associated with nontaxable benefits would accrue to higher - paid workers .

health care reform legislation now before congress could change these circumstances: for example , the principal proposals now being considered would require everyone to have health insurance , making it no longer an option , and lower - income taxpayers would receive premium subsidies of some sort .

congress may consider establishing separate nondiscrimination rules for premium conversion that takes account of the new proposed subsidies .

