the 111 th congress has made health reform a priority .

as health reform is debated , one possible issue that may surface is the rights and requirements of noncitizens ( aliens ) under health reform .

because some of the proposals to address health reform in the united states would create a mechanism to provide health insurance to the overwhelming majority of individuals in the nation , this report explores the health insurance coverage of noncitizens in the united states , as well as noncitizen usage of selected safety - net providers and the impact of unauthorized aliens on the health care system .

the report begins with an overview of noncitizen eligibility for health insurance in the united states .

next , it provides an analysis of health insurance coverage for noncitizens in the united states and an examination of the impact of noncitizens on the number of uninsured persons in the united states over time .

the report continues with discussions of noncitizen usage of emergency medicaid and emergency departments , and of noncitizens' eligibility to receive care through federal health centers .

the report concludes with an overview of the literature on the cost to the health care system of unauthorized aliens .

noncitizens are not barred from having health insurance or from paying for health care on their own .

indeed , due to the quality of health care in the united states , some noncitizens come to the united states to receive health care from world - renowned doctors and hospitals .

in the group ( employer ) health insurance market , there is no legal burden for the insurer to confirm that a worker is legally entitled to work in the united states .

furthermore , u.s. law mandates that medicare - participating hospitals provide emergency medical services for all patients who seek care , regardless of their ability to pay ; this includes services to all noncitizens , regardless of their immigration status .

nonetheless , the 1996 personal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act ( prwora ) established comprehensive new restrictions on the eligibility of noncitizens for federal , state , and local public benefits — with significant exceptions for those with a substantial u.s. work history or military connection — setting specific eligibility requirements and exceptions for many health care services .

in general , prwora states that an alien who is not a qualified alien is not eligible for any f ederal public benefit with specified exceptions for certain short - term , emergency related benefits ( see below ) .

in addition , with specified exceptions , any alien who is not a qualified alien , a nonimmigrant , or an alien paroled into the united states under ina section 212 ( d ) ( 5 ) for less than one year is not eligible for a state or local public benefit .

in other words , almost all legally present noncitizens are eligible for state and local public benefits , but in general , only those aliens who are or are expected to become immigrants ( legal permanent residents ) are eligible for federal public benefits .

in addition , pwora placed additional restrictions on receiving federal means - tested public benefits .

the health related means - tested public benefits are medicaid and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) , and are discussed below .

the law defines "public benefit" as: …any retirement , welfare , health , disability , public or assisted housing , postsecondary education , food assistance , unemployment benefit , or any other similar benefit for which payments or assistance are provided to an individual , household , or family eligibility unit by an agency of the united states or by appropriated funds of the united states .

[8 u.s.c .

1611 ( c ) and 8 u.s.c .

1621 ( c ) ] the exemptions to these restrictions consist of the following: ( a ) medical assistance under title xix of the social security act [medicaid]…for care and services that are necessary for the treatment of an emergency medical condition…of the alien involved and are not related to an organ transplant procedure , if the alien involved otherwise meets the eligibility requirements for medical assistance under the state plan approved under such title .

 ( b ) short - term , non - cash , in - kind emergency disaster relief .

 ( c ) public health…for immunizations with respect to immunizable diseases and for testing and treatment of symptoms of communicable diseases whether or not such symptoms are caused by a communicable disease .

 ( d ) programs , services , or assistance ( such as soup kitchens , crisis counseling and intervention , and short - term shelter ) specified by the attorney general , in the attorney general's sole and unreviewable discretion after consultation with appropriate federal agencies and departments , which ( i ) deliver in - kind services at the community level , including through public or private nonprofit agencies ; ( ii ) do not condition the provision of assistance , the amount of assistance provided , or the cost of assistance provided on the individual recipient's income or resources ; and ( iii ) are necessary for the protection of life or safety .

[8 u.s.c .

1611 ( b ) ] a notice published by the attorney general includes in the exemptions from the alienage restrictions for public benefits ambulance services ; medical and public health services ( including treatment and prevention of diseases and injuries ) and mental health , disability , or substance abuse assistance necessary to protect life or safety ; activities designed to protect the life and safety of workers , children and youths , or community residents ; and any other programs , services , or assistance necessary for the protection of life or safety .

in summary , noncitizens have specific eligibility requirements under law for public benefits , including means - tested public benefits such as medicaid and chip , which can , however , pay for emergency medical services of certain noncitizens who are otherwise eligible .

in addition , due to the exemptions and the fact that under regulation federally funded health centers are not defined as federal public benefits , there does not appear to be specified eligibility requirements or prohibitions related to noncitizens' use of federally qualified health centers , including community health centers and migrant health centers .

some health reform proposals try to devise a system to ensure that the overwhelming majority of people in the united states have health insurance .

the following section examines current health insurance coverage for noncitizens and the characteristics that affect having health insurance .

the section begins with an overview of the data and methodology employed in this study and then continues with a presentation of the findings .

the section concludes with a summation of the results and presents findings from select articles that examined characteristics or populations that could not be analyzed by using the current population survey ( cps ) .

although there appears to be general agreement on the fact that noncitizens are more likely than u.s. citizens to lack health insurance , there is not a consensus on the impact of noncitizens on the u.s. uninsured population over time .

one study concluded that immigrants who arrived between 1994 and 1998 accounted for the majority of the growth in the uninsured population during that time period .

conversely , another study during the same time period concluded that although uninsured rates among recent immigrants are high , this population was not a significant factor in the growth of the uninsured population .

several studies , as well as crs analyses , have found that the time period examined has a significant impact on the estimated effect of noncitizens on the uninsured population .

as discussed above , noncitizens are less likely than citizens to have health insurance coverage .

this next section discusses two of the most likely sources of care for those who lack health insurance: emergency departments ( eds ) and health centers .

the discussion of eds includes use of emergency medicaid and studies examining noncitizen visits to eds .

due to a lack of published research , the discussion of health centers is general and does not contain information on noncitizen usage .

the following section provides analysis of the 2006 data on emergency medicaid expenditures and presents findings from two studies on emergency medicaid .

notably , few studies have examined emergency medicaid expenditures , and except for one study discussed below , information about patient characteristics and services for which emergency medicaid funding has been used is absent in the published literature .

some contend that a common route for the poor , including unauthorized aliens , to receive medical care is through hospital emergency departments ( eds ) .

as discussed above , the emergency medical treatment and active labor act ( emtala ) requires medicare - participating hospitals to provide emergency medical services for all patients who seek care , regardless of their ability to pay .

more specifically , the act has three primary requirements: hospitals must provide an appropriate medical screening examination for individuals who seek emergency care in a hospital ed ; if an individual is found to have an emergency medical condition , the hospital must treat and stabilize the medical condition ( or transfer the patient under certain circumstances ) ; and if an individual's medical condition is not stable , the hospital may not transfer him or her unless ( 1 ) the individual ( or someone acting on the individual's behalf ) requests the transfer and / or ( 2 ) the transfer is appropriate as defined under the act .

because hospitals are required to evaluate and treat all patients who seek care in hospital eds , emtala in effect requires hospitals to provide free ( uncompensated ) care for some patients .

overall , in the united states , 17% of the approximately 115 million annual ed visits are made by patients without health insurance .

a study that examined data on ed usage concluded that the literature does not support the notion that uninsured patients are a primary cause of ed overcrowding , present with less acute conditions than insured patients , or seek ed care primarily for convenience .

nonetheless , others have reported that the increase in ed usage is caused by uninsured patients , and that emtala has led to more patients seeking care for non - urgent conditions in eds .

as discussed above , noncitizens are more likely than u.s. citizens to be uninsured .

in addition , research from the 1980s and the early 1990s indicated that unauthorized aliens obtained health care in the united states primarily though hospital emergency departments ; however , it is unknown if this is still true .

this section discusses federally qualified health centers ( fqhcs ) , often referred to as clinics .

however , although it seems likely that some proportion of the noncitizen population receives care at these centers , crs was not able to locate published information on noncitizen usage of health centers .

as discussed above , because of the types of services provided and the fact that the department of health and human services ( hhs ) did not classify fqhcs as public benefits , it would appear that most of the health centers ( unless serving a specific population discussed below ) provide services to noncitizens regardless of immigration status .

due to the fact that immigration status is not a condition for receiving services , it is unlikely that health centers ask the clients' immigration status .

indeed , one study on safety - net providers ( eg , hospitals , community health centers , free clinics ) found that obtaining specific information about aliens was difficult because health care providers , including those at health centers , reported that they did not attempt to distinguish patients by documentation status .

the term "health center," as defined by hhs , refers to all of the diverse public and nonprofit organizations and programs that receive federal funding under the consolidated health centers program .

the consolidated health center program includes community health centers , migrant health centers , health centers for the homeless , and health centers for residents of public housing .

under this authority , health centers' grants largely provide primary health care services to medically underserved populations .

in cy2007 , there were nearly 7,000 delivery sites serving more than 16.1 million clients with a total of 1,072 grantees .

the client ( patient ) population is primarily low - income , uninsured , or underinsured individuals .

a majority of this population — which includes people with chronic diseases , pregnant teens , substance abusers , and a number of individuals living with hiv / aids infection — is not working .

many are unable to afford even the most basic medical or dental care .

an estimated 92% of health center patients are at or below 200% of the federal poverty level .

of this population , 40% have no health insurance , 64% are racial or ethnic minorities , and 35% depend on medicaid .

every center provides a similar range of primary health services on an ambulatory basis .

community health centers are required to provide primary health services , as defined in the regulations , which include services of physicians , physicians' assistants , and nurse clinicians ; diagnostic laboratory and radiologic services ; preventive health services ; emergency medical services ; preventive dental services ; pharmaceutical services ; transportation ; and other enabling services .

the average cost per medical patient visit was $123 in 2007 .

centers are generally required to serve all residents of the area in which the center is located , regardless of the residents' ability to pay .

the consolidated health centers program includes three special categories ( or types of health centers ) other than the basic "community" health center category: migrant health centers , health centers for the homeless , and health centers for residents of public housing .

native hawaiian health care , fqhc look - alikes , and tribal fqhcs also fall under the umbrella of fqhcs because they also receive federal grants .

notably , in general , a noncitizen must be a qualified alien to receive public housing and as a result would not be able to use health centers specifically for residents of public housing .

in addition , it is unlikely that a noncitizen would qualify as a native hawaiian and be able to receive services at those clinics .

nonetheless , it seems likely that some noncitizens frequent migrant health centers .

the migrant health centers served 827,000 migrant and seasonal farm workers and their families in cy2007 .

ascertaining the cost of unauthorized aliens to the health care system presents complex fiscal questions .

it is very difficult to enumerate a population that is trying to avoid detection by the government .

the main sources of socioeconomic information in the united states — the current population survey ( cps ) , the decennial census of the population ( census ) , and the american community survey , collected by the census bureau — ask about citizenship status but not immigration status .

thus , it is not possible to use these data sources in calculating the health care cost of unauthorized aliens .

in addition , because it is extremely difficult to get accurate data on unauthorized aliens , many studies make assumptions about the number of unauthorized aliens , their service usage , and their revenue contributions .

it is not clear whether the assumptions are correct , or if they overestimate or underestimate the amounts spent .

as a result , many studies that attempt to estimate the cost of health care for unauthorized aliens in the united states focus on limited geographic regions ( eg , border communities , states , or cities ) .

in addition , some of these studies survey immigrant communities and ask immigration status , while others ask local agencies to estimate the cost of services provided to unauthorized aliens .

some studies use proxies , such as those who provided a false social security number or foreign - born workers who are low - wage earners , to determine who is an unauthorized alien .

each of these methods has strengths and weaknesses , and none provides a reliable estimate upon which researchers agree .

for example , the few studies that have specifically examined the unauthorized latino population have used small samples and limited health care measures .

notably , a study on safety - net providers found that obtaining specific information about unauthorized aliens was difficult because health care providers reported that they did not attempt to distinguish patients by documentation status .

this report has presented an overview of the health insurance status of noncitizens and what is known about their usage of selected safety - net providers such as health care centers and emergency departments .

overall , even controlling for most socio - economic variables , noncitizens are more likely than native - born and naturalized u.s. citizens to be uninsured .

as a corollary , noncitizens also have a lower rate of private insurance coverage than the native - born and naturalized populations .

in addition , between 2000 and 2007 , the noncitizens' percentage of the uninsured population increased , although the increase was not consistent across the time period .

conversely , during the same time period , the percentage of the uninsured population made up of native - born citizens decreased .

as with the noncitizen population , the naturalized citizen percentage of the uninsured population increased from 2000 to 2007 .

examining emergency medicaid expenditures , in fy2006 , approximately 1.5% of the total medicaid recipients reported by states received emergency care based on alien status ( i.e. , emergency medicaid ) .

during this period , approximately $2.6 billion was spent on emergency medicaid , which constituted 1.1% of the total medicaid spending .

nonetheless , although there is limited research , there does not seem to be evidence that noncitizens use emergency departments more than citizens .

notably , some argue that one of the reasons noncitizens lack health insurance and tend to use few health services ( except for those related to childbirth ) is that overall they are a healthier population .

the literature is mixed on whether this is a valid assumption .

for example , a study of latinos found that unauthorized aliens are the least likely to report their health as poor among mexicans and other latinos , including immigrants and citizens .

another study reported that the foreign - born reported fewer health problems than the native - born , and the health advantage was especially larger among the unauthorized population .

nonetheless , other studies have found the opposite , with noncitizens being as likely as citizens to report poor or fair health and less likely to report having excellent health .

in addition , the link between health insurance coverage and health care utilization is well documented , and several studies have shown that their lower rate of insurance coverage is one factor contributing to noncitizens' lower utilization of health care , including preventive care ( e.g .

cancer screening ) .

nonetheless , several studies have reported that the noncitizen population , including unauthorized aliens , was more likely to have hospitalization for childbirth than the citizen population .

furthermore , regardless of legal status , and in addition to the barriers caused by a lack of health insurance , immigrants often face language and cultural barriers in accessing health care .

these barriers include lack of knowledge about the u.s. healthcare system and lack of sufficient financial resources .

many of these barriers are the same for citizens ( eg , low incomes , poor education , being in a health care shortage area such as an inner city ) , but in general , noncitizens are more likely to have more of these characteristics .

in addition , the kaiser commission reports that immigrants may underutilize health care , regardless of insurance coverage , out of fear of jeopardizing their eligibility citizenship by incurring costs as a public charge .

similarly , fear of discovery by government officials may also be a barrier to accessing health services among the unauthorized population , as was shown in a 1994 study on unauthorized aliens and tuberculosis .

appendix a .

data and detailed methodology the crs analysis of data in this report is based primarily on the 2008 current population survey ( cps ) annual demographic survey , march supplement .

the current population survey ( cps ) is a household survey conducted by the u.s. bureau of the census for the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) of the u.s. department of labor .

the monthly cps is the main source of labor force data for the nation , including estimates of the monthly unemployment rate .

the cps collects a wide range of demographic , social , and labor market information .

currently , approximately 57,000 households are interviewed each month .

for the march supplement approximately 99,000 households are interviewed .

the monthly cps sample is representative of the civilian non - institutional population ; it does not include persons on active military duty .

each march , the cps asks additional questions about earnings and health insurance for the previous year .

employment variables the bls defines the labor force as the sum of employed and unemployed persons .

unemployed persons are individuals who are not working but who are available and looking for work .

employed persons are individuals who are working for a private or public employer , are self - employed , or who work 15 hours or more a week as unpaid workers on a family farm or business .

also counted as employed are persons who are temporarily absent from work because of illness , bad weather , vacation , job training , labor - management disputes , childcare problems , maternity or paternity leave , or other family or personal reasons .

citizenship variable the cps uses five categories to define citizenship: ( 1 ) born in the united states , ( 2 ) born in puerto rico or another outlying area of the united states , ( 3 ) born abroad of u.s. citizen parents , ( 4 ) naturalized citizens , and ( 5 ) noncitizens .

for the analysis in this report , the first three categories were combined and defined as "native - born citizens. .

information on place of birth is collected for every household member in the cps sample , and for the parents of every household member .

individuals born in the united states or its outlying areas , or whose parents were born in the united states or its outlying areas , are not asked questions about citizenship .

individuals born outside the united states or its outlying areas , and whose parents were born outside the united states or its outlying areas , are asked , "are you a citizen of the united states ? .

respondents who answer "yes" are coded as naturalized citizens , while respondents who answer "no" are categorized as noncitizens .

in the cps , individuals for whom no birthplace is provided are assigned a citizenship status during the editing process .

for example , the citizenship status of a child may be assigned based on the citizenship status of the child's mother .

the cps does not attempt to verify the accuracy of responses to the questions about citizenship .

it is not possible using cps data to differentiate between different categories of noncitizens ( eg , legal permanent residents , temporary workers , students , refugees , and asylees ) .

nor is it possible to differentiate between aliens who are in the united states legally and those who are unauthorized .

basic demographic and socio - economic characteristics appendix b .

methodology of studies presented in section on estimated health care costs for unauthorized aliens uncompensated care costs: a pilot study using hospitals in texas county  ( 2009 ) the study's authors used three sources to identify uncompensated care costs: ( 1 ) the united states / mexico border counties coalition study medical emergency: costs of uncompensated care in southwest border counties ; ( 2 ) the centers for medicaid and medicare services ( cms ) report federal reimbursement of emergency health services furnished to undocumented aliens:2006 ; and the 2004 texas hospital association survey compiled by the center for health statistics within the texas department of state health services .

the total uncompensated care costs were developed using a model which reflects hospital characteristics ( eg , hospital size , urban or rural location , whether the hospital was a teaching or nonteaching hospital ) .

undocumented immigrants in iowa: estimated tax contributions and fiscal impact ( 2007 ) this study used demographic estimates by the pew hispanic center , and estimates of the annual per capita public share of medical spending on unauthorized aliens from the study immigrants and the cost of medical care , a study on los angeles county .

the authors stated that since the per capita public spending on unauthorized aliens was based on the potentially more generous care available in los angeles county , the methodology would provide a conservative estimate of public spending for medical care of adult unauthorized aliens in iowa .

the study did not estimate the costs of public spending on unauthorized alien children .

undocumented immigrants in texas: a financial analysis of the impact to the state budget and economy ( 2006 ) the comptroller of the state of texas calculated an approximation of the financial impact of unauthorized aliens on the state based on estimates of the unauthorized alien population by the pew hispanic center ; reports by the government accountability office ( gao ) and the border counties coalition ; and the state's own information on the costs of providing health care .

cost of federally mandated services to undocumented immigrants in colorado  ( 2006 ) .

this study used demographic estimates by the pew hispanic center to estimate the cost to the colorado state government of providing federally mandated services , including emergency medical care , to unauthorized aliens .

impact of illegal immigration on mississippi ( 2006 ) the mississippi office of the state auditor's estimate was accomplished by using a finding from the rand corporation that 68% of unauthorized alien adults lacked health insurance .

importantly , the report noted that "because no data regarding immigration status is collected , it is difficult to determine the accuracy of this estimate..." impact of illegal immigration on minnesota ( 2005 ) the office of strategic planning and results management for the state of minnesota used state program ( medicaid , chip ) data on unauthorized alien recipients reported to estimate the costs to these programs of unauthorized aliens .

the high cost of cheap labor: illegal immigration and the federal budget  ( 2004 ) this study released by the center for immigration studies used the march current population survey ( cps ) and the decennial census , and relied on the methodology used in two other respected studies of the fiscal effects of immigration: ( 1 ) the new americans ( 1997 ) , by the national research council ( nrc ) , and ( 2 ) immigrants in new york: their legal status , incomes and taxes ( 1998 ) , by researchers at the urban institute .

unauthorized aliens were estimated by using socioeconomic characteristics to assign a probability to each respondent that the respondent was an unauthorized alien .

the study used households as the unit of analysis arguing , as in the nrc study , that the household is the primary unit through which taxes are paid and services used .

it is important to note that although the head of the household is an unauthorized alien , it is possible that others in the household are legally present , or united states citizens .

the study noted that ascertaining the cost of unauthorized alien households presents complex fiscal questions .

care for the uninsured non - citizens: a growing burden on florida's hospitals  ( 2003 ) the florida hospital association used case studies of 700 unauthorized aliens from 39 hospitals / health systems representing 56 hospitals , or 26% of the acute care hospitals in florida , to comprise its estimate of the amount spent on care for unauthorized aliens .

medical emergency: costs of uncompensated care in southwest border counties ( 2002 ) in 2002 , the united states / mexico border counties coalition released a study entitled medical emergency: costs of uncompensated care in southwest border counties .

the survey conducted statistical modeling by identifying sets of non - border communities that "capture essential characteristics of each border community with respect to the demand for emergency medical services. .

the researchers note the complexity of matching border communities with other communities , as the counties on the u.s. / mexico border are unique on many important dimensions , and this complexity may have impacted the results .

the researchers then performed a linear regression , and assumed the differences between the border communities and the similar non - border communities could be attributed to unauthorized aliens .

appendix c. state and region definitions states / regions of residence northeast: connecticut , maine , massachusetts , new hampshire , pennsylvania , rhode island , and vermont .

midwest : illinois , indiana , iowa , kansas , michigan , minnesota , missouri , nebraska , north dakota , ohio , south dakota , and wisconsin .

south: alabama , arkansas , delaware , district of columbia , georgia , kentucky , louisiana , maryland , mississippi , north carolina , oklahoma , south carolina , tennessee , virginia , and west virginia .

west: alaska , arizona , colorado , hawaii , idaho , montana , new mexico , nevada , oregon , utah , washington , and wyoming .

new jersey , new york , florida , texas , and california were analyzed separately in the analysis .

regions of birth africa : algeria , cameroon , cape verde , egypt , ethiopia , eritrea , ghana , kenya , liberia , morocco , nigeria , senegal , sierra leone , somalia , south africa , sudan , tanzania , uganda , zimbabwe , and africa , not specified asia: afghanistan , bangladesh , cambodia , china , cyprus , hong kong , india , indonesia , japan , korea , laos , malaysia , myanmar ( burma ) , nepal , pakistan , philippines , south korea , singapore , sri lanka , taiwan , thailand , vietnam , and asia , not specified .

caribbean: antigua and barbuda , bahamas , barbados , cuba , dominica , dominican republic , grenada , haiti , jamaica , st. kitts - nevis , st. lucia , st. vincent and the grenadines , trinidad and tobago , and west indies , not specified .

central america : belize , costa rica , el salvador , guatemala , honduras , nicaragua , and panama .

europe: albania , austria , azores , belgium , bosnia & herzegovina , bulgaria , croatia , czech republic , czechoslovakia , denmark , england , finland , france , germany , greece , hungary , ireland , italy , kosovo , macedonia , netherlands , northern ireland , norway , poland , portugal , romania , scotland , serbia , slovakia , spain , sweden , switzerland , united kingdom , wales , yugoslavia , and europe , not specified .

former soviet union : armenia , azerbaijan , belarus , georgia , latvia , lithuania , moldova , russia , ukraine , ussr , and uzbekistan .

mexico : mexico middle east: iran , iraq , israel , jordan , kuwait , lebanon , saudi arabia , syria , turkey , and yemen .

north america: bermuda and canada .

south america: argentina , bolivia , brazil , chile , columbia , ecuador , guyana , paraguay , peru , uruguay , venezuela , and south america , not specified .

oceana and other: australia , fiji , new zealand , samoa , tonga , oceania not specified , americas not specified , and elsewhere .

