the existing authorization for federal surface transportation programs provided by the safe , accountable , flexible , efficient transportation equity act: a legacy for users ( safetea - lu or safetea ) expires on september 30 , 2009 .

congress is now considering legislation that would either reauthorize these programs or extend the existing program into at least part of the next fiscal year .

while it considers reauthorization or extension legislation , congress must also address an ongoing financial shortfall in the highway account of the highway trust fund .

just before leaving for its summer district work period , congress provided a short term fix for the funding problem by transferring $7 billion from the treasury's general fund account to the highway account of the highway trust fund ( p.l .

111-46 ) .

these funds are expected to keep the trust fund solvent through the remainder of fy2009 and may also provide an additional cushion that could extend later into the fall .

this action does not , however , address program extension and provides no long term solution to the trust fund's financial problems .

there are many issues associated with surface transportation legislation .

some , but not all , are discussed in the examination of the legislation under consideration presented in this report .

those seeking to understand all of the major issues at play in this debate should refer to: crs report r40053 , surface transportation program reauthorization issues for the 111 th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

the obama administration has asked congress to extend the existing program for 18 months for a number of reasons , the most important being the need to identify a solid funding structure for long term program reauthorization .

senate committee leadership has concurred with the administration view and the senate is now considering extension legislation .

on july 22 , 2009 , the senate committee on environment and public works ( epw ) reported the surface transportation extension act of 2009 ( s. 1498 ) .

this legislation would extend existing surface transportation programs at current funding levels for 18 months ( beginning october 1 , 2009 and ending march 31 , 2011 ) .

epw has jurisdiction over highway titles of the surface transportation program and is the lead committee on reauthorization .

the 3 other senate committees with jurisdiction over various titles of the program have subsequently reported and / or introduced similar legislation: commerce , science , and transportation ( s. 1496 ) , banking ( s. 1533 ) , and finance ( s. 1474 ) .

the provisions in these bills are likely to be merged into a single bill should the senate choose to consider this issue in the fall of 2009 .

staa would make major changes in the structure and policy focus in the highway title of the reauthorization bill ( title i ) .

the bill represents a major programmatic shift away from highway construction in a broader sense and toward a concentration on: the maintenance / improvement of existing highways ; the improvement of freight movement , in regard to both highway and intermodal improvements ; multimodal improvements to metropolitan area mobility , access , and livability ; addressing large projects of national significance ; as well as continuing highway safety efforts .

some could see staa as being more urban - focused in outlook than safetea , in part by expanding the authority of metropolitan planning organizations ( mpos ) relative to the state dots .

among the structural changes the highway title of staa would make to the federal - aid highway program are the following .

in subtitle a , among the core programs , the interstate maintenance program , the current highway bridge program , and the national highway system program would cease to exist as independent entities and their programmatic responsibilities would be transferred mostly to the newly created critical asset investment ( cai ) and freight improvement ( fip ) programs , or to the existing stp , which , it appears , could be substantially expanded by staa in dollar terms .

of the safetea core programs , stp , cmaq , and hsip are retained as core programs to be joined by cai and the fip , a total of five core programs .

funds under these core programs would be apportioned among the states by formula .

in subtitle b , intermodal and organizational innovations , staa creates two major intermodal programs , the metropolitan mobility and access program ( mma ) and projects of national significance ( pns ) , which would be under the control of mpos and the fhwa , respectively , and not state dots .

staa would allow for a major expansion of funding transferability between highway and transit programs and a broadening of direct project funding eligibilities to allow an increase in direct highway funding of transit projects or direct transit funding of highway projects .

historically , however , most of such funding transfers have been of title 23 u.s.c. , highways funds to chapter 53 of title 49 , public transportation projects and uses .

transferability is discussed further later in this section .

staa also continues a significant number of discretionary programs , consolidates or eliminates some , and creates others .

intermodalism , as the name of the legislation suggests , was a major focus of the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991 ( istea , p.l .

102-240 ) .

that legislation suggested that surface transportation programs should be administered with improved intermodal connections in mind .

to facilitate this process the law created a new office of intermodalism within dot that was supposed to give the concept a high profile in dot program decisionmaking .

the office of intermodalism , however , never lived up to the high level of expectation that the author's of istea held for it .

the office itself has moved around within dot over the years and has , by most accounts , had little direct influence on policymaking .

the draft bill released by the house transportation and infrastructure committee ( t&i ) appears to make significant changes to the structure of the overall federal transit program , along with some major and minor changes to individual programs .

these proposed changes are emphasized in summaries of the legislation published by t&i , but , as noted earlier , the draft bill does not provide details of how the funding will be distributed among the programs , making it impossible to fully assess the changes that are being proposed .

the staa , according to the committee's documents , would authorize $50 billion over six years ( $8.3 billion per year ) for the development of intercity high - speed passenger rail corridors .

the source of funds would be the general treasury , not the highway trust fund .

this level of funding for high - speed rail is a substantial increase over the $100 million per year authorized in safetea ( section 9001 ) and the $300 million per year authorized in the passenger rail investment and improvement act ( p.l .

110-432 , section 501 ) enacted in october 2008 .

it is more in keeping with the $8 billion appropriated in the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) for high - speed rail .

the bill defines "high - speed" as rail service that is reasonably expected to reach speeds of at least 110 miles per hour .

the high - speed rail development program , as promulgated in section 6001 of the draft bill , would require a local match of 20% and allow the secretary of transportation to issue "letters of intent" regarding federal funding of specific projects in future years .

states or amtrak may enter into a cooperative agreement with any public , private , or non - profit entity to implement a high - speed rail project .

although the bill authorizes a substantial increase in funding for modernizing the nation's passenger rail network , without a dedicated funding source , which has benefitted the development of other modes of intercity travel , it is uncertain whether congress can sustain , over the long - term , the level of funding it recently appropriated to passenger rail in arra .

sustaining higher levels of capital funding is not the only challenge confronting decision - makers .

on many of the proposed routes it is unlikely that ticket and other revenues will be sufficient to cover operating costs , requiring public assistance to cover these losses in addition to funding infrastructure maintenance and improvements .

several members of congress have introduced legislation that would , if adopted or incorporated into the major reauthorization bill , have an impact on federal surface transportation policy .

this bill , sometimes referred to as cleantea , establishes a new trust fund , the low greenhouse gas transportation fund , to be funded with monies coming from the auctioning of greenhouse gas emissions allowances that might arise with the enactment of a cap - and - trade system .

the bill requires money from 10% of the auctioned allowances to be deposited in the fund .

monies in the fund , distributed by formula , are to be used by states and mpos to develop plans and targets to reduce ghg emissions from transportation , and to help fund projects that are planned .

this bill would allow states to opt out of the federal - aid highway program beginning in fy2011 .

a state opting out of the highway program would instead receive an amount equivalent to the state's contribution to the highway account of the highway trust fund , less an amount to be determined by the secretary to pay a portion of the funding necessary to maintain nhtsa and fmcsa activities .

as part of this transfer , the state would agree to continue certain aspects of the existing highway program , such as the urbanized area suballocation distribution that would have occurred as part of the stp program .

in addition , a state would agree to maintain the interstates and submit a plan on how the funds obtained from this transfer would be utilized .

s. 903 is a donor state bill .

by transferring funds directly to the state instead of through the existing federal aid program it addresses many of the long standing complaints expressed by donor states that they do not receive a full return on their contributions to the trust fund .

at its core the bill is a policy statement favoring partial devolution of the surface transportation assistance program .

it is partial because it deals only with the spending side of the program .

the federal government would still be required to collect taxes and transfer them to the states .

in some ways this process would be similar to the revenue sharing policies adopted during the nixon administration and repealed under the reagan administration .

the bill as introduced does not contain detailed implementation provisions .

the bill does not , for example , provide guidance on how the regulatory structure for this program restructuring would be created .

one could assume that the secretary would have this role , but the legislation does not make this clear .

the federal surface transportation policy and planning act of 2009 ( s. 1036 ) , introduced by senators rockefeller and lautenberg , sets out a number of national surface transportation policy objectives , and establishes 10 goals .

the policy goals are: to reduce national per capita motor vehicle miles traveled on an annual basis ; to reduce national motor vehicle - related fatalities by 50% by 2030 ; to reduce national surface transportation - generated carbon dioxide levels by 40% by 2030 ; to reduce national surface transportation delays per capita on an annual basis ; to increase the percentage of system - critical surface transportation assets , as defined by the secretary , that are in a state of good repair by 20% by 2030 ; to increase the total usage of public transportation , intercity passenger rail services , and non - motorized transportation on an annual basis ; to increase the proportion of national freight transportation provided by non - highway or multimodal services by 10% by 2020 ; to reduce passenger and freight transportation delays and congestion at international points of entry on an annual basis ; to ensure adequate transportation of domestic energy supplies ; and to maintain or the reduce the percentage of gross domestic product consumed by transportation costs .

in order to achieve the policy , objectives , and goals in the act , the secretary of dot is required , in consultation with a wide range of state and local governments , non - profits , and private entities , to develop and implement a national surface transportation performance plan .

the secretary is also required to evaluate how well federal surface transportation programs contribute to achieving the policy , objectives , and goals , and must "align the availability and award of federal surface transportation funding to meet the policy , objectives , goals , and performance criteria established. .

appendix a. crs surface transportation reauthorization reports crs report r40053 , surface transportation program reauthorization issues for the 111th congress , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34675 , surface transportation reauthorization: selected highway and transit issues in brief , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl33995 , surface transportation congestion: policy and issues , by [author name scrubbed] crs report r40451 , the donor - donee state issue: funding equity in surface transportation reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34127 , highway bridges: conditions and the federal / state role , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report r40629 , freight issues in surface transportation reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34183 , public transit program funding issues in surface transportation reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34171 , public transit program issues in surface transportation reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34305 , motorcycle safety: recent trends , congressional action , and selected policy options , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34153 , seat belts on school buses: overview of the issue , by [author name scrubbed] crs report rl34657 , financial institution insolvency: federal authority over fannie mae , freddie mac , and depository institutions , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] crs report rl33492 , amtrak: budget and reauthorization , by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed] appendix b .

trust fund financial dat .

