the housing trust fund ( htf ) , administered by the department of hous ing and urban development ( hud ) , provides formula funds to states to use for certain affordable housing activities .

the htf was established by the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( hera , p.l .

110-289 ) , which contained a wide range of housing - related provisions .

some of the key features of the housing trust fund include the following: it is intended to be primarily a rental housing production program .

most funds must be used to produce , preserve , rehabilitate , or operate rental housing , while a limited amount can be used to support homeownership for certain first - time homebuyers .

a majority of funds must be used to benefit extremely low - income households ( households with incomes at or below 30% of area median income ) , and all funds must be used for extremely low - or very low - income households ( households with incomes at or below 50% of area median income ) .

rather than being funded through appropriations , the housing trust fund ( along with the capital magnet fund , another new affordable housing fund established by hera ) is funded through contributions from two government - sponsored enterprises ( gses ) , fannie mae and freddie mac .

after its creation in 2008 , the htf did not receive any funding for several years .

in september 2008 , there were concerns about fannie mae's and freddie mac's finances .

they entered voluntary conservatorship overseen by their regulator , the federal housing finance agency ( fhfa ) , and the department of the treasury agreed to provide financial support to the gses through the purchase of senior preferred stock .

in november 2008 fhfa suspended fannie mae's and freddie mac's contributions to the affordable housing funds before any had been made .

the contributions remained suspended for several years , leaving the htf without a source of funding .

in subsequent years , fannie mae's and freddie mac's finances improved , and in december 2014 the federal housing finance agency directed them to begin setting aside contributions for the affordable housing funds during 2015 .

these first contributions were required to be transferred to the housing trust fund by february 29 , 2016 .

the gses transferred $174 million to the housing trust fund , and hud announced formula allocations to states in may 2016 .

this report provides background on the housing trust fund , including its funding mechanism and key programmatic features .

it also provides a brief overview of current issues related to the housing trust fund .

many states and localities across the nation have created housing trust funds , which provide dedicated sources of state or local funding for affordable housing activities .

in general , affordable housing trust funds are permanent funding streams that are not reliant on annual appropriations and are dedicated to affordable housing activities for low - income households .

for example , various types of real estate transaction fees are a common source of funding for state or local trust funds .

according to the center for community change , an advocacy group , nearly 700 state , city , and county housing trust funds have been established in 47 states across the nation .

for several years prior to the establishment of the federal housing trust fund in 2008 , a coalition of low - income housing advocacy organizations led by the national low income housing coalition advocated for the establishment of an affordable housing trust fund at the national level to complement these state and local efforts .

 ( appendix a provides a brief overview of legislative proposals to create a national housing trust fund prior to the establishment of the housing trust fund. ) .

advocates wanted a national housing trust fund to be capitalized with new resources devoted to affordable housing activities , rather than resources diverted from other federal affordable housing programs .

a dedicated source of funding would allow the program to avoid the uncertainties of the annual appropriations process , and would mean that the program would not be in competition with other housing priorities for appropriated funds .

in july 2008 , the housing and economic recovery act ( hera , p.l .

110-289 ) was enacted .

hera contained a wide variety of housing - related provisions .

among other things , it established the housing trust fund , administered by the department of housing and urban development , and the capital magnet fund , administered by the department of the treasury's community development financial institutions fund ( cdfi fund ) .

 ( see the nearby text box for a brief description of the capital magnet fund and how it differs from the housing trust fund. ) .

both funds were to be funded through annual contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac .

however , because these contributions were suspended for several years , the housing trust fund received its first funding in 2016 .

 ( the " suspension and resumption of gse contributions to the htf " section of this report provides more detail on the suspension of the contributions. ) .

hud published a proposed rule governing the allocation formula for the housing trust fund ( htf ) on december 4 , 2009 and a proposed rule governing program requirements on october 29 , 2010 .

on january 30 , 2015 , hud published an interim rule governing both the htf formula and program requirements .

hud indicated that it would seek public comment on the interim rule after the htf received funding and grantees had experience administering the program .

this section describes the formula for the housing trust fund and key program requirements based on the statute and hud's interim rule .

the gses first set aside contributions for the htf during 2015 , and these first funds were transferred to the housing trust fund in early 2016 .

the total amount transferred to the htf was $174 million .

this amount reflects a required sequestration , or reduction , of mandatory spending .

in may 2016 , hud announced each state's formula allocation from this first round of funding .

appendix b shows each state's formula allocation .

the majority of states ( plus dc ) received the minimum allocation of $3 million .

 ( the minimum allocation applies to the 50 states and dc , but not puerto rico and the insular areas , which received smaller amounts of funding. ) .

fifteen states received allocations higher than the minimum ; of these fifteen states , five states ( california , new york , texas , florida , and illinois ) have allocations above $4 million .

california's allocation is the largest , at $10 million .

this section discusses current issues related to the housing trust fund , namely , arguments that are commonly made for and against the housing trust fund ; the current status of fannie mae and freddie mac and its potential implications for the housing trust fund ; legislative proposals that would provide additional funding to the housing trust fund ; and legislative proposals that would limit funding for the housing trust fund or eliminate the program entirely .

the idea of a national affordable housing trust fund has been controversial .

supporters have advocated for such a fund for years , arguing that it is needed to address a shortage of affordable housing for extremely low - income households .

opponents , however , have raised several concerns about such a program's funding and potential uses .

supporters of a national affordable housing trust fund argue that such a fund is needed to help address a shortage of rental housing that is affordable and available to those with the lowest incomes .

according to hud , in 2013 , for every 100 extremely low - income renters there were only 34 physically adequate housing units that were both affordable and available to this population .

in light of this shortage , supporters of a national housing trust fund argue that there is a need for funds specifically targeted to the production of rental housing affordable to households with the lowest incomes — particularly those with incomes at or below 30% of the area median income .

most federal affordable housing programs are targeted towards making existing housing more affordable to low - income households , such as by providing rental assistance , rather than producing or rehabilitating additional housing units that will be affordable to low - income households .

furthermore , current funding for federal housing assistance programs is not sufficient to serve all eligible households .

for example , it is estimated that federal rental assistance programs serve approximately a quarter of low - income rental households who may be eligible for assistance .

the federal housing programs that do support the production of housing for low - income households may not always reach those who are extremely low - income , or the production of rental housing may compete with other eligible uses of the funds .

for example , the largest federal rental housing production program , treasury's low - income housing tax credit ( lihtc ) , helps develop rental units for households with incomes at or below 50% or 60% of area median income .

similarly , hud's home investment partnerships program ( home program ) , which provides funds to states and local governments to use for a variety of housing activities , must be used to benefit households with incomes at or below 80% of area median income or , in the case of most rental housing , at or below 60% of area median income .

furthermore , while home funds can be used for rental housing production , they can also be used for a range of other purposes , including activities such as homebuyer assistance , rehabilitating owner - occupied homes , or rental assistance .

this means that rental housing production may compete with other local housing priorities for home funds .

opponents have voiced several concerns about the housing trust fund .

first , critics note that the federal government already provides funding for affordable housing through other programs , including flexible block grant programs such as the home program .

they argue that a national affordable housing trust fund is duplicative of other programs since the activities that it funds are also eligible uses of other sources of federal funds .

additionally , some have raised concerns about funding being provided outside of the appropriations process .

they argue that any funding for affordable rental housing activities should go through the normal appropriations process , thereby giving congress the oversight opportunities that the appropriations process provides .

some have also expressed concerns that , although hera prohibits funds from being used for purposes such as lobbying , advocacy , and political activities , there may not be sufficient safeguards to ensure that funds from the housing trust fund are not used for such purposes or otherwise misused .

finally , since it was announced that fannie mae and freddie mac would be beginning their contributions to the housing trust fund and the capital magnet fund , some have criticized the decision to require fannie mae and freddie mac to make contributions to the housing funds while they remain in conservatorship and subject to agreements with treasury .

they also argue that fannie mae and freddie mac should not make contributions to the affordable housing funds when they have not repaid treasury for financial support they received in past years .

 ( the gses have paid dividends to treasury in an amount that exceeds what they received in support ; however , dividend payments are not considered repayment. ) .

fannie mae and freddie mac remain in government conservatorship .

they also continue to have agreements with treasury that would allow the gses to draw additional funds from treasury if needed .

as part of these agreements , the amount of a capital buffer that fannie mae and freddie mac are permitted to hold decreases each year before reaching zero in 2018 .

if fannie mae and freddie mac are not permitted to hold capital , the possibility that one or both may need to draw funds from treasury at some point increases .

if fannie mae or freddie mac draws funds from treasury in a given quarter , its contributions to the htf would be suspended for that year .

therefore , the quarterly financial performance of the gses has implications for the housing trust fund .

additionally , over the past several years , congress and the administration have considered options for reforming the housing finance system in general , and fannie mae and freddie mac in particular , to reduce the federal government's exposure to future losses related to mortgages .

these discussions have included the question of fannie mae's and freddie mac's support for affordable housing generally , and the housing trust fund specifically .

while there is broad agreement on the need for housing finance reform , there is no consensus on how the system should be reformed .

in the 113 th congress , different housing finance reform bills were reported out of the committee in the house and senate , respectively: in the house , the protecting american taxpayers and homeowners ( path ) act ( h.r .

2767 ) would have wound down fannie mae and freddie mac over several years and replaced them with a new entity that would have facilitated mortgage securitization but would not have provided any kind of government guarantee .

the path act would have abolished the housing trust fund .

in the senate , the housing finance reform and taxpayer protection act of 2013 ( s. 1217 , commonly referred to as the johnson - crapo bill ) would have also wound down fannie mae and freddie mac over several years and replaced them with a new entity , which would have provided federal reinsurance on certain eligible mortgage - backed securities .

the bill would have retained the housing trust fund and directed the new entity to make contributions to the housing trust fund through a fee on covered mortgage - backed securities .

in the 114 th congress , no comprehensive housing finance reform legislation has been considered by committee .

however , to the extent that congress considers fannie mae's and freddie mac's status in the future , the housing trust fund is likely to be part of the debate .

hera allows other funds to be "appropriated , transferred , or credited" to the housing trust fund .

in the years following the suspension of contributions to the housing trust fund , affordable housing advocates searched for both a new dedicated source of permanent funding for the housing trust fund and for a source of funding to initially capitalize the housing trust fund .

although fhfa directed the gses to begin their contributions to the housing trust fund and the capital magnet fund in december 2014 , housing advocates continue to search for additional sources of funding for the housing trust fund .

a range of other potential sources of either permanent or initial funding have been suggested by advocates .

in recent years , some have proposed generating funding for the htf through changes to the mortgage interest deduction that would presumably result in lower tax expenditures associated with the deduction .

in the 114 th congress , multiple bills have been introduced to provide additional funding to the housing trust fund .

the common sense housing investment act of 2015 ( h.r .

1662 ) would make changes to the mortgage interest deduction and direct some of the savings projected to result from such changes to the housing trust fund and some to other housing programs .

versions of the common sense housing investment act were also introduced in the 113 th congress ( h.r .

1213 ) and the 112 th congress ( h.r .

6677 ) .

the pathways out of poverty act of 2015 ( h.r .

2721 ) would also provide funding to the housing trust fund from savings generated by changes to the mortgage interest deduction .

a version of that bill was also introduced in the 113 th congress .

another bill in the 114 th congress , the ending homelessness act of 2016 ( h.r .

4888 ) , would appropriate $1 billion per year in mandatory funding out of general treasury funds for the housing trust fund , as well as another $50 million for rental assistance for housing trust fund units .

in previous congresses , other bills would also have provided funds to the housing trust fund from the general fund of the treasury .

for many years , the president's budget requests requested $1 billion in mandatory funding from general treasury funds be provided to the housing trust fund as well .

other bills in previous congresses proposed providing funds to the housing trust fund from funds related to the troubled asset relief program ( tarp ) .

tarp was a temporary program created in 2008 to address the financial crisis and provided treasury with temporary authority to purchase or insure troubled assets owned by financial institutions .

some bills would have used tarp funds directly to fund the housing trust fund , while other bills would have used funds from dividends paid to treasury or the sale of warrants under tarp .

other than the original funding mechanism in hera , no funding for the housing trust fund has been included in annual appropriations acts or in any other enacted legislation to date .

as noted earlier , some in congress criticize the housing trust fund as being duplicative of other programs or express concerns that it is funded outside the appropriations process or could be vulnerable to misuse .

furthermore , some have argued that the gses should not be diverting funding to affordable housing programs while they remain in government conservatorship .

there have been several bills introduced in the 114 th congress and previous congresses to either eliminate the housing trust fund entirely , or to limit the circumstances under which it can receive funding from the gses .

for example , in the 114 th congress: the pay back the taxpayers act of 2015 ( h.r .

574 ) would prohibit fannie mae and freddie mac from providing any funding to the housing trust fund or the capital magnet fund while in government conservatorship or receivership .

a version of this bill was also introduced in the 113 th congress ( h.r .

3901 ) .

the house - passed version of the fy2016 hud appropriations bill ( h.r .

2577 ) would have diverted any funding provided to the housing trust fund to hud's home program instead .

however , such a provision was not included in the consolidated appropriations act , 2016 ( p.l .

114-113 ) , the law that provided final fy2016 hud appropriations .

in addition , the housing finance restructuring act of 2016 ( h.r .

4913 ) would provide for the end of the conservatorship of fannie mae and freddie mac and require the entities to rebuild capital .

the contributions to the housing trust fund and the capital magnet fund would be suspended until fannie mae and freddie mac had rebuilt a certain amount of capital , but the contributions would continue once that capital threshold was reached .

in the 113 th congress , the new fair deal banking and housing stability act of 2013 ( h.r .

3550 ) would have eliminated several government policies , programs , and agencies related to housing and mortgage markets , including repealing the housing trust fund .

in the 112 th congress , the gse bailout elimination and taxpayer protection act was introduced in both the house and the senate ( h.r .

1182 and s. 693 , respectively ) and would have repealed the section of law that established the housing trust fund .

the housing trust fund elimination act of 2011 ( h.r .

2441 ) would have eliminated the housing trust fund and transferred any amounts available in the fund to the treasury , to be used solely for the purpose of reducing the federal budget deficit .

none of these bills were enacted .

appendix a .

previous legislative proposals to establish a national housing trust fund prior to the enactment of hera , legislation to establish a national affordable housing trust fund was introduced several times , beginning in the 106 th congress .

this appendix provides a brief description of previous legislative proposals to establish a national housing trust fund .

one major question surrounding the creation of an affordable housing trust fund was how such a program would be funded .

early legislation proposed using a portion of receipts from the federal housing administration ( fha ) .

however , because fha receipts are counted as offsets to appropriations , diverting fha receipts to a housing trust fund would have a cost .

later legislation proposed using contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac as a potential funding source .

fannie mae and freddie mac were chartered by congress to ensure liquidity in the mortgage market .

their charters give them a special relationship with the federal government that includes both certain privileges and certain responsibilities .

fannie mae and freddie mac purchase mortgages from private lenders , guarantee the principal and interest payments on the mortgages , and package them into mortgage - backed securities that they either hold on their balance sheets or sell to investors .

they are overseen by an independent federal regulator .

because of the gses' status as government - sponsored private entities , rather than federal agencies , contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac would not have counted as new government spending .

however , there was some disagreement over whether it was appropriate for the government to require the gses to contribute to affordable housing funds .

opponents of gse contributions argued that the gses should not be asked to balance public policy objectives against the interests of their shareholders .

proponents pointed to the special privileges that the gses received , and statutory affordable housing goals that they already had , to justify their contributions to a national housing trust fund .

in 2008 , hera created the housing trust fund and the capital magnet fund .

both were to be funded by contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac .

table a - 1 summarizes previous legislation that had been introduced to create a national housing trust fund , including proposed funding sources .

appendix b .

state htf allocations in 2016 hud announced the first state allocations from the housing trust fund in may 2016 .

 ( these allocations are from the funds that were set aside by fannie mae and freddie mac during calendar year 2015. ) .

table b - 1 shows each state's and insular area's formula allocation , organized from the largest allocation to the smallest .

most states received the minimum allocation amount of $3 million .

the minimum allocation applies to the 50 states and dc , but not to puerto rico and the insular areas .

