over the past 25 years , defined contribution ( dc ) plans have become the most prevalent form of employer - sponsored retirement plan in the united states .

according to the bureau of labor statistics ( bls ) , 51% of workers in the private sector participated in an employer - sponsored retirement plan of some kind in 2007 .

only 20% of all private - sector workers were covered by traditional pensions — also called defined benefit or "db" plans — whereas 43% participated in 401 ( k ) plans and other dc plans .

twelve percent of workers participated in both types of plan .

one of the key distinctions between a defined benefit plan and a defined contribution plan is that in a db plan , it is the employer who bears the investment risk .

the employer must ensure that the pension plan has sufficient assets to pay the benefits promised to workers and their surviving dependents .

in a dc plan , the worker bears the investment risk .

the worker's account balance at retirement will depend on how much has been contributed to the plan over the years and on the performance of the assets in which the plan is invested .

in a typical 401 ( k ) plan , a worker must decide whether to participate , how much to contribute , how to invest the contributions , what to do with the account if he or she changes jobs , and how to take money out of the account after retiring .

the majority of assets held in dc plans are invested in stocks and stock mutual funds , and as a result , the decline in the major stock market indices in 2008 greatly reduced the value of many families' retirement savings .

according to the federal reserve board , assets held in dc plans fell from $3.73 trillion at year - end 2007 to $2.66 trillion at year - end 2008 , a decline of 28.7% .

the decline would have been even greater if not for ongoing contributions to the plans by workers and employers .

the effect of stock market volatility on families' retirement savings is just one issue of concern to congress with respect to dc plans .

other issues that have received attention in hearings and through proposed legislation include increasing access to employer - sponsored plans , raising participation and contribution rates , helping participants make better investment choices , requiring clearer disclosure of fees charged to plan participants , preserving retirement savings when workers face economic hardship or change jobs , and promoting life annuities as a source of retirement income .

this crs report describes these seven major policy issues with respect to dc plans: access to employer - sponsored retirement plans , participation in employer - sponsored plans , contribution rates , investment choices , fee disclosure , leakage from retirement savings , and converting retirement savings into income .

according to the national compensation survey ( ncs ) , 61% of private - sector workers were employed at establishments that offered one or more retirement plans in 2007 .

twenty - one percent worked for employers that offered a db plan , 55% worked for employers that offered a dc plan , and 15% worked for employers that offered both types of plan .

thus , almost 4 out of 10 workers in the private sector did not have the opportunity to participate in a retirement plan where they worked .

moreover , there is a substantial disparity in sponsorship of retirement plans between large employers and small employers .

workers at establishments with fewer than 100 employees are much less likely to have access to an employer - sponsored retirement plan than are workers at larger establishments .

 ( see table 1 . ) .

policies that would increase the number of small employers that offer retirement plans could expand access to these plans to include millions more workers .

even when an employer offers a retirement plan , not all employees choose to participate .

in 2007 , about 75% of employees whose employer sponsored a 401 ( k ) plan participated in the plan , and about 78% of eligible employees participated in dc plans of all types .

participation in a 401 ( k ) plan usually requires the employee to elect to contribute to the plan .

although some 401 ( k ) plans now automatically enroll eligible employees , almost two - thirds of dc plans continue to require employees to elect to participate .

if an employee elects to participate in a 401 ( k ) plan , the next important decision he or she must make is how much to contribute to the plan .

studies have shown that employees are more likely to contribute to a plan if it provides matching contributions , and the amount that an employee contributes to a plan can be influenced by the formula for the matching contribution .

about two - thirds of all 401 ( k ) plans offered an employer matching contribution in 2007 .

the most common matching formula was 50% of the first 6% of pay contributed by the employee , for a total employer contribution equal to 3% of employee pay .

the maximum permissible annual contribution to a retirement plan is limited by federal law , but very few workers contribute amounts near the annual legal maximum .

many employees contribute only enough to receive the full amount of the employer matching contribution .

those who elect not to contribute to a plan that offers a match , or who contribute less than the amount necessary to receive the full match , are in effect choosing to reduce their own compensation below the maximum available to them .

in defined contribution plans , the benefit available to the worker at retirement is the amount in his or her account .

the account balance depends on the amount that the employer and employee have contributed to the plan , the investment gains or losses on those contributions , and the fees charged to participants .

research has shown that , historically , the most important factors affecting workers' retirement account balances at retirement are the number of years over which they have contributed and the amounts that they contributed each year to their retirement plans .

consequently , persuading workers to save more and to begin saving earlier are two of the most effective ways of increasing workers' income in retirement .

a worker who has elected to participate in a 401 ( k ) plan and has decided how much to contribute to the plan usually also must decide how to invest these contributions .

more than 90% of 401 ( k ) plans allow employees to direct the investment of their contributions , and three - fourths of plans allow employees to direct the investment of the employer's contributions .

in order for a plan sponsor to be relieved of liability for investment losses in a participant - directed retirement plan , participants must be given a choice of at least three investment alternatives , each of which must have different risk and return characteristics .

most plans offer participants more than the minimum number of investment choices required by law .

in 2007 , the average 401 ( k ) plan offered participants 18 investment options .

the investment options most commonly offered were actively managed u.s. stock funds ( 77% of plans ) , actively managed international stock funds ( 73% ) , indexed u.s. stock funds ( 70% ) , and actively managed u.s. bond funds ( 64% ) .

participants in 401 ( k ) plans bear the risk of investment losses .

an individual's retirement account might suffer investment losses because the particular stocks , bonds , or other assets in which he or she has chosen to invest decline in value .

diversification can reduce the risk associated with investing in specific assets because declines in the value of some assets may be fully or partially offset by gains in the value of other assets .

stock and bond mutual funds , for example , help protect individuals from investment risk by purchasing securities from many companies in a variety of industries .

in a stock mutual fund , investment losses from companies that are performing poorly may be offset by investment gains from companies that are performing well .

a broader form of investment risk is market risk , which is the possibility of an overall decline in a broad class of assets , such as stocks .

even a well - diversified portfolio of stocks , for example , will not protect the value of an individual's retirement account from depreciating if stock values fall across the board , as they did in 2008 .

this is why most investment advisors recommend diversification not only within a class of assets — by buying broadly diversified stock mutual funds instead of individual stocks , for example — but also diversification across asset classes .

bond prices have historically been less volatile than stock prices , and there have been long periods when returns on stocks and bonds have not been closely correlated .

life - cycle funds and target date funds diversify across classes of assets by buying shares in stock mutual funds , bond funds , and sometimes other investments as well .

although most financial advisors recommend diversifying investments across classes of assets and periodically re - balancing accounts to maintain appropriate diversification , relatively few plan participants put this advice into practice .

the assets of dc plans are heavily invested in stocks and stock mutual funds .

at year - end 2007 , 78% of all dc plan assets were invested in stocks and stock mutual funds .

investment in stocks and stock mutual funds varied little by age , indicating that many workers nearing retirement were heavily invested in stocks , and risked substantial losses in a market downturn like that in 2008 .

according to the 2007 survey of consumer finances , nearly 30% of dc plan participants between the ages of 35 and 54 had 100% of their account balance invested in stocks in 2007 .

twenty - eight percent of participants aged 55 to 64 had their entire account balance invested in stocks and stock mutual funds .

 ( see figure 1 . ) .

because many plan participants lack basic financial literacy , policy analysts have suggested that plans should take steps to help participants make better investment choices or adopt plans that automatically allocate contributions among various classes of investments .

investment education and target date funds are two approaches to achieving asset diversification in dc plans .

another issue that has concerned congress is the effect of fees on retirement account balances .

retirement plans contract with service providers to provide investment management , record - keeping , and other services .

there can be many service providers , each charging a fee that is ultimately paid by plan participants .

the arrangements through which service providers are compensated can be very complicated .

because the structure of 401 ( k ) fees is opaque to most plan participants , it is very difficult for them to judge whether they are receiving services at a price they would be willing to pay in a more transparent market transaction .

the tax incentives that congress has authorized for retirement savings accounts are designed to assure that the money workers have set aside for retirement remains in the account until they are near retirement age .

in recognition of needs that may arise over the course of an individual's life , congress has allowed certain exceptions to the general restriction on access to these accounts before retirement .

each exception , however justifiable on its own merits , increases the danger that workers will reduce their retirement savings before they have reached retirement .

pre - retirement withdrawals from retirement accounts are sometimes described as "leakages" from the pool of retirement savings .

congress has used a combination of regulation and taxation to limit and discourage pre - retirement access to money in retirement accounts , but it has not completely prohibited pre - retirement access to these accounts because this access is important to many plan participants .

research has shown that workers are less likely to put money into a retirement account if they believe that the money will be inaccessible in the event of emergency .

consequently , current law represents a compromise between limiting leakages from retirement accounts and allowing people to have access to their retirement funds in times of great need .

leakages from retirement plans can take a variety of forms , including "hardship" withdrawals from the plan prior to retirement , borrowing against plan assets , and cashing out plan assets upon separation from employment .

a retiree who is deciding how to convert retirement savings into income will have to take into account many risks .

increases in average life expectancy mean that many retirees will have to ensure that their savings will last through a retirement that could span 30 or 40 years .

volatility in equity markets , the effects of inflation on purchasing power , and the possibility of substantial expenses for medical treatment and long - term care will further complicate this decision .

many retirees may find it more challenging to manage their financial assets in retirement than it was during their working years .

there are a number of ways to convert retirement savings into income .

one option is to purchase an annuity .

a life annuity — also called an immediate annuity — is an insurance contract that provides regular income payments for life in return for an initial lump - sum premium .

life annuities can help protect retirees against some of the financial risks of retirement , especially longevity risk and investment risk .

a life annuity pays income to the purchaser for as long as he or she lives , and in the case of a joint - and survivor annuity , for as long as the surviving spouse lives .

some annuities offer limited protection against inflation through annual increases in income ; however , the annual increases must be paid for by accepting a lower initial monthly annuity income .

other annuities allow the purchaser to share in investment gains from growth in equity markets as a way to offset the effects of inflation .

these annuities also require the purchaser to share in the investment losses if markets fall .

relatively few 401 ( k ) plans provide the opportunity for retiring workers to convert all or part of their 401 ( k ) accounts into life annuities at retirement .

only 21% of plans offered an annuity option in 2007 , down from 26% in 2000 .

one reason few plans offer annuities is that they have proven to be unpopular in plans that offer them .

fewer than 10% of participants in plans that offer an annuity choose this option .

at retirement , most dc plan participants either take periodic withdrawals or roll the account balance into an ira from which they take withdrawals .

few people purchase life annuities for a number of reasons .

social security provides benefits in the form of an inflation - adjusted annuity , and some retirees may consider this to be sufficient protection against the risk of spending all of their retirement assets before they die .

in addition , about one - third of retirees receive income from defined benefit pensions , and they therefore have less need to purchase an annuity with their retirement savings .

some potential purchasers of annuities are concerned that the fees charged by insurers are too high and that the insurance companies do a poor job of explaining the fees that they charge .

others are concerned that purchasing an annuity will reduce the financial assets that they have available to meet unexpected expenses .

finally , some older persons prefer not to purchase an annuity in the hope that they will be able to leave their assets as an inheritance for their children .

for these and other reasons , the number of retirees who purchase income annuities has remained relatively low compared with the number who elect to take periodic withdrawals from their retirement accounts .

about half of all workers in the united states participate in employer - sponsored retirement plans , a proportion that has remained essentially unchanged since the early 1970s .

since the 1980s , the proportion of workers in defined benefit pension plans has fallen while the proportion in defined contribution plans has risen .

sponsorship of retirement plans is substantially lower among small employers than among large employers .

efforts to increase retirement plan sponsorship among small employers have had only limited success .

some policy analysts have suggested that expanding access to payroll deduction iras could greatly increase the number of employees at small firms who have a retirement savings account .

even among employers who offer a retirement plan , not all workers participate .

roughly 20% to 25% of workers employed at firms that sponsor a defined contribution plan do not participate in the plan .

participation rates may rise if more firms adopt automatic enrollment , but currently , almost two - thirds of dc plans continue to require employees to elect to participate in the plan .

on average , individual workers who participate in dc plans contribute about 6% of their pay to the plan , and households with one or more participants contribute about 5% of total household earnings .

one way to boost employee savings rates would be for employers to adopt automatic escalation of contributions .

employee contributions can be increased slightly each year until reaching a target contribution rate , such as 10% of pay .

as with automatic enrollment , employees must be permitted to opt out of the increase or to choose another contribution rate .

in most dc plans , workers must decide not only whether to participate in the plan and how much to contribute , but also how to invest the contributions .

as employers have become more aware of how daunting these choices can be for their employees , some have begun to add life - cycle funds that automatically adjust the allocation of contributions between stocks , bonds , and other investments based on the employee's expected date of retirement .

the majority of plan sponsors also offer investment education for participants .

some employers arrange for financial planners or other professionals to offer investment advice to their employees .

excessive fees can substantially reduce retirement account balances , but plan participants often are unable to discern from their account statements how much they are paying in fees and what services they are receiving in exchange for the fees charged to their accounts .

improving the disclosure of fees charged to participants in 401 ( k ) plans could help to drive down fees because participants and plan sponsors would be better able to compare fees across plans and to evaluate the services provided relative to the fees charged for those services .

although pre - retirement access to money held in 401 ( k ) plans is limited by law , money sometimes "leaks" from workers' accounts before they retire .

this happens when a worker withdraws funds from a 401 ( k ) plan when changing jobs , or through a hardship distribution from the plan .

current law imposes a 10% tax penalty on most withdrawals from 401 ( k ) plans before age 59½ .

the tax penalty creates a disincentive for withdrawing money from the account before retirement and also helps assure that 401 ( k ) accounts remain dedicated to preparing for retirement rather than functioning as tax - deferred general - purpose savings accounts .

workers who are approaching retirement today are less likely than those who retired 20 or more years ago to have a defined benefit pension .

those who have retirement savings in a 401 ( k ) plan or an ira will have to decide how to convert their retirement savings into retirement income .

one of the risks that they will face is the possibility that if they withdraw money too quickly , they might exhaust their savings while they still have many years to live .

income annuities insure retirees against the possibility of outliving their retirement savings , but for a variety of reasons income annuities have not yet proved to be a popular option for providing retirement income .

one of the most important public policy challenges of the next several years will be to develop strategies that will help retirees manage their retirement savings wisely so that they can remain financially independent throughout retirement .

