during the 1990s and early 2000s , guinea was considered a locus of relative stability as civil conflicts raged in neighboring liberia , sierra leone , guinea - bissau , côte d'ivoire , and mali .

however , guinea subsequently came to be viewed as a potential source of regional instability due to its fractious and sometimes restive military , periodic political unrest , ethnic tensions , and the rise of transnational drug trafficking and maritime piracy .

poor governance , corruption , weak or nonexistent infrastructure , and other factors have prevented guinea's population from benefiting from its rich natural resource endowments , and average living conditions are poor even by regional standards in west africa .

the ongoing ebola outbreak in west africa has highlighted stark gaps in guinea's healthcare infrastructure .

it has also cast a spotlight on deep mistrust between local communities and historically absent or abusive state institutions .

such tensions are particularly evident in the remote southeast "forest" region , where the epidemic reportedly originated in december 2013 .

however , now that dwindling ebola cases are concentrated in the capital , conakry , and along the coast , communities in those areas have also resisted ebola education and treatment campaigns .

the outbreak has affected guinea's economy , social relations , and politics .

previously , guinea had seen a relative increase in stability since elections in 2010 brought an end to two years of turbulent military rule .

longtime opposition leader alpha condé was elected president in the country's first ever open elections organized by an independent electoral commission .

as president , condé has enacted economic reforms and has largely confined the military to the barracks .

critics , however , accuse him of ruling unilaterally , and his time in office has been characterized by severe political tensions .

the ebola crisis , at its height , led to a hiatus of political demonstrations and protests .

however , as the urgency of the crisis has faded , political leaders have turned to a dispute over the timetable and appropriate sequencing for presidential and local elections , currently scheduled for october 2015 and early - to - mid - 2016 , respectively .

in 2010 , significant election - related violence along ethnic lines revealed latent tensions and damaging the social fabric in ethnically mixed areas .

these events left scars that continue to affect political dynamics .

at the local level , in the forest region , tensions between ethnic malinkés ( who trace their heritage to northeastern guinea ) and diverse groups viewed as the area's indigenous inhabitants ( known collectively as forestiers ) also spark periodic violence .

ethnic differences sometimes map onto religious identity , particularly in the forest region , but religion alone is not a major factor in national politics .

the united states played a key role in guinea's 2010 political transition by isolating the military junta and providing high - level support for elections .

u.s. bilateral aid has since decreased , and is overwhelmingly focused on health .

congress has appropriated funds for u.s. aid to guinea , including for ebola response , and some members have periodically expressed interest in guinea's political stability , democratic trajectory , human rights record , and role in regional security .

guinea's political system concentrates substantial power in the presidency .

president condé has arguably deepened this tendency through the elevation of presidential advisors and a pattern of unilateral decision - making .

although condé appears to have consolidated political power , he has not been able to fulfill campaign promises to raise living standards , and analysts periodically express concerns about political stability .

condé's leading opponent remains cellou dalein diallo , his top rival in 2010 , who leads the union of democratic forces of guinea ( ufdg ) party and the opposition block in parliament .

political dynamics in 2015 have been dominated by entrenched disputes over the upcoming electoral cycle .

in early 2015 , the national electoral commission ( ceni , after its french acronym ) scheduled the presidential election for october 2015 and local elections for 2016 .

opposition leaders , however , assert that a 2013 political agreement between the government and opposition requires local elections to be held before the presidential vote .

they accuse condé's administration of politicizing the ceni and seeking to manipulate the electoral process — including through the appointment of partisan individuals to replace elected local - level officials .

the opposition withdrew its representatives from parliament in march 2015 in protest against perceived political interference in election preparations and staged multiple anti - government protests in april - may , several of which turned violent .

an investigation by human rights watch ( hrw ) found that on numerous occasions , security forces responding to the protests used excessive force , engaged in theft and banditry , and employed "ethnic slurs" against opposition supporters .

hrw also reported that protesters engaged in criminal conduct .

in response , the guinean government blamed these issues on a lack of training .

the protests have also exhibited a new trend of civilian - on - civilian violence , often along ethnic lines .

many guineans view the crux of national politics as a power - struggle between guinea's two largest ethno - regional communities , the peul and malinké , with other communities forced to choose sides or else face political irrelevance .

given condé's past electoral success in malinké areas and diallo's in peul areas , the presidential contest is thus expected to be hard - fought in the melting pot of conakry and in potential "swing districts," such as the ethnic soussou - dominated coastal region and the ethnically diverse forest region in the southeast .

perhaps as a result of ethno - regional calculations , in june 2015 , diallo's ufdg announced an electoral alliance with former military junta leader moussa dadis camara , a forestier , who is in exile in burkina faso .

soon after , the guinean government — after years of delay — brought criminal charges against dadis camara for the massacre of protesters by security forces in 2009 , while he was president .

whether dadis camara will return to guinea is a matter of intense speculation .

legislative elections were held in september 2013 , following the aforementioned political agreement , which was brokered by the special representative of the u.n. secretary - general for west africa and backed by the european union ( eu ) .

the elections were initially supposed to take place in 2011 but had been repeatedly delayed due to a dispute over electoral procedures .

the elections were widely viewed as a key step in guinea's political transition , and the eu had conditioned the full resumption of its development aid on completing them .

the lead - up to the vote was violent , however , and the opposition contested the results .

condé's rpg won a plurality of seats ( 53 out of 114 ) , which , in coalition with smaller parties in the ruling rainbow alliance , allowed it to control a slim majority of 59 seats .

the state department's annual human rights report lauded the 2013 elections as "the first competitive and inclusive legislative elections in the country's history. .

however , eu election observers criticized both technical shortfalls and the overall political climate .

for example , eu observers stated that "the transmission of results suffered from a lack of transparency" and reported that a number of problems had "a negative impact on the quality of operations and lessened public confidence in electoral administration," including "the absence of detailed data on the revision of the electoral registry , the release of provisional voter lists that had not been purged or corrected , the unilateral and tardy announcement of a new map of polling stations that did not conform to legal requirements , concerns regarding the contractor in charge of the electoral registry , the inversion of key steps in the process , and the removal of proxy voting a week before the polls. .

eu observers also criticized aspects of guinea's legal electoral framework .

guinea boasts bountiful natural resources , including the world's largest known reserves of bauxite ( aluminum ore ) ; sizable deposits of high - grade iron ore , diamonds , gold , and uranium ; and potential offshore oil and gas reserves .

it also has significant hydroelectric and commercial agricultural potential .

the economy relies heavily on mineral exports , notably joint - venture bauxite mining and alumina operations .

extractive industries are estimated to account for over 30% of gross domestic product ( gdp ) .

over three - quarters of the labor force , however , works in the largely subsistence - focused agricultural sector .

economic hardship has contributed to periodic unrest , including general strikes in 2007 that turned into a national anti - government protest movement .

economic growth has been buffeted by regional instability and swings in global mineral prices , and growth rates of 2% - 4% per year from 2010 to 2013 were insufficient to reduce poverty or improve living standards .

since 2014 , ebola has substantially reduced growth and investment , with a slight recession projected in 2015 .

president condé has worked to attract greater foreign investment , particularly in the mining and electrification sectors .

investors nonetheless face sharp obstacles , including electricity shortages , poor infrastructure , and a lack of skilled workers .

condé's administration has improved macroeconomic stability by addressing key aspects of poor economic governance under past regimes — such as unsustainable spending and the printing of extra currency to meet budget shortfalls , which caused high inflation .

condé's reforms secured $2.1 billion in debt relief in 2012 under the world bank - and international monetary fund ( imf ) - managed highly indebted poor countries initiative .

as a result , guinea's debt decreased from 100% of gdp in 2010 to 37% in 2014 .

the reforms also enabled the restoration of international financial institution aid , which had been suspended due to payment arrears and policy concerns .

according to the state department , "u.s. policy seeks to encourage guinea's democratic reforms , its positive contribution to regional stability , and sustainable economic and social development. .

the obama administration hailed the 2013 legislative elections as "a positive advance in guinea's democratic development," and called for "fortifying the national assembly , constructing a transparent judiciary , and preparing for 2015 presidential elections. .

the administration has also continued to call for those responsible for the 2009 massacre of protesters during the military junta to be brought to justice .

the obama administration congratulated guinea in 2010 "on the successful completion of its first democratic presidential election" and congratulated president condé on his victory , expressing hopes that "it is only the first step on the road to democratic transition and civilian rule. .

as a result of that election , u.s. aid restrictions related to the 2008 military coup were lifted , and guinea's eligibility for trade preferences under the african growth and opportunity act ( agoa ) was restored .

president condé , along with three other west african presidents who had been democratically elected , met with president obama at the white house in 2011 .

the ebola crisis has led to new u.s. aid and engagement , along with a change in immigration regulations for guinean nationals residing in the united states .

in november 2014 , citing the ebola crisis , the secretary of homeland security designated guinea for "temporary protected status" for a period of 18 months , under section 244 ( b ) ( 1 ) ( c ) of the immigration and nationality act .

the designation allows eligible resident guinean nationals to remain in the united states .

guinea's large mineral deposits represent potential strategic and commercial interests for u.s. actors .

several u.s. - based resource firms operate in guinea and face competition from other foreign investors .

guinea's extractive industries have also drawn attention from the u.s. department of justice for potential violations of the foreign corrupt practices act ( fcpa ) of 1977 .

as noted above ( " the mining sector " ) , doj is pursuing at least one such case related to the acquisition of a guinean iron ore concession by benny steinmetz group resources ( bsgr ) .

a u.s. - based firm , hyperdynamics , is reportedly also under doj scrutiny for potential fcpa violations in connection with its acquisition of an offshore oil concession in guinea .

the united states played a key role in guinea's 2010 transition to an elected , civilian government .

that transition led to a significant improvement in guinea's security situation and political stability .

still , the election and its aftermath created new political tensions that have contributed to , and fed off of , ethnic divisions .

such tensions are likely to increase further ahead of presidential elections scheduled for october 2015 .

guinea may continue to interest u.s. policymakers for its role in regional security , its economic potential , and its recent democratic transition — but generally , u.s. policy attention faded substantially after 2010 .

the ebola outbreak has prompted new concerns , accompanied by substantial resource commitments for affected countries .

the outbreak is impacting guinean politics and society , with potentially serious implications for the country's prosperity and future stability .

