problems with quality of health care in the united states earned the attention of the public with , and have steadily gained in importance since , the release of the first in a series of institute of medicine ( iom ) reports on this topic , "to err is human: building a safer health system," in 1999 .

the release of the iom report represented a changing approach to addressing suboptimal health care quality , from one focused primarily on quality assurance to one focused on quality improvement broadly through the realignment of systems of delivering and financing care to incentivize quality of care .

this issue now occupies a prominent position on the national agenda for health care reform and is the subject of considerable congressional interest .

policy makers and others have offered a wide range of policy options to improve health care quality .

this report provides information on the issue of quality measurement , which serves as the basis of several of the options policy makers are offering for addressing this problem .

specifically , recently introduced health reform bills have included a strong focus on supporting and expanding a coordinated national quality measurement infrastructure .

these include efforts that would broadly support the development of national priorities in the area of performance measurement ; the development of new quality measures and identification of gaps in existing measures ; the expansion of the endorsement process for quality measures ; and the delineation of a process , in rulemaking , for selecting and implementing new quality measures for use in public health care programs .

this report begins with a brief description of health care quality activity conceptually , the types of quality information that support these activities , and how quality measurement can be placed within these frameworks .

it provides a discussion of the definition of quality measurement and a description of the life cycle of quality measures , including the development of quality measures ( across provider types ) ; the process of endorsement of quality measures ; and the process for implementing those measures .

overviews of selected examples of implementation , including the physician quality reporting initiative ( pqri ) and the reporting hospital quality data for annual payment update ( rhqdapu ) , are included .

the report concludes with an overview of key technical and policy issues in quality measurement .

the u.s. health care system is characterized by systemic quality shortcomings .

the iom stated in 2001 that "[c]rucial reports from disciplined review bodies document the scale and gravity of the problems .

quality problems are everywhere , affecting many patients .

between the health care we have and the care we could have lies not just a gap , but a chasm. .

significant activity has been undertaken to improve the quality of care delivered in the united states over the past decade , but a number of concerning trends remain .

the u.s health care system's quality problems are evidenced by a broad range of relevant quality indicators .

these include high rates of medical and medication error ; a high amenable mortality rate ; overuse , underuse , and misuse of health care services ; and a lack of , and variation in , diffusion of evidence - based guidelines .

in its 1999 study , the iom reported that between 44,000 and 98,000 people die each year because of preventable medical errors , at a cost of between $17 billion and $29 billion per year .

serious adverse medication events are estimated to occur in up to 15% of hospitalized patients , and more than 100,000 deaths are attributed annually to such reactions .

a july 2008 study reports that despite spending two times more per capita than any other major industrialized country on health care , the united states has an amenable mortality rate — deaths that are amenable to health care intervention and may have been prevented by that intervention — of 110 per 100,000 ( ranking 19 th out of 19 surveyed countries ) .

with respect to the problems of overuse , misuse , and underuse of health care services , a study conducted by the midwest business group on health in 2003 found that approximately "30 percent of all direct health care outlays are the result of poor - quality care , consisting primarily of overuse , misuse and waste. .

another study found that as many as 20% to 30% of patients received contraindicated care .

in addition , a 2007 rand study found that only 46.5% of children receive care recommended by evidence - based guidelines , and a similar rand study conducted in 2003 concluded that adults receive only 55% of indicated care .

according to the iom , an average of 17 years is required for findings from randomized clinical trials to be implemented into clinical practice , and when they are , it is done so in an uneven fashion .

taken together , these findings evidence significant shortfalls in the quality of care provided in the united states .

despite the fact that most experts agree that health care quality is a serious problem deserving of attention , a precise operational definition for the concept can be difficult to identify .

although there is no single universally agreed upon definition for quality of care , or health care quality , perhaps the most commonly cited definition is the iom's definition , as follows: " ( t ) he degree to which health services for individuals and populations increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes and are consistent with current professional knowledge. .

the 2001 iom report "crossing the quality chasm" further defines quality of care in terms of six domains: effective .

providing services based on scientific knowledge to all who could benefit .

efficient .

avoiding waste , including waste of equipment , supplies , ideas , and energy .

equitable .

providing care that does not vary in quality because of personal characteristics .

patient - centered .

providing care that is responsive to and respectful of individual patient preferences .

safe .

avoiding injuries to patients from the care that is supposed to help them .

timely .

reducing waits and sometimes - harmful delays .

most health care quality efforts aim to improve one or more of these six domains of quality of care , and quality care is often colloquially defined as simply delivering the right care to the right person at the right time .

however basic it may appear , operationalizing these six domains , and thus improving health care quality , has proven difficult .

the effort to improve health care quality is operationally embodied by a wide range of quality activities .

one way to consider these activities is by grouping them into one or more of the following four areas: ( 1 ) research ( basic , translational , and health services ) ; ( 2 ) quality measurement ; ( 3 ) quality reporting ( encompassing both increased transparency and incentive alignment ) ; and ( 4 ) patient safety activities .

reliable and sound quality information plays a fundamental role in all of these health care quality activities , which may both use and generate such information .

for those activities that rely on quality information , such as quality reporting , their effectiveness is directly dependent upon the quality of the information available .

there are various types of quality information , including evidence syntheses , health technology assessments , clinical comparative effectiveness data , clinical practice guidelines , quality measure data , and medical error / near miss reports .

in many cases , these different types of information are interrelated .

for example , evidence syntheses are utilized as the basis for the development of clinical practice guidelines , which in many cases in turn serve as the basis for developing quality measures .

quality information may be broadly leveraged through the types of activities referenced above for a number of purposes , including to educate and inform providers about performance ; for public reporting to inform consumer decision making ; to create payment incentives ; to inform accreditation or maintenance of certification ; to inform internal quality assurance or improvement efforts ; for public health surveillance efforts and activities ; and to inform system - level changes to improve safety .

quality information may be fed back to inform the modification of quality measures , incentive programs , quality assurance activities , health care provider education , or the processes of delivering health care with the goal of improving quality .

this report focuses specifically on quality measurement , one subset of quality activities , and will focus on the processes used to develop , endorse , select , and implement quality measures .

broadly , quality measurement focuses on assessing processes , structures , and outcomes of health care , and for this reason , quality measures are informally categorized as structural , process , or outcome measures .

this model of quality measurement rests on the premise that a sound structure will support appropriate processes of care that in turn will result in good outcomes .

ideally , process measures are supported by research demonstrating a link to improved outcomes , and all measures will assess things that are under the direct control of the health care system .

structural measures assess whether "the resources and organizational arrangements are in place to deliver care," for example , staffing ratios or health information technology ( hit ) implementation .

process measures assess whether the "appropriate provider activities are carried out to deliver care," for example , percentage of indicated patients receiving mammograms within a given timeframe .

finally , outcomes measures assess "the results of physician and other provider activities," for example , 30-day mortality rates post - hospitalization for pneumonia .

composite measures , which summarize performance across separate and discrete measures of quality , are a useful tool for certain end - users , such as policy makers and the general public .

the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) now includes several agency for healthcare research and quality ( ahrq ) - developed composite measures in its reporting hospital quality data for annual payment update ( rhqdapu ) program ( described later in this report ) .

in addition , quality measures may be developed in order to collect patients' reports of system performance .

an example of this type of measure may be found in the consumer assessment of healthcare providers and systems ( cahps ) survey and the hospital consumer assessment of healthcare providers and systems ( hcahps ) survey , both funded by ahrq .

while these measures may assess the delivery of evidence - or consensus - based clinical care , they also include an evaluation of the human aspects of how that care was delivered .

quality measures may attempt to assess or evaluate one of three broader breakdowns in health care quality: ( 1 ) overuse of health care services , ( 2 ) misuse of health care services , or ( 3 ) underuse of health care services .

this approach encompasses variation in care patterns as well as disparities in quality of care received .

the development of quality measures may be based either on existing clinical practice guidelines ( evidence - based ) or on consensus - based guidelines .

generally , utilizing an evidence - based guideline as a basis for a quality measure is preferred over using a consensus - based one ; however , as there are significant gaps in the evidence base , in many cases , consensus - based guidelines are the only option available .

although the development of reliable and valid quality measures tends to be challenging , the development of structural and process quality measures may be less complicated than the development and specification of outcomes measures , which requires complex risk - adjustment manipulations to account for variation in patient case - mix .

data sources for quality measures vary , but include four primary sources: ( 1 ) administrative claims data , ( 2 ) medical records , ( 3 ) medical registries , and ( 4 ) patients' reports .

quality measures may be used for a number of purposes .

they may be used to assess performance at the level of a hospital ( or other health care facility , for example , a nursing home or outpatient surgical center ) ; a health care provider , group of providers , or practice group ; or a health plan .

they may be used by payers , purchasers , health care consumers , regulators , accrediting or licensure bodies , researchers , health care providers , or health care facilities .

finally , quality measures may be used as the basis for policies that realign payment incentives ; to facilitate internal quality improvement or quality assurance efforts ; to empower consumer decision making ; or to provide feedback on performance — for the purposes of self - improvement — to health care providers , health plans , or health care facilities .

the life cycle of a quality measure is composed of three basic components: the creation and specification of the measure , the endorsement of the measure , and the selection and implementation of the measure .

this process may not always be perfectly linear in all cases ( for example , an entity may adapt an existing endorsed measure for use in one of its quality - related activities ) , but with respect to the creation of de novo quality measures , these are the ordered steps generally followed .

each stage is discussed in more detail in the following sections .

there is a wide range of current efforts to develop quality metrics that may be used in performance measurement activities and , likewise , there are a number of different entities involved in the development , endorsement , selection , and implementation of quality measures .

ahrq reports in its 2008 national healthcare quality report that the "often opportunistic , incremental , and fragmented development of quality measures without detailed consideration of data sources , analysis and maintenance requirements , and user needs" is a challenge , and that "uncoordinated and isolated measure development can lead different groups to create and advocate competing and sometimes conflicting measures of the same process or outcome. .

in an attempt to better coordinate performance measurement and other quality activities , in november of 2008 , the national quality forum ( nqf ) convened the national priorities partnership ( npp ) , a collaborative effort between 28 key health care stakeholders representing all major health care perspectives .

the goal of the npp is to rapidly improve quality in six priority areas , including patient and family engagement , population health , safety , care coordination , overuse , and palliative and end - of - life care .

the npp aims to achieve measurable progress in these six areas , specifically focusing on payment , public reporting , quality improvement , and consumer engagement .

the medicare improvements for patients and providers act of 2008 ( mippa , p.l .

110-275 ) further emphasized the importance of "an integrated national strategy and priorities for health care performance measurement in all applicable settings. .

mippa required the secretary to enter into a contract with a consensus - based entity ( and provided as an example the national quality forum ) to help strengthen and better focus the nation's performance - measurement infrastructure , and specifically to synthesize evidence and convene stakeholders to provide recommendations on a national performance - measurement infrastructure ; to endorse and maintain measures ; and to report annually to the secretary on these activities .

the national quality forum was awarded this contract and recently released its first report , improving healthcare performance: setting priorities and enhancing measurement capacity , in fulfillment of this statutory requirement .

the initial phase in the life cycle of a quality measure is the development stage .

in this stage , measures are conceived of , created , specified , refined , and oftentimes field tested .

quality measures are developed by a number of different measure developers , including the joint commission , the national committee for quality assurance ( ncqa ) , and the american medical association ( ama ) - convened physician consortium for performance improvement ( pcpi ) , for application in a wide variety of settings , including hospitals , nursing homes , clinics , and to evaluate health plans .

measures may generally be developed in one of two ways: they may be created entirely anew , or de novo , or existing measures may be identified and adapted for a specific purpose ( i.e. , hospital accreditation ) .

traditionally , developers have focused on measures of process rather than outcomes , and they generally direct their efforts toward developing measures focused on a specific setting ( eg , hospital ) or in a particular clinical area ( eg , pneumonia ) .

gaps have occurred in measure development where services span provider settings or where no single entity has sole responsibility for providing a service ( eg , coordination of care or end - of - life care ) .

in addition , measure development may be guided by overuse or cost intensiveness , or rather , may be guided by explicit links to improved outcomes , regardless of cost or cost burden .

from a value - based purchasing perspective , development would ideally be guided by both ; however , from the consumer perspective , outcomes may be more important than costs .

this section details the processes used by measure developers to develop quality measures for evaluating the performance of hospitals , physicians , and health plans .

an examination of these processes reveals that they share several attributes: they all solicit public input on measures , they all rely on panels or workgroups of technical and / or clinical specialists for guidance , and they all subject measures to some degree of field testing .

in addition , both the joint commission and ncqa utilize a set of clearly delineated and specific attributes by which to assess and evaluate measures' value and thus guide their development activities .

nqf has recognized the importance of testing quality measures by instituting a mechanism of "time - limited" endorsement for a period of 12-24 months for those measures that meet all of nqf's standards for endorsement , but that have not been subjected to rigorous field testing .

the national quality forum ( nqf ) is the entity in the united states with the lead responsibility for endorsing quality measures .

numerous measure developers , including ncqa , pcpi , and the joint commission , submit their measures to nqf for endorsement , and other entities , including cms , the hospital quality alliance ( hqa ) , medical boards , and health care providers , often choose quality measures for their quality activities from among the list of nqf - endorsed measures .

the endorsement process provides a mechanism for recognizing those measures that meet certain standards and allows interested parties to identify easily a set of valid and reliable measures .

this is valuable , given the large number of extant quality metrics .

many entities rely on nqf - endorsed measures for use in their quality activities .

for example , cms's physician quality reporting initiative ( pqri ) is statutorily required in 2008 and 2009 to use measures that have been "adopted or endorsed by a consensus organization ( such as the national quality forum or aqa ) " and is required in 2010 and subsequent years to use "such measures selected by the secretary from measures that have been endorsed by the entity with a contract with the secretary under section 1890 ( a ) of the social security act. .

also , with respect to cms's reporting hospital quality data for annual payment update ( rhqdapu ) program , the secretary is required to "add other measures that reflect consensus among affected parties and , to the extent feasible and practicable , shall include measures set forth by one or more national consensus building entities. .

once quality measures have been developed and ideally received endorsement , they will be considered for use in various quality activities .

since quality activities have varying goals ( eg , accountability , quality improvement ) and are conducted in different settings for a variety of purposes , the selection stage is critical .

this stage is especially consequential if the measures are being used for purposes of accountability , so the processes used by cms to select measures for its pay - for - reporting programs ( as part of its value - based purchasing initiative ) , and by cms and other stakeholders for public reporting , are of particular import .

the criteria used by cms to select measures for its pqri and rhqdapu programs are discussed in more detail below .

aqa has also played a prominent role in the measure selection stage for physician measures .

the aqa encourages and facilitates health plans and physicians to collaborate in determining which quality measures developed by the pcpi or the ncqa should be recommended for implementation .

these recommendations are directed primarily to cms for measure inclusion in its pqri program , but also to smaller private payers for use in pay - for - performance programs .

in this way , aqa contributes to prioritizing measures for implementation .

the following sections describe details of selected examples of implementation , specifically the physician quality reporting initiative ( pqri ) and the reporting hospital quality data for annual payment update ( rhqdapu ) program .

the complexity of quality measurement , and the importance of its potential applications , has generated a number of policy and technical issues in terms of both measure development and implementation .

especially in the context of health care reform , these issues may be useful to consider as congress develops policies aimed at improving health care quality .

some of these issues are discussed in more detail below .

the issue of improving the quality of health care is multifaceted , and policy makers have offered numerous approaches to addressing this policy problem .

measuring the quality of care delivered has served as the basis for a number of policy options being considered , but the effectiveness of these policy approaches depends on the quality of the data generated through measurement activities .

the quality of this data in turn depends on the quality of the measure development process , as well as the way in which the measures are used and for what purpose .

congress may want to consider the issues outlined in this report when developing policy options that rely on quality measurement .

appendix a .

quality measure development processes ( cms , pcpi , and ncqa ) appendix b. nqf's measure endorsement process appendix c. list of acronyms aafp: american academy of family physicians acp: american college of physicians ahip: america's health insurance plans ahrq : agency for healthcare research and quality ama : american medical association aqa : the aqa alliance cms : centers for medicare and medicaid services hedis : healthcare effectiveness data and information set hqa : hospital quality alliance iom : institute of medicine omb: office of management and budget ncqa : national committee for quality assurance npp: national priorities partnership nqf : national quality forum pcpi : physician consortium for performance improvement pqri : physician quality reporting initiative rhqdapu : reporting hospital quality data for annual payment updat .

