although the federal government provides health coverage for many individuals through federal programs such as medicare , it has never required individuals to purchase health insurance until the enactment of the patient protection and affordable care act ( aca ) in march of 2010 .

while a requirement to transfer money to a private party may arise in other contexts ( eg , automobile insurance ) , it has been noted that these provisions are based on exercising a privilege , like driving a car .

thus , due at least in part to the novelty of this requirement , there have been questions debated over its constitutionality , and several lawsuits have challenged the minimum coverage provision on constitutional grounds .

these challenges have reached the supreme court , where oral arguments in the cases took place during the last week of march , 2012 .

this report first analyzes the authority of congress to enact the minimum coverage provision contained in aca and discusses whether there must be exceptions to a requirement to purchase health insurance based on first amendment freedom of religion .

it finally examines some of the legal challenges to this federal requirement as well as other questions ( relating to the anti - injunction act and severability ) that the supreme court is considering in conjunction with the minimum coverage provision .

for a discussion of the constitutional challenge to aca's expansion of the medicaid program , see crs report r42367 , federalism challenge to medicaid expansion under the affordable care act: florida v. department of health and human services , by [author name scrubbed] .

under section 1501 of aca , beginning in tax year 2014 , some taxpayers will be assessed a monetary penalty for any months during which they or their dependents lack "minimum essential" health coverage .

"minimum essential coverage" includes coverage under a government - sponsored health care program ( eg , medicaid , part a of medicare ) ; an "eligible" employer - sponsored plan ; coverage under a plan offered in the individual market ; a grandfathered health plan ; and other health coverage as recognized by the secretary of health and human services .

the amount of the assessment for failing to meet the individual mandate , which can be prorated for partial compliance during the year , is determined by taking the greater of a flat dollar amount and a calculation based on a percentage of the taxpayer's household income .

the annual flat dollar amount is assessed per individual or dependent without coverage and will be phased in over three years .

the amount is set at $95 for 2014 ; $325 for 2015 ; and $695 in 2016 and thereafter .

this amount will also be adjusted for inflation beyond 2016 .

although this is a fixed per - person amount , a taxpayer's liability will not exceed three times this amount per year , regardless of the number of individuals who actually lack adequate coverage during the year .

for example , a married couple filing jointly with two dependent children and no health insurance will have the same flat dollar assessment as a similarly situated married couple with three dependent children .

this flat dollar amount will be compared to a percentage of the extent to which the taxpayer's household income exceeds the income tax filing threshold .

like the flat dollar amount , the applicable percentage to be used is phased in over three years , set at 1% for 2014 , 2% for 2015 , and 2.5% thereafter .

the amount assessed on a taxpayer who lacks minimum essential coverage will be equal to the greater of the flat dollar amount or the calculated percentage of household income .

however , this amount shall not exceed the national average of the annual premiums of a bronze level health insurance plan offered through an exchange created under aca .

exemptions would apply to individuals with qualified religious exemptions , members of health care sharing ministries , unauthorized aliens , incarcerated individuals , qualified u.s. citizens and residents living abroad , and bona fide residents of the u.s. possessions .

additionally , no amounts would be assessed on individuals who could not afford coverage ; taxpayers with income less than the filing threshold ; members of indian tribes ; and individuals granted hardship exceptions .

finally , no amounts would be assessed for periods without coverage that last less than three months .

this three - month exception could apply to only one continuous period without coverage during a calendar year .

while there is no specific enumerated constitutional power to regulate health care or establish a minimum coverage provision , one can look to congress's other broad enumerated powers which have been used to justify health care regulation in the past .

in the instant case , congress's taxing power or its power to regulate interstate commerce may be pertinent .

it should be noted that while there are numerous congressional findings under section 1501 of aca that address the correlation of the minimum coverage provision to interstate commerce , there are no similar statements in the act relating to the individual mandate and congress's taxing power .

requiring individuals to obtain health insurance may conflict with some individuals' religious beliefs .

accordingly , legislation that would require individuals to obtain health insurance might raise constitutional issues of religious freedom .

these issues may be addressed with a religious exemption to the minimum coverage provision , which must comport with the first amendment's religion clauses .

those clauses serve as guarantees that individuals will neither be required to act under a prescribed religious belief ( the establishment clause ) nor be prohibited from acting under their chosen religious beliefs ( the free exercise clause ) .

in addition to the litigation mentioned in the previous section , several lawsuits have been filed challenging the constitutionality of the minimum coverage provision .

while these lawsuits are not identical in their complaints , they typically assert that the federal government does not have the authority to impose on individuals a requirement to purchase health insurance , and therefore seek declarative and injunctive relief .

the administration has filed motions to dismiss in these cases , arguing that the lawsuits are barred for procedural reasons because , among other things , the plaintiffs lack standing to challenge the minimum coverage provision , and that the issues asserted are not ripe for adjudication because the requirement does not take effect until 2014 , and thus no injury to individuals could occur before then .

the administration has also contended that the requirement is well within congress's power under the commerce clause , general welfare clause , and the necessary and proper clause .

plaintiffs' success in challenging the minimum coverage provision has been mixed .

so far , nine federal courts , including three appellate courts and six district courts , have rendered a decision on the constitutionality of the requirement .

the three appellate courts evaluating the issue have reached contrasting conclusions .

while three district courts have upheld the minimum coverage provision , three have struck it down .

other courts have dismissed plaintiffs' claims for procedural reasons , such as lack of standing to bring the action .

six petitions for supreme court review were filed in response to appellate decisions in the eleventh , sixth , and fourth circuits .

on november 14 , 2011 , the court agreed to hear the appeals in the florida case .

oral arguments in this case took place during the last week of march .

as mentioned above , in november 2011 , the supreme court agreed to hear arguments in hhs v. florida .

regardless of the outcome of the case , many view this challenge to aca as historic — not just because of the implications it may have for the regulation of health care , but also for how it could generally affect the scope of congress's legislative powers .

oral arguments took place in this case during the last week of march 2012 , and many expect the court to reach a decision in june .

aside from evaluating the constitutional issues surrounding the requirement to have health insurance , the court agreed to separately examine whether the court is barred from evaluating the individual mandate at this time because of the anti - injunction act , which prohibits lawsuits seeking to restrain the assessment or collection of a tax .

the court also agreed to review the question of whether the individual mandate may be severed from the rest of aca , assuming the individual mandate is found to be unconstitutional .

a federal law known as the anti - injunction act ( aia ) generally provides that "no suit for the purpose of restraining the assessment or collection of any tax shall be maintained in any court by any person , whether or not such person is the person against whom such tax was assessed. .

in response to lawsuits filed challenging the constitutionality of the minimum coverage provision , the government initially argued that the suits were barred by the aia , but withdrew that argument as the litigation progressed .

however , the question of whether the aia bars this litigation has been raised by three united states courts of appeals , on their own initiative , notwithstanding the fact that all the litigants before these courts agree that the aia should not preclude a decision about the merits of the minimum coverage provision .

two of the three courts of appeals have held that the aia does not apply to suits challenging the individual mandate , while one has held the opposite .

in light of this circuit - split , the supreme court included this question in its writ of certiorari granted in response to petitions seeking review of the constitutional questions surrounding the individual mandate and other provisions of aca .

oral arguments on this question were heard before the supreme court on march 26 , 2012 .

because the federal government is no longer raising the aia as a defense to the challenges to the minimum coverage provision , the first question that must be answered in the context of the aia is whether the applicability of the aia must be addressed by the court at all .

generally , litigants are permitted to waive potential defenses in federal court .

however , this is not the case where the defense is based on the court's lack of jurisdiction over the subject matter of a case .

therefore , if the aia is a jurisdictional statute , it cannot be waived by the federal government .

the supreme court has made statements in prior cases indicating that the aia is a jurisdictional bar .

for example , in bob jones university v. simon , the court held that the aia "deprived the [federal] district court of jurisdiction" to hear a case in which the plaintiff sought to enjoin the irs from issuing a ruling denying the plaintiff's tax - exempt status .

similarly , in enochs v. williams packing and navigation company , the court stated that "[t]he object of [the aia] is to withdraw jurisdiction from the state and federal courts to entertain suits seeking injunctions prohibiting the collection of federal taxes. .

on the other hand , the federal government had not sought to waive the aia in either of these cases , so the court may not have been directly addressing the issue of waiver when describing the aia as jurisdictional .

the second question presented by the aia is whether these suits would fall within the class of suits that congress has prohibited by enacting the aia .

the text of the aia provides that no "suit for the purpose of restraining the assessment or collection of any tax shall be maintained in any court by any person , whether or not such person is the person against whom such tax was assessed. .

based on this language , the aia would likely be an obstacle to these suits if they are suits to restrain the assessment or collection of any tax .

in order to determine whether this is the case , one must first identify which tax would be at issue in the suit .

the most obvious possibility here is that the penalty imposed on the failure to obtain health insurance as required by the minimum coverage provision is a tax for purposes of the aia .

the suits challenging the minimum coverage provision seek a declaration that congress does not have the power to require individuals to purchase health insurance .

if they are successful , the penalties imposed on individuals that fail to purchase health insurance could no longer be assessed or collected .

therefore , if the penalty is a tax for purposes of the aia , then these suits would be barred .

the aia provides no definition of the term "tax. .

however , federal courts have generally interpreted the term to refer to "an exaction for the support of the government. .

despite this broad interpretation , the supreme court has held that even where an exaction has been labeled as a tax , "when by its very nature the imposition is a penalty , it must be so regarded. .

a number of commentators and lower courts have relied on the fact that the minimum coverage provision is described as a "penalty" in the text of the aca .

other textual arguments may be made to support inclusion of the minimum coverage provision within the meaning of taxes for purposes of the aia .

for example , the provision specifically states that it should be "assessed and collected" in the same manner as assessable penalties that are subject to the aia .

other explicit penalties in the internal revenue code have been held to be subject to the aia , but only where there were explicit statutory directives to treat such penalties as taxes or where the penalties were part of an overall tax scheme .

neither of these characteristics appears to be present with respect to the minimum coverage provision .

finally , it should be noted that the use of the term "tax" in the context of the aia is not identical to how that term is used for purposes of congress' power to levy taxes .

in bailey v. george , the court applied the aia to bar a suit challenging a tax on employers who used child labor on the same day that the court struck down the same tax in a separate suit .

therefore , it is not necessarily true that if the court were to determine that the minimum coverage provision is a tax for purposes of the aia that it would be bound by that decision when determining whether the minimum coverage provision could be justified solely under the taxing power .

when a court finds a portion of a law to be unconstitutional , it may then confront the issue of whether to strike what is unconstitutional and uphold the remainder , or whether to declare the rest a law invalid , either partially or in its entirety .

the supreme court agreed to review the question of whether the individual mandate can be severed from the remainder of aca .

this section provides an overview of severability precedent , discusses severability arguments in the f lorida case , and addresses some of the considerations that the supreme court could take into account in evaluating the severability of the individual mandate .

current severability doctrine is based on the premise that courts "should refrain from invalidating more of a statute than is necessary…. .

courts also express reluctance to rewrite or restructure a statute in order to preserve the remaining portions of a law .

the supreme court has , on multiple occasions , recited a "well - established" standard for determining the severability of an unconstitutional provision , under which severability is presumed: "'[u]nless it is evident that the legislature would not have enacted those provisions which are within its power , independently of that which is not , the invalid part may be dropped if what is left is fully operative as a law.' .

notwithstanding this standard , it is generally recognized that the "touchstone" of a court's severability analysis is congressional intent .

in one of the modern and more frequently cited supreme court cases exploring severability , alaska airlines v. brock , the court evaluated whether an unconstitutional legislative veto provision allowing congress to nullify department of labor regulations could be removed from employee protection provisions in the airline deregulation act of 1978 .

in examining the remaining employee protection provisions of the act , the court noted that because the legislative veto was , by its nature , separate from the operation of the substantive provisions of the act , there was little guidance as to congress's intent regarding severability of the veto .

the court therefore noted that "the more relevant inquiry" was whether the severed statute "will function in a manner consistent with the intent of congress. .

the court went on to find "abundant indication[s]" of congressional intent for severability in the language , structure , and legislative history of the airline deregulation act .

the court pointed out , for example , that with respect to the number of duties that the act placed on air carriers with respect to employees , there was not much of substance subject to a veto .

there were also , according to the court , several indications that congress regarded the labor protections as an important part of the airline deregulation act , but paid "scant attention" to the legislative veto provision .

the court found no conclusive evidence that congress would have refused to pass the act with its employee protections , but without the legislative veto .

accordingly , it found the legislative veto provision severable .

in one of the court's most recent cases to address severability , free enterprise fund v. public co. accounting oversight board , the court reaffirmed use of this severability standard , as well as its deference to congress in matters of legislative restructuring .

in that case , the court looked at the constitutionality of a provision in sarbanes - oxley act that created a public board with members that were subject to removal by an agency for violation of specified federal laws , and not directly by the president .

after finding that the board's tenure provisions violated separation of powers principles , the court briefly addressed the severability question .

the court found the remainder of the large act "'fully operative as a law'" with these tenure restrictions excised , and that "nothing in the statute's text or historical context made it "evident" that congress , faced with the limitations imposed by the constitution , would have preferred no board at all to a board whose members are removable at will. .

the court noted that theoretically , it could "blue - pencil" a number of fixes to the sarbanes - oxley act , but it found such "editorial freedom" more appropriate for the congress , rather than the court .

in assessing whether a provision is severable from the rest of a statute , the court has also considered the purpose of the congressional act and how the provision interacts with that purpose .

for example , in new york v. u.s. , the court evaluated a challenge to the low - level radioactive waste policy amendments act of 1985 , which addressed disposal of this waste .

the court struck down on constitutional grounds a provision requiring states or a regional compact to take title to and possession of low level radioactive waste under certain circumstances , but left other incentives for dealing with the waste in place .

the court explained that "[c]ommon sense suggests that where congress has enacted a statutory scheme for an obvious purpose , and where congress has included a series of provisions operating as incentives to achieve that purpose , the invalidation of one of the incentives should not ordinarily cause congress' overall intent to be frustrated. .

other recent cases such as u.s. v. booker seem to demonstrate some willingness of the court to amend a statutory scheme in order to preserve congressional intent .

after holding that the mandatory nature of the u.s .

sentencing guidelines for criminal offenses was unconstitutional , the court conducted a severability analysis , and , in a 5-4 decision , severed two sections of the sentencing reform act of 1984 , which had the effect of replacing the mandatory guidelines with those operating in a discretionary manner .

the court indicated that it sought to determine "what 'congress would have intended' in light of the court's constitutional holding. .

the court acknowledged that the remedy chosen by the majority of the court , i.e. , discretionary sentencing guidelines , as well as the different remedy proposed by the minority , would "significantly alter the system that congress designed. .

however , it explained that because of the constitutional holding , congress's desire to have mandatory sentencing guidelines was no longer possible .

accordingly , the court stated its role was to decide which remedy "would deviate less radically from congress's system…. .

the court also noted its responsibility to retain those portions of the act that were " ( 1 ) constitutionally valid , ( 2 ) capable of 'functioning independently,' and ( 3 ) consistent with congress' objectives in enacting the statute. .

by severing the two provisions the court concluded that the remainder of the act met the three constitutional requirements .

additionally , the court has noted that while the answer to a severability inquiry can sometimes be "elusive," the inquiry may be clarified by the presence of a severability clause .

the inclusion of a severability clause reinforces the presumption that congress preferred for the valid portion of a statute in question to remain standing .

however , the court has expressed multiple times that the lack of a severability clause does not create a presumption against severability .

both the state and private petitioners in the florida case argue that aca should be struck down in its entirety .

however , the administration advocates for partial severability , arguing that certain health insurance provisions , i.e. , the "community rating" and "guaranteed issue" provisions , are inseverable from the individual mandate , but that the rest of the act should remain valid .

in general , the guaranteed issue requirements compel health insurers to accept everyone that applies and prevent an insurer from denying health insurance coverage based factors such as health status .

the community rating provisions prohibit health insurers from charging higher premiums based on health factors .

the administration submits that congress intended that these insurance provisions work together , because without the individual mandate , individuals would simply wait to purchase health insurance until they needed care , which would make the market dysfunctional .

in light of the fact that the administration and the state and private petitioners in florida agree to at least partial severability , the court appointed an amicus to argue in support of the judgment of the eleventh circuit: that the individual mandate alone should be severed from the remainder of the aca .

in florida , the district court reached the opposite conclusion , striking down the aca , and generally finding that while many provisions in aca could function independently of the individual mandate , they could not function "in a manner consistent with the intent of congress. .

this was because , as the district court explained , the individual mandate , was "indisputably essential" to the health reform effort .

the lack of a severability clause , the district court found , was evidence of this idea that the rest of the statute should not remain intact .

it noted that earlier versions of health reform legislation contained such a clause , but it was not included in the final version of aca .

the district court distinguished the instant case from cases like alaska airlines , where the provision at issue was "uncontroversial," and where legislative history demonstrated its "relative unimportance," compared to aca , where the individual mandate is "at the heart of the act. .

the court also explained that it was impossible for the court to go through the lengthy , complex statute to ascertain which provisions would or would not have to be severed along with the individual mandate , and accordingly nullified the act .

the appeals court disagreed with the district court's holding of "wholesale invalidation" of aca and reversed this part of the district court's decision .

in deciding to only excise the individual mandate , the court opined that "the lion's share of the act has nothing to do with private insurance , much less the mandate to buy insurance. .

the eleventh circuit noted that "in light of the stand - alone nature of hundreds of the act's provisions and their manifest lack of connection to the individual mandate , the plaintiffs have not met the heavy burden needed to rebut the presumption of severability. .

the appellate court also disagreed with the district court's emphasis on the lack of a severability clause in aca .

in deciding to sever the individual mandate alone , while leaving the insurance reforms intact , the court found that certain factors relevant in determining congressional intent .

for example , relying on the booker and new york cases , the court explained that aca contains many other provisions besides the individual mandate that could help to accomplish the goals of aca ( i.e. , accessibility of health insurance coverage and a reduction of the number of uninsured individuals ) .

cutting against the idea that aca would fail to function without the individual mandate but with the other health insurance reforms preserved , the court observed that the individual mandate is , similar to the legislative veto in alaska airlines , limited in its operation , because , eg , there are individuals who are excepted from having to buy health insurance or pay a penalty .

for these reasons and others , the court was not persuaded that it was "evident" that congress would not have enacted the guaranteed issue and community rating reforms without the individual mandate .

if the court determines that the individual mandate is unconstitutional and undertakes a severability analysis of aca , the court will likely evaluate legislative intent to determine the extent to which aca should remain intact .

in conjunction with that evaluation , the court may explore whether aca could function without the individual mandate .

other factors may also come into play in ascertaining whether other provisions of aca remain valid .

it should be noted that while the court could address severability if it were to find the expansion of the medicaid program under aca unconstitutional , the question explicitly granted review by the court , and thus the focus of this overview , addressed the severability of the individual mandate .

in determining congressional intent , the court may , as it has in previous cases , frame its inquiry as whether it is evident that congress would have passed aca without the individual mandate .

the parties to the litigation disagree about what to evaluate in answering this fundamental question .

private and state petitioners , for example , claim that this part of the severability inquiry should largely be focused on , as noted in alaska airlines , whether the "balance of the act can function in the manner that congress intended. .

applying this standard to aca , state and private petitioners generally contend that the requirement to have health insurance is the centerpiece of aca , which is essential to achieving universal health coverage , and to remove it would fundamentally alter what congress intended .

they explain that this conclusion is reinforced by legislative history addressing the importance of the individual mandate .

petitioners further point to the contentious legislative process through which aca was created , eg , the narrow margin under which the act was passed , as an indication that the act would have failed had there been any changes to it ( eg , removing the minimum coverage provision ) .

the administration , on the other hand , relies on the idea that the court generally tries not to invalidate more of a statute than is necessary .

one of the administration's central arguments is that the majority of aca should remain valid because the act contains a number of tools for improving the health care market that "operate independently of the [individual mandate] and would advance congress's goal of expanding affordable coverage if that provision were invalidated. .

it contends further that "there is no basis for invalidating as inseverable provisions of the act that have no apparent connection at all , let alone an inextricably close connection , to the [individual mandate]. .

the administration notes that evidence of this idea includes the fact that while the individual mandate does not take effect until 2014 , there are many provisions of aca that are effective before then .

similar to the 11 th circuit , the administration claims that the intent of many of aca's provisions , not just the individual mandate alone , is to broaden access to affordable health care .

they argue that this situation is similar to cases like new york , where there was a "common purpose," and where the court found it appropriate to sever an unconstitutional provision from the rest of a valid act , even where the provision related to one of the primary objectives of the congressional enactment .

however , unlike the 11 th circuit , the administration claims that congress intended for the guaranteed issue and community rating provisions to be integral to the individual mandate .

without the mandate , it argues , individuals would not purchase health insurance until they needed care , which would leave more unhealthy people with insurance .

as a result , premiums would increase , which is precisely what congress did not want .

accordingly , the administration argues that because the individual mandate is needed to make those insurance reforms effective , the guaranteed issue and community rating provisions are inseverable from the individual mandate , while the rest of the act should stand .

the court - appointed amicus defends the 11 th circuit position , stating that the focus should be on the question of whether congress would have preferred an aca with no individual mandate , to no aca at all .

similar to the administration , the amicus argues , among other things , that besides the guaranteed issue and community rating requirements , many provisions of aca have little , if any connection to the individual mandate .

relying on cases like booker , the amicus disputes the petitioner's claim that severability turns on the question of whether the statute functions in the manner that congress intended .

additionally , the amicus reasons that the guaranteed issue and community rating should also stand , as it is improbable that congress would have wanted for health insurance consumers to be in the position they were in before the act: potentially subject to things like denials of coverage because of their health conditions .

the amicus argues that while congress expected these health insurance requirements to work together with the individual mandate , it is not evident that congress would have wanted to remove those benefits from individuals , which can still be effective without the individual mandate .

one factor that the court may consider in evaluating congressional intent is the congressional findings accompanying the individual mandate .

as discussed above , the findings state , among other things , that the individual mandate is "an essential part of this larger regulation of economic activity , and the absence of the requirement would undercut federal regulation of the health insurance market. .

the findings further provide that it is "essential to creating effective health insurance markets in which improved health insurance products that are guaranteed issue and do not exclude coverage of pre - existing conditions can be sold. .

it is not clear whether the court might regard these findings as an indicator that congress regarded the individual mandate as an indispensable part of aca , as the petitioners argue ; as an expression of congress's view that the individual mandate is inseparable from the guaranteed issue and community rating provisions , as the administration claims ; or conversely , unrelated to the severability question , as a demonstration of congress's view that the individual mandate plays an essential role in a broader regulatory scheme for purposes of the commerce clause , as the amicus contends .

phrasing this latter position differently , the findings arguably address congress's position on its power to enact the provision , not its preference as to what should happen to the rest of aca without it .

other arguments that could influence the decision of the court include the lack of a severability clause in aca .

while recent supreme court jurisprudence does not place great emphasis on the existence of the clause in legislation , petitioners argue that this case is distinguishable , as there was a severability clause in earlier versions of the health reform bill that was removed in the health reform bill that passed and became aca .

the administration contends that the lack of such a clause in aca is insignificant and disputes the idea that a clause was removed from the bill that was enacted by congress , as a severability clause was only included in a house bill that was never considered in the senate .

the administration also contends that severability clauses in the acts that aca amends ( eg , the internal revenue code ) could apply to aca's provisions .

in addition , the administration claims that the court should not address inseverability of provisions that do not affect the plaintiffs .

the administration asserts that the petitioners "may not challenge the myriad provisions of the act that do not apply to them," and that "[p]arties must demonstrate standing for each form of relief they seek and , in doing so , cannot rely on the rights of third parties. .

the administration relies on printz v. united states , a case in which the court declined to address certain provisions of a statute that "burden[ed] only" parties outside the litigation .

however , the petitioners and amicus disagree with this position , contending , among other things , that the court is not constrained to considering remedies only affecting the interests of the parties to the instant case .

