in recent years , the issue of industry gifts and other payments to health care professionals such as physicians , and the possible conflicts of interest that could arise from these payments , has been controversial .

examples of gifts and payments mentioned in media reports include meals , honoraria for speaking engagements , and travel expenses for conferences .

as congress addresses health reform , there has been interest in increasing transparency , preventing inappropriate relationships , and requiring disclosure of gifts and other payments made to physicians .

while companies are free to voluntarily disclose this information about gifts and other payments , there is no current federal requirement to do so .

supporters of a federal disclosure provision emphasize concern about the effects of gifts and payments on both the cost of prescription medication and on health care quality .

they may point to recent data showing that payments from pharmaceutical companies influence some physicians' decisions to prescribe certain medications , occasionally resulting in over - prescribing of the most expensive medications or even causing unnecessary health risks for patients .

they also argue that the ethical guidelines such as the american medical association ( ama ) code discussed below are insufficient deterrents because they "are not being followed. .

groups opposing a federal disclosure argue that it is unnecessary because existing guidelines within the medical and pharmaceutical - marketing professions discourage unethical behavior .

they also argue that gifts and payments can benefit patients , as physicians receive product samples , attend educational seminars , and receive detailed information about particular medications .

this report outlines the existing ama guidelines on disclosure and describes certain state disclosure laws and selected federal legislation , in particular , the physician payment sunshine act of 2009 ( s. 301 , h.r .

3138 ) .

this report also analyzes various legal and constitutional considerations that may pertain to a federal disclosure requirement .

in enacting a federal disclosure requirement , congress may consider the following statutory and constitutional considerations .

these considerations include the prohibition of certain payments under the anti - kickback statute , and the question of whether payments to physicians could be considered trade secrets , which require certain legal protections .

another issue is whether requiring a pharmaceutical company or other entity to make a disclosure would violate the freedom of speech guaranteed under the first amendment .

in sum , there have been recent efforts to crack down on perceived conflicts of interest between health care professionals and the pharmaceutical and other medical industries , in particular through disclosure of certain gifts or other payments .

several states have already enacted legislation requiring companies to disclose gifts and payments to these professionals .

federal legislation has also been introduced , which would require disclosure of gifts and other transfers of value from the pharmaceutical and other entities to health care provider recipients .

a federal disclosure requirement would likely survive a legal challenge .

pharmaceutical companies might challenge the provision on first amendment grounds .

however , it appears likely that it would survive judicial scrutiny under the various applicable tests of constitutionality .

