the food and drug administration ( fda ) regulates the safety of foods ( including animal feeds ) and cosmetics , and the safety and effectiveness of drugs , biologics ( eg , vaccines ) , and medical devices .

the agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies appropriations bill provides fda's annual funding .

the total amount that fda can spend , its program level , consists of direct appropriations ( which fda calls budget authority ) and other funds , most of them user fees .

an appropriations bill specifies both the budget authority and user fee amounts each year .

it also dictates the total for each of fda's major program areas ( foods , human drugs , biologics , devices , animal drugs and feeds , and toxicological research ) and several agency - wide support areas ( office of the commissioner and other headquarter offices , rents to the general services administration , and other rent and rent - related activities ) .

it also authorizes collections and spending from several specific other funds ( relating to mammography quality standards , and color and export certification ) .

traditionally , the appropriations committees have used report language to recommend , urge , or request specific activities within major programs .

the standard appropriations procedure involves congressional passage of 12 annual regular appropriations acts , of which agriculture ( including fda ) is one .

except that final passage occurred after the start of the fiscal year , the fy2010 agriculture appropriations followed the standard process .

table 1 provides a timeline of the administrative and congressional steps toward fy2010 appropriations for fda .

for 7 of the previous 11 fiscal years , congress had not completed that standard process and had passed omnibus or consolidated appropriations legislation , as shown in table 2 .

for fy2009 , congress acted in the final days of fy2008 to provide appropriations for the start of fy2009 as part of the larger consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 , signed on september 30 , 2008 ) .

in march 2009 , congress passed an omnibus appropriations bill that included fda ( p.l .

111-8 ) .

in february of each year ( except for when a new president has taken office the month before ) , the president presents a budget request to congress .

the annual food and drug administration justification of estimates for appropriations committees contains program - level details of the president's request , while also highlighting successes , needs , and special initiatives ( eg , drug safety , imports , bioterror countermeasures , inspections ) .

because the topics selected for discussion vary over the years , analysts cannot use this information to track exact changes over time .

the program - level detail , however , provides a window into the priorities and activities of the agency .

the fy2010 request — $3.178 billion — is 19% higher than fy2009-enacted appropriations .

it includes increased funding for food and medical product safety activities and cost - of - living expenses .

data column 4 of table 3 displays the president's fy2010 request by major program area .

this follows columns for fy2008-enacted appropriations , fy2008 actual appropriations ( as of april 2009 ) , and fy2009-enacted appropriations .

the appropriations committees in the house and the senate each have subcommittees that parallel the 12 annual appropriations bills .

the subcommittees on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies consider fda appropriations .

the textbook order of activity is as follows: in each chamber , the subcommittee considers the issues , perhaps holds hearings , and marks up a bill for the full committee's consideration .

in each chamber , the full committee considers the subcommittee - marked bill or a version that the full committee chair presents , and reports a bill , perhaps with committee amendments , to the full house or the full senate for consideration .

the full house considers the house committee on appropriations - reported bill , perhaps amending it on the floor , and passes the bill ; the full senate considers the senate committee on appropriations - reported bill , perhaps amending it on the floor , and passes the bill .

if the house - passed and senate - passed bills are not identical , each chamber assigns members to meet in conference to work out one acceptable bill .

each chamber must vote to approve the conference bill ; the second chamber that passes the conference bill sends it to the president for signing .

on june 23 , 2009 , the full committee on appropriations reported h.r .

2997 , which the subcommittee on agriculture , rural development , food and drug administration , and related agencies had marked up on june 11 , 2009 .

the bill matched the president's request but did not include the proposed new user fees .

data column 5 of table 3 shows the committee - reported amounts .

as it had in previous years , the committee included in the bill a provision to preclude fda's closing or relocating its division of pharmaceutical analysis outside the st. louis , mo , area .

in h.rept .

111-181 , which accompanied h.r .

2997 , the committee highlighted the increased support for food and medical product safety that would cover , for example , more foreign and domestic inspections .

the committee also noted that the increase would fund research in biomarkers ; collection and analysis of data on foodborne illnesses ; research on screening tests for bloodborne diseases ; efforts to understand adverse events related to medical devices used in pediatric hospitals ; evaluations of drug risk evaluation and mitigation strategies ; and investment in information technology .

the report also noted funding for congressionally directed spending items .

in its report , the committee stated its intention to authorize fda to collect and spend tobacco product user fee revenue once the tobacco legislation was signed into law .

the committee also encouraged fda to prioritize its review of products that would address neuroblastoma ; to issue a final rule on over - the - counter sunscreen testing and labeling ; to devise targeted communications strategies to allow consumers to use the findings of the upcoming dietary guidelines advisory committee report ; and to remind honey manufacturers about the law's misbranding and adulteration provisions and to respond to a pending citizen petition proposing a standard of identity for honey .

the house - passed bill included an anticipated amendment to allow the collection and spending of newly authorized tobacco product user fees .

it would allocate most of the $235 million to a new center for tobacco products and related field activities of the office of regulatory affairs , reserving a small part for rent and rent related activities , gsa rent , and other activities , including the office of the commissioner .

data column 7 of table 3 shows the house - passed amounts .

on july 7 , 2009 , the committee on appropriations reported s. 1406 , although the subcommittee had not voted on and referred a bill .

the budget authority and user fee amounts matched both the house committee - reported and the president's request amounts ; it also included the st. louis , mo , provision .

data column 6 of table 3 shows the committee - reported amounts .

the accompanying report , s.rept .

111-39 , highlighted the increase related to food and medical product safety , which would allow additional inspections .

the senate committee also mentioned laboratory capacity ; screening test development ; adverse event data collection and analysis ; research on bioequivalence standards of generic products ; enforcement against fraudulent products ; noninvasive techniques to better understand the risks of anesthetic use in children ; and information technology systems .

the committee specifically encouraged fda to develop a program for increasing the inspection of imported shrimp for banned antibiotics ; to issue guidance regarding antibiotic development and to work with others to promote development and appropriate use of antibacterial drugs for humans ; and to continue its activities regarding antimicrobial resistance .

the committee recommended a $2 million increase ( approximately a 25% increase ) to the cosmetics program .

it directed the agency to use $18 million for its critical path initiative , with one - third going to partnerships , and to use at least $2 million of the critical path partnership funding to support research in treatment or rapid diagnosis of tropical diseases .

the committee directed fda to report quarterly on critical path spending .

the committee also directed the agency to clarify the relationship of dietary supplements to a definition of food ; recommended $3 million for demonstration grants for improving pediatric device availability ; directed fda to report on planned research involving bioequivalent anti - epileptic drugs ; recommended $93 million for the generic drugs program , increasing the office of generic drugs by $10 million ; directed the department of health and human services ( hhs ) and fda to resolve problems with the rockville human resources center and to report to the committee ; directed fda to submit a report regarding infant formula products introduced in the past decade ; recommended that $5 million in appropriated funds , as well as the $19 million in user fees , be used for mammography quality standards act activities ; urged fda to stimulate the development of products that could address orphan tropical diseases ; and recommended $6 million for the office of women's health .

it also directed fda to consider the need for regulations on the safe handling and processing of packaged ice ; to continue priority attention to products for neuroblastoma ; to work with states to more aggressively combat fraud in the seafood industry ; to respond to a proposed standard of identity to prevent the misbranding and adulteration of honey .

the committee instructed fda to report quarterly on its use of appropriated funds in its implementation of the new tobacco program , and noted its intention to authorize the collection and use of fees .

the senate - passed bill included an anticipated amendment to allow the collection and spending of newly authorized tobacco product user fees .

it also authorized the fda commissioner to conduct and report on a study regarding addiction to certain types of food and addiction to classic drugs of abuse .

data column 8 of table 3 shows the senate - passed amounts .

another amendment authorized the commissioner to establish two review groups to recommend activities regarding products to prevent , diagnose , and treat rare diseases and neglected diseases of the developing world , and directed the commissioner to report to congress on those recommendations and to develop review standards based on those recommendations .

the senate - passed bill also directed the commissioner to report ( with the administrator of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration ) to congress on the technical challenges associated with inspecting imported seafood , and to study the labeling of fda - regulated personal care products for which organic content claims are made .

a conference committee , with members appointed by each chamber , submitted a conference report , h.rept .

111-279 , on september 30 , 2009 , concerning h.r .

2997 , the agriculture appropriations bill for fy2010 .

table 3 displays the fda - relevant amounts in data column 9 .

the conference agreement would provide fda with a total program level of $3.279 billion .

the two components of the total are $2.357 in direct appropriations ( budget authority ) and $922 million in user fees .

the total , which includes $235 million in newly authorized user fees to support a new center for tobacco products ( and related activities of the agency - wide office of regulatory affairs ) , would be 22.9% higher than fy2009 appropriations for fda .

excluding the new tobacco program , to provide a comparison of similar program responsibilities , fy2010 appropriations would be 14.1% higher than fy2009 appropriations .

the conference agreement would increase the budget authority to the human drugs program by $7 million and specifies that at least $52 million be made available to the office of generic drugs .

it also specifies $4 million for a grant to the national center for natural products research .

accepting a provision in the senate and house bills , the conference agreement would prohibit the use of appropriated funds to close or relocate the fda division of pharmaceutical analysis in st. louis , mo .

the conference agreement includes a provision , based on one in the senate - passed bill , to require the fda commissioner to establish two review groups to recommend activities regarding products to prevent , diagnose , and treat rare diseases and neglected diseases of the developing world , and directed the commissioner to report to congress on those recommendations and to develop guidance and internal review standards based on those recommendations .

the explanatory statement , the part of the conference report with a narrative approach similar to the committee reports that accompany the bills in each chamber , included a few of the items from the senate report .

the conference agreement states that at least $93 million is for the generic drugs program , of which $52 million is for the office of generic drugs , noting that this is a $10 million increase from fy2009 .

also included is a $2 million increase for cosmetics activities , $3 million for demonstration grants for improving pediatric device availability , $18 million for the critical path initiative , and $6 million for four congressionally directed projects .

the conference agreement requests fda to report on adverse events and seizures associated with brand and generic anti - epileptic drugs , specifically the pharmacokinetic profiles of drugs that fda rates as therapeutically equivalent , and to recommend changes to current bioequivalence testing .

the conference agreement directs fda to report on safety challenges associated with imported seafood .

it also directs fda to report regarding personal care products for which organic content claims are made , to include recommendations on the need for labeling standards and premarket approval of labeling .

the house agreed to the conference report on october 7 , 2009 ( vote: 263-162 ) .

the senate agreed to conference report on october 8 , 2009 ( vote: 76-22 ) .

the fda title of the agriculture appropriations bill as signed by the president on october 21 , 2009 , provides the agency with the budget authority and the authorized user fees that the president had requested , plus user fees that congress enacted after the administration had submitted its request .

the conference agreement increased the budget authority by $7 million .

the enacted appropriations provide fda with a fy2010 total program level of $3.3 billion ( $2.4 billion in budget authority and $922 million in user fees ) .

this total does not include an additional $141 million in user fees that the administration has proposed and included in its request ( concerning generic drugs , food export certification , reinspection , and food inspection and facility registration ) .

