the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) administers a number of agricultural conservation programs that assist private landowners with natural resource concerns .

these include working land programs , land retirement and easement programs , watershed programs , emergency programs , technical assistance , and other programs .

the number and funding levels for agricultural conservation programs have steadily increased over the past 60 years .

early conservation efforts undertaken by congress were focused on reducing high levels of soil erosion and providing water to agriculture in quantities and quality that enhanced farm production .

by the early 1980s , however , concern was growing that these programs were not adequately dealing with environmental problems resulting from agricultural activities ( especially off the farm ) .

in 1985 , conservation policy took a new direction when congress passed the food security act of 1985 ( 1985 farm bill , p.l .

99-198 ) , which established the first conservation programs designed to deal with environmental issues resulting from agricultural activities .

provisions enacted in subsequent farm bills , including in 1990 , 1996 , 2002 , 2008 , and 2014 , reflect a rapid evolution of the conservation agenda , including the growing influence of environmentalists and other nonagricultural interests in the formulation of conservation policy , and a recognition that agriculture was not treated like other business sectors in many environmental laws .

congress also began funding many of these new programs through mandatory spending for the first time , using the borrowing authority of usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) as the funding mechanism instead of annual appropriations .

in addition to the original soil erosion and water quality and quantity issues , the conservation agenda has continued to expand to address other natural resource concerns , such as wildlife habitat , air quality , wetlands restoration and protection , energy efficiency , and sustainable agriculture .

lead agricultural conservation agencies within usda are the natural resources conservation service ( nrcs ) , which provides technical assistance and administers most conservation programs , and the farm service agency ( fsa ) , which administers the conservation reserve program ( crp ) .

these agencies are supported by others in usda that supply research and educational assistance , including the agricultural research service ( ars ) , the economic research service ( ers ) , the national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) , and the forest service ( fs ) .

in addition , agricultural conservation programs involve a large array of partners , including other federal agencies , state and local governments , and private organizations , among others , who provide funds , expertise , and other forms of assistance to further agricultural conservation efforts .

usda provides technical and financial assistance to attract interest and encourage participation in conservation programs .

participation in all usda conservation programs is voluntary .

these programs protect soil , water , wildlife , and other natural resources on privately owned agricultural lands to limit environmental impacts of production activities both on and off the farm , while maintaining or improving production of food and fiber .

some of these programs center on improving or restoring resources that have been degraded , while others seek to create conditions with the objective of limiting degradation in the future .

though programs in this report are listed alphabetically , agricultural conservation programs can be grouped into the following categories based on similarities: working land programs , land retirement and easement programs , watershed programs , emergency programs , compliance , technical assistance , and other programs and overarching provisions .

the majority of conservation programs are funded through usda's commodity credit corporation ( ccc ) as mandatory spending .

congress authorizes mandatory programs at specified funding levels ( or acreage enrollment levels for crp and csp ) for multiple years , typically through omnibus legislation such as the farm bill .

mandatory programs are funded at these levels unless congress limits funding to a lower amount through the appropriations or legislative process ( or puts a ceiling on acreage that can be enrolled ) .

discretionary programs are funded each year through the annual appropriations process .

despite a steady increase in mandatory funding authority , select conservation programs have been reduced or capped through annual appropriation acts since fy2003 .

many of these spending reductions were at the request of the administration .

the mix of programs and amount of reductions vary from year to year .

some programs , such as the crp , have not been reduced by appropriators in recent years , while others , such as eqip , have been repeatedly reduced below authorized levels .

authorized mandatory funding for conservation programs has been reduced by a total of more than $4 billion over the past 10 years .

fy2018 marks the first time in 15 years that an appropriations act does not reduce mandatory conservation program funding .

sequestration has also had an effect on conservation programs .

sequestration is a process of automatic , largely across - the - board reductions that permanently cancel mandatory and / or discretionary budget authority to enforce statutory budget goals .

discretionary accounts have avoided sequestration in recent years through adjustments to spending limits , although sequestration continues on mandatory accounts .

most all mandatory conservation programs were subject to sequestration in fy2014 through fy2018 .

even with sequestration and appropriations act reductions , total annual mandatory funding for conservation programs has grown from a total of $3.9 billion in fy2008 to over $5 billion in fy2018 .

before the 1985 farm bill , few conservation programs existed , and only two would be considered large by today's standards .

in contrast , leading up to the debate on the 2014 farm bill , there were over 20 distinct conservation programs with total annual spending greater than $5 billion .

the differences and number of these programs created general confusion about the purpose , participation , and policies of the programs .

discussion about simplifying or consolidating conservation programs to reduce overlap and duplication , and to generate savings , continued for a number of years .

the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 , 2014 farm bill ) , contained several program consolidation measures , including the repeal of 12 active and inactive programs , the creation of two new programs , and the merging of two programs into existing ones .

a number of conservation programs were repealed by the 2014 farm bill or have gone unfunded by congress in recent years .

table 1 lists these programs and the most recent congressional action taken .

the tabular presentation that follows provides basic information covering each of the usda agricultural conservation programs , including administering agency or agencies within usda ; brief program description ; major amendments to the program in the agricultural act of 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 ) , commonly referred to as the 2014 farm bill ; national scope and availability , including participation levels and acres enrolled ; states with the highest level of funds obligated or acres enrolled ; volume of application backlog or public interest in each program ; authorized funding levels , whether mandatory spending or discretionary appropriations , and any funding restrictions ; fy2018 funding level in the consolidated appropriations act of 2018 ( p.l .

115-124 ) , or , if applicable , the authorized level in the agricultural act of 2014 ( sequestration and carryover not included unless noted ) ; fy2019 funding level requested by the administration ( sequestration and carryover included where known ) ; statutory authority , recent amendments , and u.s. code reference ; expiration date of program authority unless permanently authorized ; and program's website link .

information for the following tables is drawn from agency budget presentations , explanatory notes , and websites ; written responses to questions published each year in hearing records of the agriculture appropriations subcommittees of the house and senate appropriations committees ; and spending estimates from the congressional budget office .

further information about these programs may be found on the nrcs website at http: / / www.nrcs.usda.gov and on the "conservation programs" page of the fsa website at http: / / www.fsa.usda.gov .

