local and regional procurement ( lrp ) of food aid refers to the purchase of commodities for emergency food aid by donors in countries with food needs or in another country within the region .

lrp is used extensively by the united nations world food program ( wfp ) and has been proposed as a cost - effective , time - saving tool that the united states could use to meet emergency food needs .

food aid budget submissions in fy2006 through fy2009 included a proposal with suggested legislative language to authorize the administrator of the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to allocate up to 25% of the funds available for u.s. food aid ( title ii of p.l .

480 , or the food for peace act ) to local or regional purchase .

the budget justification for this authority was that it would increase the timeliness and effectiveness of the u.s. response to overseas food aid needs by eliminating the need to transport the commodities by ocean carriers .

further , savings achieved in transportation and distribution costs could be made available for additional commodity purchases , thereby increasing the overall level of the u.s. response .

house and senate agriculture appropriators did not include this proposal in the annual funding bills .

congressional and other critics of the local purchase proposal maintain that allowing non - u.s. commodities to be purchased would result in undermining the coalition of commodity producers , agribusinesses , private voluntary organizations ( pvos ) , and shippers that participate in the food aid program and in reducing u.s. food aid .

the previous administration's 2008 farm bill proposal for food aid also called for authorizing the use of p.l .

480 title ii funds for lrp .

this proposal also was not adopted .

instead , the 2008 farm bill ( p.l .

110-246 ) included a pilot project for lrp ( discussed below ) .

the fiscal 2010 budget proposal for p.l .

480 title ii does not mention using title ii funding for lrp .

however , the president's fy2010 foreign affairs budget proposed , among other food - security - related items , that $300 million of international disaster assistance ( ida ) funds be used for lrp , cash transfers , and cash vouchers to meet emergency food needs .

some of the issues that have been raised about lrp include the following: could the united states respond to emergency food needs at lower cost and in a more timely manner if commodities were purchased in locations closer to where they were needed ? .

are there risks that could be associated with lrp that would make it a less - effective response to emergency food needs than provision of u.s. commodities ? .

could lrp contribute to agricultural development ( increased production , productivity , development of markets ) of low - income farmers in developing countries ? .

could lrp adversely affect agricultural development and make poor consumers more food insecure ? .

almost all u.s. food aid is provided in the form of u.s. commodity donations .

p.l .

480 , most recently amended by the 2008 farm bill and renamed the food for peace act , authorizes the president , in title ii , to use u.s. agricultural commodities to meet emergency food needs and to provide nonemergency assistance .

this statutory authority precludes the use of title ii funds for local and regional purchase in developing countries .

in fy2008 , the united states provided approximately $2.9 billion of u.s. - produced food aid to the wfp and to pvos for emergency and non - emergency programs .

most recent analyses of u.s. commodity food aid acknowledge that u.s. commodities purchased and shipped from the united states as food aid have "assisted millions of hungry people over the past fifty years. .

at the same time critics of u.s. food aid policy argue that food aid could be provided more cost - effectively and in a more timely manner with lrp .

the united states has used lrp to a limited extent .

section 491 of the foreign assistance act authorizes the provision of international disaster assistance ( ida ) .

most ida funds have been used to supply non - food emergency assistance ( tents , blankets , latrines , medicines , and the like ) , but some have been used for lrp of food .

this statutory authority has been used by the u.s. agency for international development ( usaid ) to provide funds to wfp and to pvos for the local and regional purchase of emergency food aid .

the government accountability office ( gao ) reports that , since 2000 , ida funds were tapped for about $200 million worth of locally or regionally procured emergency food aid .

usaid's office of disaster assistance ( ofda ) and the state department's bureau for population , refugees and migration use ida funding to provide emergency food aid .

the president's emergency plan for aids relief ( pepfar ) also has legislative authority to provide locally or regionally purchased foods to people living with hiv / aids .

while the united states is the world's largest food aid provider , other food aid donors , including the european union ( eu ) and eu member countries , canada , and australia , among others , also provide food aid .

the united states has continued to provide its food aid in the form of commodities , while other donors have moved to cash - based systems of providing food aid .

the eu , the world's second - largest supplier of food aid , supplies almost all of its food aid in the form of cash .

most eu cash for food aid is allocated to the wfp .

individual eu member countries retain relatively small percentages of domestically procured food aid , but most of them also provide most of their food aid to the wfp ( also some to pvos ) in the form of cash grants .

in contrast to the united states , which has provided about a third of its commodity food aid for nonemergency or development projects , the eu has ceased to provide commodities to support development projects .

instead , the eu provides food security aid in the form of cash financing of food security projects .

canada , which is an important bilateral donor of food aid , provides all of its aid on a cash basis .

most of its cash contributions go to the wfp , but canadian pvos get some as well .

the wfp and pvos have been using donor funding to procure commodities in developing countries for more than 30 years .

evaluations of lrp have focused on the cost - effectiveness of lrp versus u.s. commodity donations and the timeliness of delivery of lrp versus overseas donations .

the impact of lrp on development has been much less researched .

three recent reports — by the government accountability office ( gao ) , michigan state university ( msu ) , and the organization for economic cooperation and development ( oecd ) — examine issues with respect to lrp .

the potential to involve smallholders and low - income producers in developing countries in lrp has not been extensively explored in the reports examined in this report ( gao , msu , oecd ) .

those reports focused primarily on issues relating to the cost - effectiveness of lrp and the timeliness of deliveries .

however , usaid lrp initiatives and the wfp's purchase for progress program have begun explorations of how low - income farmers in developing countries could participate in lrp efforts carried out by wfp or usaid .

 ( usaid and p4p programs are discussed in the next section. ) .

in the 111 th congress , lrp was dealt with in appropriations bills and in proposed authorizing legislation in both the house and senate .

bills under consideration would give the u.s. government the flexibility to use lrp in response to food emergencies without reducing the funds available for p.l .

480 title ii commodity donations .

the president's fy2010 foreign affairs budget called for $300 million to be allocated to usaid's international disaster assistance ( ida ) program to be used for lrp and the financing of cash transfers and cash vouchers to meet food security objectives .

the house - passed foreign operations appropriations bill ( h.r .

3081 ) provided $200 million of ida funding for these purposes .

the senate committee - reported bill ( s. 1434 ) directed that $1.5 billion of usaid development assistance be allocated to agricultural development and food security efforts , "including for local and regional purchase and distribution of food. .

the final foreign operations appropriations bill , folded into a consolidated measure ( h.r .

3288 , p.l .

111-117 ) discussed local and regional purchase of food aid commodities under the heading of international disaster assistance .

the conference report ( h.rept .

111-366 ) stipulates that "a significant portion of the funds available under this heading ( $845 million ) will support food assistance in fiscal 2010 and will be in addition to the $1.169 billion designated in this act for food security and agricultural development. .

in separate house and senate - passed agriculture appropriations bills ( h.r .

2997 ) , funds for p.l .

480 title ii commodity donations increase from $1.2 billion in fy2009 to $1.7 billion in fy2010 .

s. 384 , the global food security act of 2009 ( lugar ) , was introduced in the senate on february 5 , 2009 , and reported by the senate foreign relations committee on may 13 , 2009 ( s.rept .

111-19 ) .

h.r .

3077 ( mccollum ) , the house companion bill to s. 384 , was introduced on june 26 , 2009 .

among other provisions , s. 384 and h.r .

3077 would authorize the president to provide assistance for unexpected urgent food needs and establish a rapid response to food crises fund to carry out such a program .

the proposed food crisis fund is in addition , and complementary , to food aid provided under 2008 farm bill legislative authorities .

the rapid response fund would allow usaid to quickly engage at the onset of a crisis with the objective of preempting its escalation .

the fund can be used for food and non - food assistance of an emergency nature ; it is not for long - term support or development .

funds may be used for the local and regional purchase and distribution of food .

other food - security - related assistance , in the form of vouchers , cash transfers , safety net programs , or other appropriate assistance of an emergency nature , may also be provided .

s. 384 and h.r .

3077 would authorize $500 million for the emergency rapid response to food crises fund that would remain available until expended .

disbursements from the account must be reported to the appropriate congressional committees not later than five days prior to providing the assistance .

h.r .

2817 , introduced on june 11 , 2009 , includes an endorsement of a coordinated approach to addressing food security concerns — the roadmap to end global hunger — that was developed by a group of 42 u.s. pvos .

the roadmap proposal calls for allocating more than $50 billion to global food security initiatives over a five - year period .

included in the roadmap proposals is an allocation of $7.4 billion for local and regional purchase of food aid commodities and other food security - related activities .

in addition , the roadmap proposal calls for $9.8 billion in food commodity donations over five years through p.l .

480 title ii .

