in the federalist papers , james madison commented that "no man is allowed to be a judge in his own case , because his interest would certainly bias his judgment , and , not improbably , corrupt his integrity .

with equal , nay with greater reason , a body of men are unfit to be both judge and parties at the same time. .

since the first session of congress in 1789 , the house of representatives and the senate have contemplated how to judge fellow members .

investigating and judging members of congress continues to be an issue for congress .

in 1964 , the senate established the select committee on ethics , and in 1967 , the house created the committee on standards of official conduct , which was renamed the committee on ethics in the 112 th congress ( 2011-2012 ) .

these two committees formally assumed the duties of investigating allegations of wrongdoing against members of their respective chambers .

in the house , the committee on ethics has had sole responsibility to investigate and recommend the discipline of members .

self - discipline by the committee on ethics has , at various times , been considered problematic , as members are dependent on one another to do their jobs , bring individual perspectives on chamber rules to investigations , and are judged by the public at the same time they are judging congressional colleagues .

this creates a difficult investigative environment and often leads to closed - door investigations and media allegations of improper enforcement of chamber rules .

historically , congress has used its ethics power neither arbitrarily nor frequently .

congress has , however , "periodically tightened its ethics codes and procedures for dealing with misconduct. .

in addition to amending internal congressional ethics codes and procedures , congress has considered numerous legislative proposals since 1951 to create an independent ethics advisory body that would replace or assist the committee on ethics with investigations or enforcement .

in the 110 th congress ( 2007-2008 ) , the house created the office of congressional ethics ( oce ) to review complaints , and when appropriate , refer findings of fact to the committee on ethics .

the oce is the first independent , outside body charged by congress to investigate complaints against members and refer valid complaints to the committee on ethics .

the oce is intended to perform an important public service for the house and the public by assuring the integrity of the chamber .

it provides a way for groups and individuals to provide information about alleged misconduct by members , officers , and employees of the house to an investigative body .

the office is designed to "supplement but not supplant" the role of the house committee on ethics .

the oce formally opened on january 23 , 2009 , after adopting rules for conducting investigations and a code of conduct for its board members and staff .

it has jurisdiction only over current members , officers , and employees of the house .

this report focuses only on the house of representatives and the house ethics process .

since the establishment of the senate select committee on ethics and the house committee on ethics , members of both committees have sometimes been perceived as reluctant to investigate and discipline colleagues .

seeking to be fair and not to pre - judge or prejudice the consideration of an allegation , the committees operate with little publicity .

as a result they have often been criticized by the media for "failure to properly implement and enforce the internal rules of their respective house of congress. .

until 2008 , these perceptions led to unsuccessful calls for investigative and enforcement mechanisms to supplement or replace the ethics committees .

over the years , proposals have been offered to create an office of public integrity , an independent ethics commission , and a public review board or office within the legislative branch , composed of former members of congress , retired judges , private citizens , or a combination of these .

for some , having a panel of senior statesmen help investigate allegations of wrongdoing by members of congress is viewed as a way to strengthen congress .

dennis thompson , a harvard professor of public policy and congressional scholar , has long advocated countering the institutional conflict of interest inherent in members judging members with an independent body such as an ethics commission .

thompson sees such an outside body as likely to reach more objective and independent judgments .

it could more credibly protect members' rights and enforce institutional obligations without regard to political or personal loyalties .

it would provide more effective accountability and help restore the confidence of the public .

and — an advantage that should appeal to congress — it would reduce the time members would have to spend on the chores of ethics regulation .

beginning in 1951 , even before the ethics committees were created , there were legislative proposals to create an independent entity to investigate complaints in both the house and the senate or within one house .

none of these were enacted .

only the legislative proposals that prompted hearings are discussed below .

proposals receiving no committee action are listed in table 1 and table 2 .

on january 31 , 2007 , house speaker nancy pelosi and minority leader john boehner announced the creation of the special task force on ethics enforcement in the house of representatives .

chaired by representative michael capuano , the task force was charged with considering "whether the house should create an outside enforcement entity , based on examples in state legislatures and private entities. .

during the next eight months , the task force met 29 times in executive session to discuss the investigative process and to hear from current and former members of congress , academic experts , and citizen advocacy groups .

the executive sessions both preceded and followed a public hearing in april 2007 .

establishment of the task force was part of speaker nancy pelosi's emphasis on ethics reform in the 110 th congress and followed several congressional scandals in the previous congresses .

in january 2006 , congressional democrats from around the country joined in a washington , dc , press conference to pledge "honest leadership and open government. .

at the same time , public citizen , a watchdog group , issued a list of six benchmarks for reform which included the establishment of an independent congressional office of public integrity to monitor allegations of ethics violations and refer them to the congressional ethics committees .

public opinion also appeared to favor reform ; a january 2006 cnn / usatoday / gallup poll found that "corruption in government" was ranked as an "extremely important" or "very important" issue by 81% of respondents .

the oce held its first public meeting on january 23 , 2009 , and began to implement the structural requirements of h.res .

895 .

it also adopted rules of procedure , a code of conduct , and rules for the conduct of a review .

the office of congressional ethics was most recently reauthorized by the house as part of the rules package ( h.res .

6 ) adopted by the 116 th congress on january 3 , 2019 .

the following sections outline the structure , powers , authority , and procedures of the oce .

creation of the oce changed the relationship between the public and the house ethics process .

even with oce active since 2009 , there continue to be options which might further clarify the oce's relationship with the public , rank - and - file house members , and the committee on ethics .

these options each have advantages and disadvantages for the structure of the oce , its relationship to the committee on ethics , and the house's constitutional responsibility to investigate its members .

consequently , careful comparison of all options for the future of the oce may be useful to ensure that the most effective process is created while ensuring the continued enforcement of house ethics procedures .

crs takes no position on any of the options identified in this report .

the oce exists pursuant to h.res .

895 ( 110 th congress ) and faces renewal on a biannual basis as part of the house rules package .

in january 2019 , the oce was reauthorized when h.res .

6 was agreed to .

because the oce operates pursuant to a house resolution , a change in party control or a decision to exclude the oce from the rules package in a future congress might result in the elimination of the office .

if the house wanted to ensure the oce's continuation , it could create a statutory ethics entity .

a permanent statutory office would not require reauthorization each congress .

if the house chose to create a statutory office , should the house desire to alter or terminate the program , subsequent legislation would be necessary to amend or terminate the program .

creation of a statutory ethics office , even if only in the house , would require the concurrence of the senate and the president's signature .

prior to the creation of the oce , the committee on ethics did not allow public complaints to be to made against members of congress .

if the house wanted to provide an opportunity for citizens to be involved in the ethics process without the creation of an independent ethics entity ( either by resolution or statute ) , the house could amend house or committee rules to allow the committee on ethics to receive formal complaints or information from the general public .

allowing the public to provide information directly to the committee on ethics could allay constitutional concerns over the involvement of an independent entity in investigating and recommending action on internal house enforcement matters .

instead of giving power to an outside entity , the committee on ethics could establish mechanisms for the intake and evaluation of citizen complaints prior to investigation and potential action of the full committee .

this work could be handled by a subcommittee or by the whole committee .

should the committee on ethics assume this responsibility , the committee's workload could increase substantially .

the oce specifies the number of contacts its staff has with the public and the number of investigations authorized as part of quarterly reports .

it is possible that providing the public with direct access to the committee on ethics might result in more information ( at least at the level currently handled by the oce ) being provided by the public .

in addition , a citizen or group providing information might expect the committee to provide updates on the status of investigations .

the relationship between the oce and the committee on ethics continues to evolve .

under the provisions of h.res .

895 , as the oce completes second - phase reviews and determines that a further investigation is necessary , the oce board forwards a report and supporting documentation to the committee on ethics .

the house could provide the oce with limited subpoena power to enable the oce board to conduct more thorough investigations prior to referral to the committee on ethics .

providing subpoena power to the oce might reduce the workload and investigative burden of the committee on ethics and prevent duplicative efforts on behalf of the oce and committee staffs .

chairman capuano , in the task force report , explained that consideration was given to empowering the oce with subpoena power .

during the discussions , the task force sought the professional opinion of numerous experts ( including the house parliamentarian , house general counsel , and the congressional research service ) .

the decision not to include subpoena authority was based on various factors , including timeliness .

challenges to a subpoena , it was felt , could hinder and complicate the oce process and prevent a prompt investigation .

moreover , because of congress's reluctance to delegate subpoena authority to independent entities , if the task force had recommended giving the oce that authority , the legislative process might have been delayed while the house debated the merits of the proposal .

currently , if a subpoena is deemed necessary , the house provides the oce with the ability to recommend to the committee on ethics that a subpoena be issued , as part of the authority already delegated to the committee .

the house could also provide a mechanism whereby the oce could formally follow up on investigations forwarded to the committee on ethics .

pursuant to current practice , the oce has no recourse to follow a case once it is referred to the committee .

committee rules require that the committee release the oce report under certain circumstances .

on march 5 , 2009 , representative ron paul introduced h.res .

216 .

the resolution , if agreed to by the house , would have amended house rules to require a certain period of time to elapse between introduction of legislation and a vote by the house .

included in the resolutions provisions , rule xxix would be amended to allow citizens to petition the board of the office of congressional ethics to investigate potential violations of the new rule .

notwithstanding any provision of these rules , any citizen who is eligible to vote and who is not an employee of the executive or judicial branch of the government may petition the board of the office of congressional ethics to investigate allegations that a member voted for any measure that violated this rule .

the addition to the oce's jurisdiction by amending house rules could be a way to involve the investigative expertise of the oce in other house matters .

h.res .

216 implied the oce's authority to take "complaints" from the general public .

this would appear to be incongruent with oce's current mission to take "information" from public sources and would potentially need to be clarified by the board or by congress .

an amendment to the rules of the house that would reassign the functions of the oce to the house ethics committee was initially proposed to be included as part of the rules package for the 115 th congress ( 2017-2018 ) .

this language , which was not included in h.res .

5 , would have created a new office of congressional complaint review , as an office within the ethics committee .

while much of the investigative structure of oce would have been retained by this new entity , the timeline for completing a preliminary and second - phase review would have been altered , and the use of anonymous information in review would have been prohibited .

the house might determine that the current relationship between the oce and the committee on ethics is effective .

instead of creating an independent statutory ethics entity , reforming the committee on ethics , or amending oce statute , the house could continue to consider the oce as part of the rules package in subsequent congresses .

changes to the oce could be made on an as - needed basis through house resolutions or through changes to the rules package for subsequent congresses .

