regional trade agreements ( rtas ) throughout the world have increased since the early 1990s .

many members of the world trade organization ( wto ) are focusing on regional or bilateral free trade agreements as a key component of their foreign and commercial policy .

this interest is evident among industrialized and developing countries , and throughout various world regions .

mexico is a member of the wto , which permits members to enter into regional trade integration arrangements under certain conditions that are defined within specific wto rules .

since the early 1990s , mexico has had a growing commitment to trade liberalization and has a trade policy that is among the most open in the world .

mexico has actively pursued free trade agreements ( ftas ) with other countries to help promote economic growth , but also to reduce its economic dependence on the united states .

the united states is , by far , mexico's most significant trading partner .

over 80% of mexico's exports are destined for the united states .

in an effort to increase trade with other countries , mexico has entered into 11 free trade agreements with 46 countries .

mexico is a signatory to the trans - pacific partnership ( tpp ) , a proposed free trade agreement ( fta ) signed by 12 asia - pacific countries on february 4 , 2016 , after eight years of negotiation .

it would require congressional ratification before it could become effective .

on january 30 , 2017 , the united states gave notice to the other tpp signatories that it does not intend to ratify the agreement , effectively ending the u.s. ratification process and tpp's potential entry into force , unless the administration changes its position .

mexico and other tpp countries have proposed moving forward on an fta without the participation of the united states .

in the 115 th congress , congressional interest related to the trade and economic relationship with mexico may involve issues related to the north american free trade agreement ( nafta ) and a possible renegotiation , the effects of nafta , mexico's ongoing efforts to form trade agreements with other countries , the status of the proposed tpp and the possibility of its moving forward without the united states , economic conditions in mexico , mexico's labor market , and mexican migration to the united states .

this report provides an overview of mexico's free trade agreements , its motivations for trade liberalization and entering into free trade agreements , trade trends with the united states and other countries , and some of the issues mexico faces in addressing its economic challenges .

this report will be updated as events warrant .

economic motivations are generally the major driving force for the formation of free trade agreements among countries , but there are other reasons countries enter into ftas , including political and security factors .

mexico's primary motivation for the unilateral trade liberalization efforts of the late 1980s and early 1990s was to improve economic conditions in the country , which policymakers hoped would lead to greater investor confidence and attract more foreign investment .

this motivation was a major factor in negotiating nafta with the united states and canada .

the permanent lowering of trade and investment barriers and predictable trade rules provided by ftas can improve investor confidence in a country , which helps attract foreign direct investment ( fdi ) .

multinational firms invest in countries to gain access to markets , but they also do it to lower production costs .

mexico has other motivations for continuing trade liberalization with other countries , such as expanding market access for its exports and decreasing its reliance on the united states as an export market .

by entering into trade agreements with other countries , mexico is seeking to achieve economies of scale in certain sectors of the economy and to expand its export market .

ftas provide partners with broader market access for their goods and services .

countries can benefit from trade agreements , because producers are able to lower their unit costs by producing larger volumes for regional markets in addition to their own domestic markets .

when more units of a good or a service can be produced on a larger scale , companies are able to decrease cost of production .

mexico's high dependence on the united states as an export market is a likely motivation for seeking ftas and other regional trade arrangements with other countries .

the slow progress in multilateral negotiations in the wto may be another likely factor .

some countries see smaller trade arrangements as "building blocks" for multilateral agreements .

other motivations could be political .

mexico may be seeking to demonstrate good governance by locking in political and economic reforms through trading partnerships .

from the 1930s through part of the 1980s , mexico maintained a strong protectionist trade policy in an effort to be independent of any foreign power and as a means to promote domestic - led industrialization .

mexico established a policy of import substitution in the 1930s , consisting of a broad , general protection of the entire industrial sector through tight restrictions on foreign investment and by controlling the exchange rate to encourage domestic industrial growth .

mexico also nationalized the oil industry at this time .

these protectionist economic policies remained in effect until the country began to experience a series of economic challenges several decades later .

in the mid - 1980s , mexico's economy was on the verge of collapse as a result of the 1982 debt crisis in which the mexican government was unable to meet its foreign debt obligations .

much of the government's efforts in addressing these economic challenges were placed on privatizing state industries and moving toward trade liberalization .

mexico had few options but to open its economy through trade liberalization .

in the late 1980s and early into the 1990s , mexico implemented a series of measures to restructure the economy that included unilateral trade liberalization , replacing import substitution policies with others aimed at attracting foreign investment , lowering trade barriers , and making the country competitive in nonoil exports .

in 1986 , it acceded to the general agreement on tariffs and trade ( gatt ) , assuring further trade liberalization measures that led to closer ties with the united states .

mexico and the united states began nafta negotiations in the early 1990s .

canada later joined the negotiations , and the three countries signed the agreement on december 17 , 1992 .

before nafta came into force mexico had already entered into its first agreement for free trade in goods , the mexico - chile fta .

nafta entered into force with much broader provisions than the chile fta , such as trade in services , government procurement , dispute settlement procedures , and intellectual property rights protection .

in 1999 , the original text of the mexico - chile fta was complemented with broader provisions , similar to those under nafta .

mexico's initial motivation in pursuing ftas with the united states and other countries was to stabilize the mexican economy , which had experienced many difficulties throughout most of the 1980s with a significant deepening of poverty .

the expectation in mexico was that ftas would increase export diversification ; attract fdi ; and help create jobs , increase wage rates , and reduce poverty .

mexico's pursuit of free trade agreements with other countries is a way to bring benefits to the economy , but also to reduce its economic dependence on the united states .

the united states is , by far , mexico's most significant trading partner .

approximately 80% of mexico's exports go to the united states and 47% of mexico's imports come from the united states .

in an effort to diversify and increase trade with other countries , mexico has a total of 11 trade agreements involving 46 countries ( see figure 1 ) .

these include agreements with many countries in the western hemisphere including the united states and canada , chile , colombia , peru , and uruguay .

mexico has also ratified an fta with central america ( costa rica , el salvador , honduras , guatemala , and nicaragua ) that was signed on november 22 , 2011 .

as of september 1 , 2013 , the fta had entered into force among all 6 parties .

mexico has also negotiated free trade agreements outside of the western hemisphere and , in july 2000 , entered into agreements with israel and the european union .

mexico became the first latin american country to have preferential access to these two markets .

mexico has completed a trade agreement with the european free trade association of iceland , liechtenstein , norway , and switzerland .

the mexican government expanded its outreach to asia in 2000 by entering into negotiations with singapore , korea , and japan .

in 2004 , japan and mexico signed an economic partnership agreement , the first comprehensive trade agreement that japan signed with any country .

however , the large number of trade agreements has not yet been successful in significantly decreasing mexico's dependence on trade with the united states .

mexico has pursued further trade liberalization such as the proposed trans - pacific partnership agreement , the pacific alliance , and other efforts .

in 2016 , mexico's leading export items were passenger motor vehicles , motor vehicle parts , motor vehicles for transport of goods , automatic data process machines , and electrical apparatus for telephones .

leading import items were motor vehicle parts , refined petroleum oil products , electronic integrated circuits , electric apparatus for telephones , and automatic data process machines ( see table 2 ) .

since trade liberalization , mexico's trade with the world has risen rapidly , with exports increasing faster than imports .

mexico's exports to all countries increased 515% between 1994 and 2016 , from $60.8 billion to $373.9 billion ( see figure 2 ) .

although the 2009 economic downturn resulted in a decline in the value of exports , exports regained their strength in the following years .

mexico's imports from all countries increased from $79.3 billion in 1994 to $387.1 billion in 2016 , an increase of 388% .

mexico's trade balance went from a deficit of $18.5 billion in 1994 to surpluses of $7.1 billion in 1995 and $6.5 billion in 1996 .

since 1998 , mexico's trade balance with all countries has remained in deficit , equaling $13.2 billion in 2016 ; its trade balance with the united states was a surplus of $122.0 billion in 2016 as shown in figure 2 .

mexico's reliance on the united states as a trade partner has remained at relatively the same level over the years , despite its efforts to diversify trade ( see figure 3 ) .

the percentage of total exports going to the united states decreased slightly between 1996 and 2016 , from 83% to 81% .

in 2016 , 93% of mexico's exports went to countries with which it has ftas .

exports to the nafta countries accounted for 84% of total exports , while exports to the european union accounted for only 5% .

in imports , the u.s. share of mexico's total imports has declined steadily over the years .

between 1996 and 2016 , the share of u.s. products entering the mexican market decreased from 75% to 47% , while the share of products from nafta as a region declined from 77% to 49% ( see figure 3 ) .

during the same time period , the share of mexico's imports from non - fta countries increased from 8% to 34% .

although mexico does not have an fta with china , mexico's imports from china have increased considerably in recent years .

imports from china went up from $760 million , or 1% of total imports , in 1996 to $69.5 billion , or 18% of total imports , in 2016 .

the value of mexico's imports from china is higher than that from the european union or japan .

the united states continues to be the dominant export market for mexican goods , despite the mexican government's efforts to liberalize trade with other countries .

the reliance on the united states as an export market makes the mexican economy more susceptible to economic and political conditions in the united states .

for example , the global financial crisis of 2009 , which contributed to a downturn in the u.s. economy , resulted in the deepest recession in the mexican economy since the 1930s .

more recently , the mexican peso weakened to record lows in the aftermath of the u.s. election of president donald trump in november 2016 in which he made campaign promises to withdraw from nafta and build a border wall with mexico .

some industry experts maintain that mexico's manufacturing sector has numerous strategic and financial benefits for foreign companies seeking a competitive advantage and that it can be more advantageous for u.s. manufacturers to invest in mexico rather than china .

for example , labor costs in china have risen over the past 10 years and are higher in some sectors than those in mexico .

another advantage that mexico has in comparison to china is the proximity it has to the united states , which provides more cultural similarities , increased efficiencies in manufacturing operations , lower transportation costs , and greater supply chain efficiencies .

nonetheless , mexico continues to face strong competition from china and other asian economies in the manufacturing sector .

in 2003 , china replaced mexico as the second - highest source of u.s. imports .

mexico's numerous free trade agreements and its trade liberalization policy are of interest to u.s. policymakers because of the implications for u.s. - mexico trade , economic stability in mexico , and the overall relationship between the two countries .

economic conditions in mexico are important to the united states because of the proximity of mexico to the united states , the close trade and investment interactions , and other social and political implications .

another issue of interest to u.s. policymakers is the effect of mexico's ftas on u.s. exports to mexico .

the liberalization of mexico's trade and investment barriers to other countries has resulted in increasing competition for u.s. goods and services in the mexican market .

consequently , the u.s. share of goods imported by mexico has been falling steadily over the years .

the initial trade policies of the trump administration include u.s. withdrawal from tpp and the possibility of a renegotiation of nafta .

in regard to the tpp , some tpp signatories have announced their intention to move forward on a similar agreement without the united states , which may affect u.s. competitiveness in certain markets .

canada and mexico have numerous ftas with other countries and may continue to seek to diversify trade through ftas .

mexico's economy minister stated that mexico is willing to negotiate a new agreement with the asia - pacific region that may be similar to tpp and include china in the discussions .

in regard to nafta , none of the parties have formally announced what provisions they would seek in a renegotiation of the agreement .

any changes in nafta could bring disruptions to the extensive supply chains throughout north america , which could affect economic conditions and jobs in all three countries , especially in mexico .

a number of studies suggest that while mexico's trade liberalization policy , mainly nafta , may have brought economic and social benefits to the mexican economy as a whole , the benefits have not been evenly distributed throughout the country and poverty persists in some regions of the country .

given that nafta is more than 20 years old , renegotiation may provide opportunities to address issues not currently covered in the agreement .

topics of renegotiations could include services trade , rules of origin , government procurement , intellectual property rights protection , labor issues , and the environment .

mexico has stated that it would consider modernizing nafta , but it is not clear how this would take place .

mexican government officials have hinted that mexico may seek to broaden nafta negotiations to include bilateral or trilateral cooperation on various issues , especially security and immigration .

