on december 10 , 2009 , the house adopted the conference report ( h.rept .

111-366 ) to accompany the department of transportation , housing and urban development appropriations act , 2010 , and retitled as the consolidated appropriations act 2010 ( h.r .

3288 ) .

the senate adopted the conference report on december 13 , 2009 .

division e of the consolidated appropriations act 2010 included a compromise version of the house - and senate - passed versions of military construction and veterans affairs and related agencies appropriations act 2010 ( milcon - va appropriations act of 2010 ) .

the consolidated appropriations act was singed into law on december 16 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

the milcon - va appropriations act , 2010 , provides a total of approximately $45.1 billion for the veterans health administration ( vha ) of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) .

this is a 7.4% increase over the fy2009 enacted amount and the same as the administration's budget request for vha ( see table 1 ) .

this amount includes funding for the medical services ( $34.7 billion ) , medical support and compliance ( $4.9 billion ) , medical facilities ( $4.9 billion ) , and medical and prosthetic research ( $581.0 million ) accounts .

the consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

111-117 ) also provides approximately $48.2 billion in advance appropriations for the medical services , medical support and compliance , and medical facilities accounts to be available in fy2011 .

as seen in figure 1 , funding for vha has seen significant growth between fy1995 and fy2009 .

during this time period funding for vha increased by 154% , while the average annual increase was 6.9% .

from fy1995 to fy2005 the average annual increase was 6.7% whereas average annual increase between fy2006 and fy2009 was 12.7% ( figure 1 ) .

the growth in funding could be attributed to aging of many world war ii and korean war veterans with a greater need for health care services , veterans' increasing reliance on vha's pharmaceutical benefits , and more recent veterans from operation enduring freedom ( oef ) and operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) accessing the va health care system .

veterans from oef and oif account for a rising proportion of va's total patient work load .

in fy2010 oef and oif patients will represent about 7% of the overall va patient population , compared to about 3% in fy2006 .

the remainder of this report is organized as follows .

the first section of the report provides an overview of the department of veterans affairs ( va ) health care system .

the second section provides a description of the veteran patient population and eligibility for va health care .

the third section provides a brief overview of the fy2009 veterans health administration ( vha ) budget .

the fourth section discusses the fy2010 vha budget including house and senate action .

lastly , the report discusses major va health care issues as they pertain to the fy2010 budget .

the history of the present day department of veterans affairs ( va ) can be traced back to july 21 , 1930 , when president hoover issued executive order 5398 consolidating separate veterans' programs and creating an independent federal agency known as the veterans administration .

on october 25 , 1988 , president reagan signed legislation ( p.l .

100-527 ) creating a new federal cabinet - level department of veterans affairs to replace the veterans administration effective march 15 , 1989 .

the va provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules including hospital and medical care , disability compensation and pensions , education , vocational rehabilitation and employment services , assistance to homeless veterans , home loan guarantees , administration of life insurance as well as traumatic injury protection insurance for servicemembers , and death benefits that cover burial expenses .

the department carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals ( bva ) .

the veterans health administration ( vha ) is responsible for health care services and medical and prosthetic research programs .

the veterans benefits administration ( vba ) is responsible for , among other things , providing compensations , pensions , and education assistance .

the national cemetery administration ( nca ) is responsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries ; providing grants to states for establishing , expanding , or improving state veterans cemeteries ; and providing headstones and markers for the graves of eligible persons , among other things .

the va's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts .

mandatory funding supports disability compensation , pension benefits , education , vocational rehabilitation , and life insurance , among other benefits and services .

discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services including medical care .

figure 2 provides a breakdown of fy2009 budget allocations for both mandatory and discretionary programs .

in fy2009 the total va budget authority was approximately $96 billion ; discretionary budget authority accounted for about 51.2% ( $49.2 billion ) of the total , with about 85% of this discretionary funding going toward supporting va health care programs .

the vha operates the nation's largest integrated direct health care delivery system .

while medicare , medicaid , and the state children's health insurance program ( chip ) are also publicly funded programs , most health care services under these programs are delivered by private providers in private facilities .

in contrast , the va health care system is a truly public health care system in the sense that the federal government owns the medical facilities and employs the health care providers .

the va's health care system is organized into 21 geographically defined veterans integrated service networks ( visns ) ( see figure 3 ) .

although policies and guidelines are developed at va headquarters to be applied throughout the va health care system , management authority for basic decision making and budgetary responsibilities are delegated to the visns .

congressionally appropriated medical care funds are allocated to the visns based on the veterans equitable resource allocation ( vera ) system , which generally bases funding on patient workload .

visns , in turn , allocate funds to the medical centers within their networks .

prior to the implementation of the vera system , resources were allocated to facilities based primarily on their historical expenditures .

while a thorough description of vera is beyond the scope of this report , generally vera has two types of funds known as general purpose funds and specific purpose funds .

general purpose funds encompass about 83.5% of vha total budget allocations to the visns .

general purpose funds are distributed to the 21 visns at the beginning of each fiscal year and are comprised of 8 elements .

these elements include basic care , complex care , adjustments for high cost patients , geographic price adjustment , research support , education support , equipment , and non - recurring maintenance .

the specific purpose funds are given to the 21 visns during the year for specific activities including prosthetics , mental health , homeless grants and per diem program , state home per diems , transplants , clinical trainees , readjustment counseling , and medical facility activations .

under vera each network is provided an allocation that takes into account its unique characteristics , and that is also adjusted to account for those veterans who receive care in more than one network .

as seen in table 2 the largest allocations of funds in fy2009 were to visns: 8 ( florida and puerto rico ) , 16 ( mississippi , arkansas , louisiana , oklahoma , some parts of texas ) , 22 ( some parts of california and nevada ) , 7 ( alabama , georgia , and south carolina ) , and 21 ( some parts of california , and nevada , hawaii and philippines ) .

while visns 8 , 16 , 7 , and 4 have the greatest number of unique veteran patients , vera funding is not driven by veteran patient population alone , but is adjusted for differences in patient mix , high cost patients , and geographic costs , among other factors .

as of fy2009 , vha operates 153 hospitals ( medical centers ) , 135 nursing homes , 803 community - based outpatient clinics ( cbocs ) , 6 independent outpatient clinics , 271 readjustment counseling centers ( vet centers ) .

vha also operates 10 mobile outpatient clinics .

the vha pays for care provided to veterans by private - sector providers on a fee basis under certain circumstances .

inpatient and outpatient care are also provided in the private sector to eligible dependents of veterans under the civilian health and medical program of the department of veterans affairs ( champva ) .

the vha also provides grants for construction of state - owned nursing homes and domiciliary facilities and collaborates with the department of defense ( dod ) in sharing health care resources and services .

apart from providing direct patient care to veterans , vha's other statutory missions are to conduct medical research , to serve as a contingency back up to the department of defense ( dod ) medical system during a national security emergency , to provide support to the national disaster medical system and the department of health and human services as necessary , and to train health care professionals in order to provide an adequate supply of health personnel for va and the nation .

during fy2009 , the vha had an estimated total enrolled veteran population of 8.3 million and provided medical care to about 5.4 million unique veteran patients ( see table 3 and table 4 ) .

according to vha estimates , the number of unique veteran patients is estimated to increase by approximately 116,000 , from 5.42 million in fy2009 to 5.53 million in fy2010 .

as shown in table 4 there will be an estimated 2.1% increase in the total number of unique patients ( both veterans and non - veterans ) , from 5.92 million in fy2009 to 6.05 million in fy2010 .

the number of patients includes veterans from operation iraqi freedom ( oif ) and operation enduring freedom ( oef ) .

in fy2010 , vha estimates that it will treat about 419,000 oif and oef veterans , an increase of about 56,000 patients , or 15.4% , over the fy2009 level .

in fy2010 , it is estimated that va will be treating over 515,000 non - veterans , an increase of over 5,900 or 1.2% , over the fy2009 level .

the total number of outpatient visits , including visits to vet centers , reached 67.6 million during fy2008 and is projected to increase to approximately 70.9 million in fy2009 and 74.5 million in fy2010 .

the vha estimates that in fy2009 it will spend approximately 56.2% of its medical services obligations on outpatient care .

historically , the major determinant of vha's budget size and character was the number of operating beds — which was controlled by congress .

the preliminary budget estimate , to a large extent , was based on the funding and activity of the previous year .

vha developed system - wide workload estimates , by type of care , by forecasts submitted by field stations .

unit costs were derived from the field stations' reports of the estimated distribution of expenses by type of care .

costs associated with new programs were estimated by va central office and added to the budget estimate .

the costs associated with staffing improvements , pay increases and inflation were also added to this estimate .

therefore , it could be stated that the principal assumption at each phase of the budget formulation process was that the preceding year's budget was the starting point .

in 1996 , congress enacted the departments of veterans affairs and housing and urban development and independent agencies appropriations act of 1997 ( p.l .

104-204 ) .

this act required vha to develop a plan for the allocation of health care resources to ensure that veterans eligible for medical care who have similar economic status and eligibility priority have similar access to such care , regardless of where they reside .

the plan was to "account for forecasts in expected workload and to ensure fairness to facilities that provide cost - efficient health care. .

in response to the above - mentioned congressional mandate , as well as the mandate in the health care eligibility reform act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-262 ) that required the vha to establish a priority - based enrollment system , vha established the enrollee health care projection model in 1998 .

the vha's the enrollee health care projection model ( ehcpm ) , which has evolved over time , develops estimates of future veteran enrollment , enrollees' expected utilization of health care services , and the costs associated with that utilization .

these 20-year projections are by fiscal year , enrollment priority , age , veterans integrated service networks ( visn ) , market , and facility .

the vha budget is formulated using the model projections .

vha's budget request to congress begins with the formulations of the budget based on the ehcpm to estimate the demand for medical services among veterans in future years .

these estimates are then used to develop a budget request that is then included with the total va budget request to congress .

the vha is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue .

although the appropriations account structure has been subject to change from year to year , the appropriation accounts used to support the vha traditionally include medical care , medical and prosthetic research , and medical administration .

in addition , congress also appropriates funds for construction of medical facilities through a larger appropriations account for construction for all va facilities .

in fy2004 , "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," congress changed the vha's appropriations structure .

the department of veterans affairs and housing and urban development and independent agencies appropriations act , 2004 ( p.l .

108-199 , h.rept .

108-401 ) , funded vha through four accounts: ( 1 ) medical services , ( 2 ) medical administration ( currently known as medical support and compliance ) , ( 3 ) medical facilities , and ( 4 ) medical and prosthetic research .

provided below are brief descriptions of these accounts .

on february 4 , 2008 , president george w. bush submitted his fy2009 budget proposal to congress .

the administration requested a total of $39.2 billion ( excluding collections ) for vha .

this was a 5.3% , or $2 billion increase compared to the fy2008 enacted level .

including total available resources ( including medical collections ) the administration's budget would have provided $41.1 billion for vha .

the president's budget proposal also requested $4.7 billion for the medical facilities account , an increase of $561 million over the fy2008 enacted level .

the administration's budget proposal for fy2009 requested $442 million for the medical and prosthetic research account , a 7.9% decrease ( $38 million ) below the fy2008 enacted level .

as in previous budget requests ( fy2003 through fy2008 ) , the administration's fy2009 budget request included several cost - sharing proposals .

a coalition of veterans' service organizations ( vsos ) has been calling on congress to provide vha with a budget which is "sufficient , timely , and predictable. .

these organizations have asserted that vha has underestimated its budget in the past .

moreover , vsos contend that congress has not enacted the va budget by the beginning of the fiscal year .

according to these organizations the delays in the enactment of the budget have exacerbated operational challenges — such as , differing capital expenditures , delaying recruitment , restricting acquisitions , limiting maintenance — faced by vha network directors .

to mitigate these issues vso's have proposed that congress change the funding process for vha to an advance appropriation .

in the 111 th congress h.r .

1016 and s. 423 were introduced , and these measures would authorize advance appropriations for certain medical care accounts of the department of veterans affairs by providing two - fiscal year budget authority .

the house passed h.r .

1016 ( h.rept .

111-171 ) as amended on june 23 , and the senate veterans affairs committee reported s. 423 on july 8 ( s.rept .

111-41 ) .

s. 423 passed the senate on august 6 , 2009 , as a substitute amendment to h.r .

1016 .

on october 8 , the house agreed to the senate amendment pursuant to h.res .

804 , and the senate agreed to the house amendment to the senate amendment on october 13 .

the veterans health care budget reform and transparency act of 2009 ( h.r .

1016 ) was signed into law ( p.l .

111-81 ) on october 22 .

under p.l .

111-81 beginning with fy2011 , advance appropriations is authorized for the medical services , medical support and compliance , and medical facilities , accounts of the vha .

it also requires the va to provide additional detailed budget estimates in support of advance appropriations for these accounts in the president's annual budget request to congress .

it also requires the va to submit a report to congress , no later than july 31 of each year , on the sufficiency of the department's resources for the provision of medical care for the upcoming fiscal year .

furthermore , the act would require the comptroller general ( u.s. government accountability office ) to conduct a study of the adequacy and accuracy of projections for health care expenditures and submit reports to the appropriate committees of congress and to the secretary of veterans affairs , in 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 .

these reports must state whether the amounts requested in the president's budget are consistent with anticipated expenditures for health care in such fiscal year as determined utilizing the enrollee health care projection model .

the comptroller general is required to submit these reports not later than 120 days after the president has submitted his annual budget request to congress .

since january 17 , 2003 , the va has not enrolled veterans in priority group 8 unless they had been previously enrolled in another priority group and no longer qualified for enrollment in that previous priority group ( see appendix a ) .

since the suspension was promulgated , veterans advocates have urged congress to lift the suspension on priority group 8 veterans since they believe that all veterans must be able to receive care from the va because they have served their country .

the veterans health care eligibility reform act of 1996 ( p.l .

104-262 ) included language that stipulated that medical care to veterans will be furnished to the extent appropriations were made available by congress on an annual basis .

based on this statutory authority , the secretary of veterans affairs announced on january 17 , 2003 that va would temporarily suspend enrolling priority group 8 veterans .

those who enrolled prior to january 17 , 2003 in va's health care system were not to be affected by this suspension .

va claimed that , despite its funding increases , it could not provide all enrolled veterans with timely access to medical services because of the increase in the number of veterans seeking care from va .

the consolidated security , disaster assistance , and continuing appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) was enacted on september 30 , 2008 .

the accompanying report language stated that funding "has been provided within the medical services ; medical support and compliance ; medical facilities ; construction , minor projects ; and information technology systems accounts to support increased enrollment for priority 8 veterans whose income exceeds the current veterans means test and geographic means test income thresholds by 10 % or less. .

p.l .

110-329 provided $375 million for fy2009 to fund this increased enrollment .

on january 21 , 2009 , va issued regulations indicating that it plans to enroll an estimated 258,705 new priority group 8 veterans .

va began enrolling new veterans starting june 15 , 2009 .

table 6 provides details of the projected enrollment and expenditures under the current suspension scenario for fy2009 , and estimated enrollment and expenditure figures under the proposed expanded enrollment scenario — reopening enrollment for priority group 8 veterans whose incomes exceed the current va means test and geographic means test income thresholds by 10% or less — for fy2009 .

furthermore , as stated before , the president's fy2010 budget request to congress also states that by 2013 va plans to enroll about 550,000 new nonservice - connected veterans .

a veteran applying for enrollment on or after june 15 , 2009 , who does not qualify for a higher priority group and whose income exceeds va's national and geographically - adjusted means test threshold by 10% of less will be placed in priority group 8b ( if the veteran has a noncompensable 0% service - connected condition ) or 8d ( if the veteran has no service - connected condition ) and enrolled in the va health care system .

this new financial threshold is referred to as the enrollment threshold ( see appendix d ) .

veterans who applied on or after january 1 , 2009 and were denied enrollment have been notified that va will re - determine their enrollment after june 15 , 2009 .

because va uses previous year's income in its enrollment determination , veterans who applied but were rejected for enrollment prior to january 1 , 2009 may complete a va form 10-10ezr , health benefits renewal form to have their eligibility for enrollment reassessed against the new enrollment threshold .

veterans may also self - determine their eligibility for enrollment under this new provision by entering their information into va's on - line calculator in general , veterans who are unable to defray the expenses of necessary care are eligible to receive care from the va free of charge .

to determine if the veteran is eligible for free health care , the va conducts a financial assessment .

under current law and regulations va uses the veteran's previous year's ( that is , the calendar year preceding the year in which the veteran applies for care or services ) total household income ( including income of the veteran , spouse , and dependent children ) to make this determination .

however , in accordance with current va regulations , if a veteran's current year income is projected to be less than his / her prior year's income , the veteran can submit a request for a hardship determination .

thus , a veteran meeting this eligibility criterion may be placed in priority group 5 even though the veteran's prior year total gross household income is above the applicable national va means test threshold .

furthermore , under certain financial hardship circumstances , va may use the projected income for the current year of the veteran , spouse , and dependent children if the projected income is below the va's means test threshold and above a geographic means test threshold .

therefore , a veteran meeting this eligibility criterion may be placed in priority group 7 even though the veteran's prior year total gross household income is above the applicable geographic means test for the area in which the veteran resides .

circumstances that would warrant financial hardship consideration would be loss of employment , business bankruptcy , or unreimbursed medical expenses paid by the veteran or spouse for a family member or others for whom the veteran has a "moral responsibility to assist. .

the hardship determination will be valid through the end of the calendar year in which it was approved .

veterans must contact their nearest va medical facility to determine if they would be eligible to enroll in va health care under the financial hardship criteria .

in general , the beneficiary travel program reimburses certain veterans for the cost of travel to va medical facilities when seeking health care .

p.l .

76-432 , passed by congress on march 14 , 1940 , mandated va to pay either the actual travel expenses , or an allowance based upon the mileage traveled by any veteran traveling to and from a va facility or other place for the purpose of examination , treatment , or care .

p.l .

85-857 , signed into law on september 2 , 1958 , authorized va to pay necessary travel expenses to any veteran traveling to or from a va facility or other place in connection with vocational rehabilitation counseling or for the purpose of examination , treatment , or care .

however , this law changed va's travel reimbursement into a discretionary authority by stating that va "may pay" expenses of travel .

due to rapidly increasing costs of the beneficiary travel program , on march 12 , 1987 , va published final regulations that sharply curtailed eligibility for the beneficiary travel program .

under these regulations beneficiary travel payments to eligible veterans were paid when specialized modes of transportation , such as ambulance or wheelchair van , were medically required .

in addition , payment was authorized for travel in conjunction with compensation and pension examinations , as well as travel beyond a 100-mile radius from the nearest va medical care facility .

it also authorized the va to provide transportation costs , when necessary , to transfer any veteran from one health care facility ( either a va or contract care facility ) to another in order to continue care paid for by the va .

the following transportation costs were not authorized under these regulations: cost of travel by privately owned vehicle in any amount in excess of the cost of such travel by public transportation unless public transportation was not reasonably accessible or was medically inadvisable .

cost of travel in excess of the actual expense incurred by any person as certified by that person in writing .

cost of routine travel in conjunction with admission for domiciliary care , or travel for family members of veterans receiving mental health services from the va except for such travel performed beyond a 100-mile radius from the nearest va medical care facility .

travel expenses of all other veterans were not authorized unless the veterans were able to present clear and convincing evidence to show the inability to pay the cost of transportation , or except when medically - indicated ambulance transportation was claimed and an administrative determination was made regarding the veteran's ability to bear the cost of such transportation .

the veterans' benefits and services act of 1988 ( p.l .

100-322 , section 108 ) restored in large part , the travel reimbursement benefits .

it required that if va provides any beneficiary travel reimbursement under section 111 of title 38 u.s.c .

in any given fiscal year , then payments must be provided in that year in the case of travel for health care services for all the categories of beneficiaries specified in the statute .

in order to limit the overall cost of this program , the law imposed a $3 one - way deductible applicable to all travel , except for veterans otherwise eligible for beneficiary travel reimbursement who are traveling by special modes of transportation such as ambulance , air ambulance , wheelchair van , or to receive a compensation and pension examination .

in order to limit the overall impact on veterans whose clinical needs dictate frequent travel for va medical care , an $18-per - calendar - month cap on the deductible was imposed for those veterans who are pre - approved as needing to travel on a frequent basis .

veterans may qualify for travel reimbursement if ( 1 ) they have a service - connected disability rated 30% or more ; ( 2 ) they are traveling for treatment of a service - connected disability ; ( 3 ) they receive a va pension ; ( 4 ) their income does not exceed the maximum annual va pension rate ; or ( 5 ) they are traveling for a scheduled compensation or pension examination .

the fy2008 appropriations act ( p.l .

110-161 ) provided funding for va to increase the beneficiary travel mileage reimbursement rate from 11 cents per mile to 28.5 cents per mile .

the increase went into effect on february 1 , 2008 .

while increasing the payment , va , as mandated by law , also increased proportionately the deductible amounts applied to certain mileage reimbursements .

the new deductibles were $7.77 for a one way trip , $15.54 for a round trip , with a maximum of $46.62 per calendar month .

however , these deductibles could have been waived if they cause a financial hardship to the veteran .

the final milcon - va appropriations act of 2009 ( p.l .

110-329 ) provided an additional $133 million to increase the mileage reimbursement rate to 41.5 cents a mile and included an administrative provision to freeze the deductible at the fy2008 levels ( i.e .

$7.77 for a one way trip , $15.54 for a round trip , with a maximum of $46.62 per calendar month ) .

the veterans' mental health and other care improvements act of 2008 ( s. 2162 , p.l .

110-387 ) , which was signed into law on october 10 , 2008 , contained a provision that required the va to raise its current reimbursement rate to conform with the general services administration's ( gsa ) rate at which federal employees are reimbursed when using private automobiles for official business .

the provision also amended the law that allowed the va to raise or lower the deductible for reimbursements in proportion to a change in the mileage rate .

the va is no longer able to increase the deductible rate unless new deductible rates are mandated by congress .

it also restored the deductible amounts for the beneficiary travel reimbursement program to those in effect prior to february 1 , 2008 , when va increased the deductible rate ( i.e .

$3 for a one way trip , $6 for a round trip , with a maximum of $18 per calendar month ) .

the reports accompanying the milcon - va appropriations act of 2010 ( h.rept .

111-188 and s.rept .

111-40 ) state that va should continue to provide beneficiary travel reimbursements at 41.5 cents a mile .

appendix a. va priority groups and their eligibility criteria appendix b. copayments for health care services: 2010 oef / oif combat veterans enhanced eligibility for health care benefits : combat veterans discharged from active duty on or after january 28 , 2003 are eligible for enrollment in priority group 6 for five years following discharge unless eligible for a higher enrollment priority .

combat veterans discharged from active duty before january 28 , 2003 , who apply for enrollment on or after january 28 , 2008 , are eligible for enrollment in priority group 6 until january 27 , 2011 .

after the special eligibility period ends , these veterans will be reassigned to the appropriate priority group and will be subject to copayments if applicable .

copayments are applicable for priority group 6 combat veteran enrollees for care related to a condition that is congenital or developmental ( eg , scoliosis ) that existed before military service ( unless aggravated by combat service ) or has a specific etiology that began after military service , such as a common cold , etc .

appendix c. financial income thresholds for va health care benefits , calendar year 2010 appendix d. 10% increase to financial income thresholds for va health care enrollment , in priority group 8 , calendar year 201 .

