in the u.s. department of justice's national drug threat assessment 2009 , mexican drug trafficking organizations ( dtos ) were identified as the greatest organized crime and drug trafficking threat to the united states worldwide .

with increased u.s. efforts to interdict narcotic smugglers in the caribbean and florida in the late 1980s and 1990s , the colombian drug cartels began subcontracting with mexican dtos to smuggle cocaine into the united states across the southwest border .

by the late 1990s , mexican dtos had pushed aside the colombians and gained greater control and market share of cocaine trafficking into the united states .

today , mexico is a major supplier to u.s. markets of heroin , methamphetamine , and marijuana and the major transit country for cocaine smuggled into the united states .

the department of state estimates that as much as 90% of the cocaine entering the united states now transits through mexico .

since taking office in december 2006 , mexican president felipe calderón has made combating drug cartels and drug violence a top priority of his administration .

president calderón has deployed some mexican army contingents and federal police to cartel - controlled areas throughout mexico to reestablish government control .

in response , drug cartel enforcers reportedly are buying semiautomatic versions of ak - 47 and ar - 15 style assault rifles , and other military - style firearms , including .50 caliber sniper rifles in the united states .

with those rifles and other armaments , the cartels are achieving parity in terms of firepower with the mexican army and law enforcement .

president calderón has called upon the united states to increase its efforts to suppress the flow of u.s. firearms into mexico .

according to the u.s. department of justice , drug - related murders in mexico doubled from 2006 to 2007 , and more than doubled again in 2008 to 6,200 murders .

of the murders in 2008 , nearly 10% involved law enforcement officers or military personnel killed in the line of duty .

more than 23,000 firearms were recovered by mexican authorities and submitted for tracing to the u.s. department of justice ( doj ) , bureau of alcohol , tobacco , firearms and explosives ( atf ) from fy2004 through fy2008 .

although only a fraction of recovered firearms are submitted for tracing , approximately 87% of traced firearms were determined to have originated in the united states .

law enforcement authorities in both nations are confronting the southwest border paradigm: drugs and illegal migrants flow north , guns and money flow south .

the mexican government estimates that 2,000 firearms are smuggled across the southwest border daily .

although firearms trafficking is not the only reason violent crime is increasing in mexico , reducing the flow of illegal firearms from the united states to mexico would arguably reduce crime rates in mexico and improve public safety .

mexican gun laws are generally much stricter than u.s. gun laws .

the department of state's bureau of consular affairs "tips for travelers to mexico" warns u.s. gun owners not to take firearms to mexico unless they have a permit from the mexican embassy , as several dozen u.s. citizens have been incarcerated in mexico on weapons - related charges , including some who inadvertently carried a u.s. - licensed weapon into mexico .

in its publication , guide to the interstate transportation of firearms , the national rifle association ( nra ) also warns that firearms are "severely restricted" in mexico , but offers information on how firearms can be taken legally to mexico for sporting purposes .

in many ways , the gun trafficking issue between mexico and the united states is analogous to the "crime gun" trafficking issue that has arisen among states within the united states .

some states have more liberal gun laws , and others , stricter gun laws .

oftentimes , the latter view the former as the source of many crime guns and , hence , gun - related crimes .

it is noteworthy that the cross - border flow of illegal firearms has also been an issue for canada , because canadian gun laws are also generally much stricter than u.s. gun laws .

indeed , both mexico and canada , in addition to a minority of u.s. states , require the registration of most privately held firearms , but there is no u.s. federal registry of firearms .

illegal gun trafficking from the united states to mexico reportedly ranges from frequent small - scale smuggling of one or two handguns per border crossing to less frequent , larger - scale conspiracies to smuggle large shipments of military armaments .

the department of homeland security's customs and border protection ( cbp ) and the immigration and customs enforcement ( ice ) and one of its predecessor agencies , the u.s. customs service , have interdicted large weapons shipments on occasion .

it has been reported that firearms are frequently diverted from legal commercial channels to illegal channels in the united states and then smuggled into mexico .

although cross - border firearms trafficking is illegal and a high - risk endeavor , the reward is great , with profit margins that in the past have typically ranged between 300% and 500% .

four federal statutes govern u.s. commerce of firearms domestically and internationally .

many states supplement these federal statutes and have firearms laws of their own that are more strict .

for example , some states require permits to obtain firearms and impose a waiting period for firearm transfers .

domestic commerce and importations into the united states are generally regulated under the national firearms act of 1934 ( nfa ) and the gun control act of 1968 ( gca ) .

the exportation of firearms from the united states is regulated by the arms export control act of 1976 and , to a lesser extent , the export administration regulations ( ear ) .

federal firearms laws are primarily enforced by the atf .

in addition , the u.s. government is a signatory to an inter - american , anti - gun trafficking convention .

according to doj , atf is the lead federal agency responsible for stopping the illegal flow of firearms , or gun trafficking , from the united states to mexico , given the bureau's statutory mission and authority .

atf has developed a nationwide strategy to reduce firearms trafficking and violent crime by preventing convicted felons , drug traffickers , and juvenile gang members from acquiring firearms from gun traffickers .

these criminals often acquire firearms from a person who otherwise is not prohibited to possess a firearms through straw purchases or by buying a firearm from a corrupt dealer who sells firearms off - the - books in an attempt to escape federal regulation .

although there is no statutory definition for "gun trafficking" in the gca , it essentially entails the movement or diversion of firearms from legal to illegal markets .

unlike other forms of contraband , almost all illegal firearms used criminally in the united states were diverted at some point from legal channels of commerce .

atf works to reduce firearms - related crime with two approaches , industry regulation and criminal investigation .

currently , u.s. firearm laws govern the possession and transfer of firearms and create penalties for the violation of such laws .

however , as will be illustrated below , because there are no laws that specifically punish firearms trafficking or conspiracy to traffic firearms , law enforcement and prosecutors must work with existing federal statutes to tackle illegal gun trafficking .

the following are examples from the southwest border region that are demonstrative of the kinds of gun trafficking cases being prosecuted , and the federal statutes that are often implicated in such cases .

these particular examples come from the southern district of texas , though other u.s. attorney offices such as the u.s. attorney's office for the district of arizona and the southern district of california handle similar cases that involve firearms trafficking .

overall , from these cases , we can see that evidence from long investigations generally leads to the conclusion that persons are engaged in firearms trafficking .

in these instances , defendants are often prosecuted and convicted under provisions of statutes like the gca that make it unlawful for certain persons to be in possession of firearms ; govern the transaction process of obtaining firearms ( eg , straw purchases ) ; and contain penalties for the use of a firearm in a crime of violence or drug trafficking crime , or penalties for knowingly or fraudulently smuggling goods that would be contrary to u.s. law and regulation .

it is important to first note the subtle difference between trafficking and smuggling as it relates to firearms .

generally , trafficking occurs when a commercial item is diverted out of the lawful chain of commerce into illegal markets for unlawful purposes whereas smuggling , arguably a subset of trafficking , occurs when an item , legal or illegal , is imported or exported in violation of the law .

it is worth noting that under current law there is a specific provision in the gca that makes it illegal for any person to smuggle firearms into the united states , intending to engage in or promote conduct that violates state or federal drug laws , or that constitutes a crime of violence .

doing so is punishable by not more than 10 years' imprisonment and / or fine .

however , there is no corresponding provision that specifically prohibits smuggling firearms out of the united states for the purposes of drug trafficking and related violent crime , even though laws like the aeca and ear regulate the exportation of firearms .

instead , those caught smuggling firearms out of the united states are typically charged under a general smuggling provision as seen in the case that occurred in victoria , texas .

persons intending to smuggle trafficked firearms across the border often carry only a small number of firearms at a time under the guise that those firearms are their personal property .

moreover , if those persons are not otherwise prohibited from possessing a firearm , it may be extremely difficult to establish a criminal offense until they actually cross the border .

consequently , one of the challenges for investigators and prosecutors is that trafficking often involves a smaller quantity of guns so traffickers can avoid detection of their illicit activities or , if caught with a small quantity of guns , have a more believable claim that the guns in their possession are personal firearms .

these circumstances arguably underscore the need for the atf to follow up trafficking leads as expeditiously as possible in order to prevent wider trafficking schemes from expanding and proliferating .

the examples highlighted from the u.s. attorney's office illustrate that because there are no laws specifically devoted to targeting wider firearms trafficking schemes , investigators and prosecutors work with criminal provisions in the gca and nfa to charge gun traffickers with multiple violations .

in many cases , gun traffickers are prosecuted under various provisions of these statutes ; such provisions include prohibitions against dealing firearms without a federal license , or federally licensed dealers dealing off the books .

it is also unlawful for any person "to sell or otherwise dispose" of a firearm to another they "know or have reasonable cause to believe" is a person who is prohibited from possessing firearms under federal law .

likewise , there are provisions that make it unlawful to make false statements on the forms necessary to complete a firearms transaction with an ffl .

thus , persons who engage in straw purchases could be prosecuted if they are found to be lying on the atf form or transferring a firearm to a person whom they know or have reasonable cause to believe is prohibited from possessing a firearm under federal law .

there is not , however , a provision that makes it specifically unlawful for a person , who , knowing they are a person prohibited from possessing firearms , to direct another person to buy a firearm for them , for example .

in sum , the existing statutory scheme does not include firearm specific federal provisions that would cover the wider criminal conspiracies often involved in gun trafficking schemes that include multiple straw purchases and other federal violations .

such provisions would arguably assist law enforcement by allowing them to cast a wider net to investigate and prosecute those who are engaged early on in gun trafficking schemes .

the recent gao report on firearms trafficking discusses some of the federal firearms laws that may present challenges to u.s. efforts to combat arms trafficking to mexico .

the report identifies three key challenges related to ( 1 ) restrictions on collecting and reporting information on firearms purchases , ( 2 ) a lack of required background checks for private firearms sales , and ( 3 ) limitations on reporting requirements for multiple sales .

currently , the atf relies heavily on its firearms tracing program to identify individuals involved in firearms trafficking schemes and to detect trafficking patterns .

arguably , however , atf's ability to trace firearms is limited , because the u.s. government is prohibited by law from maintaining a national registry of firearms .

according to the gao report , key law enforcement officials have stated that "restrictions on establishing a federal firearms registry can lengthen the time and resources required by atf to complete a crime gun trace and can limit the success of some traces. .

furthermore , the report mentioned that secondary , or used , firearms are commonly trafficked to mexico .

officials noted that , "while atf may be able to trace a firearm to the first retail purchaser , it generally has no knowledge of any secondhand firearms purchases from gun shows or pawnshops ... without conducting further investigation" because federal law currently "permits the private transfer of certain firearms from one unlicensed individual to another [also described as "secondary transactions"] in places such as at gun shows , without requiring any record ... be maintained by the unlicensed individuals , an ffl , or other law enforcement authority. .

related to private transactions , the gao report highlighted that the lack of required background checks for private firearms sales may also be problematic in efforts to combat gun trafficking .

pursuant to the brady handgun violence prevention act , background checks are mandatory for all nonlicensed persons seeking to obtain firearms from ffls , subject to certain exceptions .

the private sales of firearms from one individual to another , including private sales at gun shows , are not subject to the background check requirement , and consequently do not require the seller to determine whether the purchaser is a felon or other prohibited person , such as an illegal alien .

last , the gao report pointed out that federal law requires ffls to report multiple sales to the attorney general whenever they transfer more than one handgun to any nonlicensee within 5 consecutive business days ( see above section " multiple handgun sales reports " ) .

atf officials noted that this federal reporting requirement "has provided critical leads for some investigations of arms trafficking" and "helps expedite the time required by atf to complete a crime gun trace. .

a similar reporting requirement , if enacted , for multiple long gun sales — particularly for rifles and shotguns capable of accepting large capacity ammunition feeding devices — would arguably provide atf and other federal law enforcement with early warning of potential firearms trafficking schemes as 27% of firearms recovered in mexico and traced from fy2004 to fy2008 were long guns .

absent is information regarding how many of those long guns were part of a multiple sales purchase .

although the gao report underscored these three areas of federal law as potential hindrances to law enforcement's ability to combat firearms trafficking , congress has passed laws on several occasions that prohibit the establishment of a registry of firearms or firearms owners ( see footnote 123 ) and past legislative proposals to more strictly regulate private , intrastate firearm transfers at gun shows have been considered on the house and senate floors , but have not been enacted ( see footnote 125 ) .

with regard to multiple long gun reporting requirements , past legislative proposals of this nature and current law are limited to handguns .

notwithstanding congress' reluctance historically to adopt such proposals , the next section analyzes three anti - firearms trafficking measures introduced in the 110 th congress .

although no anti - gun trafficking measures have been introduced during the 111 th congress thus far , a few were introduced during the 110 th congress .

these proposals would have strengthened provisions of the gca , arguably , by repealing certain limitations on the release of atf firearm trace data ; requiring comprehensive crime gun tracing nationally ; establishing new recordkeeping requirements on second - hand firearms sold or traded back to ffls , with a focus on identifying stolen firearms ; increasing penalties for licensed and non - licensed persons for violating certain provision of the gca ; and establishing a federal one - handgun - per - month limit for transfers between ffls and non - licensed persons .

in congressional testimony , u.s. authorities have asserted a moral obligation on the part of the united states to address gun trafficking on the southwest border .

yet , as described above , much of the information about southwest border gun trafficking remains incomplete .

questions that may arise include the following: southwest border gun trafficking .

have federal authorities conducted any recent military , small arms trafficking investigations between the united states and mexico ? .

if so , can details of those investigations be provided ? .

have any of those investigations involved heavy machine guns , grenades , bazookas , or anti - tank weapons ? .

what is known about the scope of such small arms trafficking in central america and mexico ? .

are gun shows a major source of such armaments ? .

atf trace data and trafficking .

what do the trace data show concerning gun trafficking from the united states to mexico ? .

can these data measure the scope of illegal gun trafficking between the two countries ? .

of the firearms recovered in mexico and traced back to the united states during fys 2005-2008 , how many of these traces were later used in straw purchase investigations in the united states ? .

how often have firearms been traced back to gun shows and corrupt federal firearms licensees ? .

of those traced firearms , is it known how many of those firearms would meet the definition of "semiautomatic assault weapon" under prior federal law ? .

what do the data tell us about illegal , military small arms trafficking ? .

do the current "tiahrt" restrictions on trace data encumber the atf from assisting mexican and u.s. law enforcement authorities in fighting drug - related violent crime ? .

inter - american gun trafficking convention .

for what reasons has the ratification of this convention not been acted upon by the senate ? .

will its ratification be a priority for the 111 th congress ? .

gun trafficking statute .

is the existing federal statutory scheme adequate to target and prosecute the ongoing gun trafficking that is occurring on the southwest border ? .

considering the scale and proliferation of gun trafficking , is there a need to create a more complex statute that specifically targets the conduct that often occurs in gun trafficking ? .

