immigration is a leading policy concern for many countries around the world .

improvements in technology , the fluidity of capital , increases in foreign direct investments , and other economic developments have increased the economic interdependence among countries .

lower - cost transportation and faster communication have facilitated globalization of the world's economies , as well as increased exposure to foreign languages , culture , and social networks .

furthermore , globalization has brought about greater awareness of economic opportunities that exist in other parts of the world .

as such , more affluent countries face high levels of demand for participation in their economies by potential international migrants .

and while political opinions regarding immigrants are frequently polarized , the transnational flow of migrants also creates numerous policy challenges , as well as opportunities , for receiving countries .

for members of congress , immigration policy has been one of the main legislative issues for several years .

with a near - consensus view that the current system is broken , legislators have introduced numerous pieces of legislation — from incremental to comprehensive — intended to provide solutions .

crafting policies to establish a politically acceptable migration level , in addition to attracting the most desirable migrants , remains a coveted goal in migration management .

yet , determining an optimal immigration policy has grown increasingly complex as economic , cultural , and security pressures all compete for political consideration .

thus , as congress works to develop legislation that would provide incentives and deterrents for and against migration , it becomes important to have a foundation for understanding migratory behavior , as well as the major policy challenges linked to international migration .

this report serves as a broad overview of the standard theory of international migration and offers a brief synopsis of the major immigration - related policy challenges relative to the legislative debates in congress .

the overview provides several possible issues for congress as it considers new legislation on immigration reform , including ( 1 ) how new immigration legislation might affect migratory behavior and ( 2 ) the possible effects of increased or decreased migration on related policy issues .

distributive questions , including the domestic cost of international migration , lie outside the scope of the present analysis .

for most advanced industrialized countries ( aics ) — a term that generally refers to the member states of the organisation for economic co - operation and development ( oecd ) — the admission of international migrants constitutes something of a dilemma .

on one hand , the admission of migrants is a desirable course of action because it mitigates labor shortages , imports human capital , and increases revenues through a broader income tax base and higher levels of consumption .

on the other hand , from a political perspective , the admission of migrants may potentially result in a host of undesirable byproducts , such as the displacement from jobs of home country nationals , potential increases in crime and crime networks , cultural tensions , the increased risk of terrorist exposure , and , for some domestic groups , a lower standard of living .

in most countries , a balance is struck between open or closed borders .

competing interests lobby for changing immigration laws and institutions in order to better suit their economic , cultural , and political preferences .

in the united states , for example , the groups advocating restricted immigration flows frequently lobby legislators in an attempt to tighten border security and prevent the inflow of illegal immigrants , which these groups perceive as important to protect both the u.s. economy and security .

some groups , however , view these inflows as cultural threats .

higher education institutions , in contrast , tend to lobby for the admission of highly skilled foreign nationals who may serve as faculty members or as students — thereby embracing both immigrant labor and dynamic multiculturalism .

moreover , the business community frequently advocates for the admission of certain types of immigrants who may provide needed skill sets or lower - cost labor .

policy makers must weigh these considerations and many others in determining who should be admitted and who should be restricted .

with the exception of certain trafficking circumstances , all migration is based on a decision - making process by the individual migrant ( or in some cases by the migrant's household ) .

even when migration is forced — as is the case with refugees — or takes place as a mass activity , some set of choices will generally occur .

"if," "when," "where," and "how" questions of migration are commonly referred to as "push / pull" factors .

essentially , while some factors appeal to potential migrants to "pull" them toward another country , other circumstances tend to "push" them away from their place of residence .

these factors are generally distinguishable in that the push factors are normally domestic circumstances ( eg , home country unemployment , poverty , limited opportunity , cultural oppression ) , while the pull factors are circumstances occurring outside the domestic arena ( eg , employment opportunities , family resettlement abroad , educational pursuits , social opportunities ) .

a "push / pull" framework is rooted in a basic economic model of international migration .

under this model , at a very basic level , each individual is seen as performing a cost / benefit calculation based on the information he or she has available on the various push / pull factors to determine whether migration will provide a net gain or loss .

assuming that migration will provide a net gain ( or a sufficient net gain ) , that individual may choose to migrate .

the basic premise of economic models of migration can be expanded to include the concept of deriving utility from such diverse actions as family reunification and cultural change , for example .

neoclassical economics generally predicts that labor flows from low - wage / labor - rich states to higher - wage / labor - poor states .

broadly , individuals engage in economic migration ( including educational pursuits ) , social migration ( such as family reunification or alternative cultural pursuits ) , or political migration ( such as asylees and refugees ) .

for each of these categories , the more important push / pull elements to decision making vary , although the categories are not mutually exclusive and multi - motivational behavior and migration type overlap may occur .

moreover , some push / pull factors will serve as broad predictors for migration , while others will likely matter only for individuals engaging in a certain type of migration .

the increasingly global nature of the market economy , and the migration of individuals associated with the pursuit of growing or emerging labor needs , has created both challenges and opportunities for advanced industrial countries .

despite the idiosyncrasies and unique policies of certain countries , a string of commonalities underlies the pressures all open economies face .

several of the themes partially mirror debates occurring in the united states .

perhaps most prominent of these are integration efforts to peaceably adjust society to accommodate any new demographic dynamics .

a second recurring theme is the alleged burden placed by some immigrants on the state , including acts of violence , threats to security , crime , and supposed net non - contributions to the welfare state .

a final theme concerns how international migration may provide numerous benefits ( particularly of an economic nature ) that could be used to help alleviate labor shortages , address an aging society , and otherwise provide cultural diversity .

these themes are addressed in greater depth in the sections below .

in a globalized economy , the motivations for migration are increasingly evident .

information about economic opportunities , family connections , and the like contributes to a set of push / pull factors wherein individuals or households calculate the cost and benefit of potential migration .

moreover , institutions put in place by policy makers mitigate these calculations by either constraining or facilitating the choices available for a potential migrant .

the construction of such institutions is also relatively well understood , as policy makers can learn from both historical examples and changes implemented by other countries .

because these basic migration mechanisms are solidly established , the immigration - related policy challenges that arise are sometimes less about functional concerns and are instead more rooted in political realities .

decisions on how these policy challenges are addressed carry economic , cultural , and political consequences , depending on who migrates , how many people migrate , and when they are allowed to migrate .

ultimately , the concerns about what these consequences will be lie at the heart of the tensions over immigration , and the polarized perceptions that international migration generates among constituent groups will likely continue in the long term .

