automobile manufacturers rely on an extensive network of approximately 20,000 independently owned dealers for sales and service of their vehicles .

dealers provide the local connection between manufacturers and car buyers , and the dealership system is one of several linchpins in the complex web of relationships that make up the u.s. automobile industry .

automakers and dealers alike agree on the importance of this relationship .

at a june 2009 congressional hearing , fritz henderson , then - president and ceo of general motors corporation ( gm ) , said , simply put , a strong dealer body is vital to gm's success .

indeed , for many customers , our dealers are the "face of gm" — so this effort [dealer network restructuring] is critically important to the successful reinvention of general motors .

at the same hearing , the chairman of the national automobile dealers association ( nada ) quoted from a commissioned report which states , … the automobile dealers support the manufacturers' efforts by providing a vast distribution channel that allows for efficient flow of the manufacturer's product to the public at virtually no cost to the manufacturer .

while there is a consensus about the overall role and value of the dealer network , manufacturers and dealers have demonstrated that there is a wide gulf between them on the appropriate size of that network , the flexibility of the dealerships in running their business , and the gm and chrysler visions of how the dealer network should perform going forward .

in june 2009 , chrysler eliminated 789 dealers , 25% of its dealer network .

gm has announced it will reduce its dealer network from 6,000 to approximately 3,600 , to take effect in october 2010 when its contracts with dealers around the country are up for renewal .

according to the nada , the gm and chrysler dealerships slated for elimination had more than 100,000 employees .

dealers are not alone in facing a tough realignment .

the highest level of new - vehicle sales this decade , including domestically - produced and imported autos , was recorded in 2000 , with new vehicle sales of 17.3 million , while sales in 2009 were 10.4 million units .

all parts of the auto supply chain have had to make what are seen as wrenching changes .

in addition to closing multiple plants , cutting thousands of union and white - collar jobs , and curtailing many supplier relationships , both chrysler and gm made reducing and reshaping dealerships a key component in their restructuring .

at issue for congress are the decisions made by the bush and obama administrations in aiding gm and chrysler and the impact of their bankruptcies on dealers , retirees , bondholders , and other stakeholders .

this report examines the size and scope of the u.s. automobile dealer network , its origins , and its economic contributions .

it also examines the role of states in franchising , as well as federal legislation and actions in the development of the present auto dealership business model .

it presents the arguments put forward by gm and chrysler , on one hand , and dealers on the other , regarding the large scale termination of dealers as part of these two manufacturers' bankruptcy cases .

the report concludes with a summary of recent congressional interest and actions with regard to the u.s. auto dealer network .

crs report r40736 , mandating dealership agreements for automakers receiving federal funds: constitutional analysis , by [author name scrubbed] , [author name scrubbed] , and [author name scrubbed] , examines several of these legislative proposals .

in the early 1900s , automakers often sold their vehicles directly to consumers .

however , that system did not work well because the manufacturers were often far away from their ultimate customers and they found the expense of setting up a nationwide network of company - owned stores to be prohibitive .

in their book on the auto supplier industry , thomas klier and james rubenstein describe ford's early experience with selling cars: ford did set up company - owned stores called branch houses during the first decade of the twentieth century .

located in major cities , branch houses were staffed by ford employees who received a salary plus a bonus based on sales .

by the 1910s , though , ford had abandoned direct selling .

ford could not open branch houses fast enough to meet demand , nor could it find enough qualified people to staff the branches .

more crucially , ford officials concluded that salaried employees were not sufficiently motivated to sell cars .

according to an industry analyst writing in the 1920s , "if a dealer has a financial interest in his own company , he is found to be much more satisfactory than a branch manager , who has practically no financial interest in the branch. .

as discussed in more detail later in this report , the dealer franchise system emerged as a way for the automakers to market , finance , and service motor vehicles .

dealers are independent businesses that enter into contracts with the manufacturers to represent those manufacturers , selling and servicing their cars locally .

most of the investments and capital risk of providing these services are borne by the dealer .

over time , state legislatures in every state passed franchise laws to govern the relationship between dealers and manufacturers .

the goal of these laws , which are not uniform , is — in the eyes of the dealers — to equalize the relationship between small businesses ( i.e. , the dealers ) and large companies ( i.e. , the manufacturers ) .

according to james surowiecki , the laws have had their desired effect: these laws do things like restrict g.m .

's freedom to open a new cadillac dealership a few miles away from an old one .

more important , they also make it nearly impossible for an auto manufacturer to simply shut down a dealership .

if g.m .

decided to get rid of pontiac and buick , it couldn't just go to those dealers and say , "nice doing business with you. .

it would have to get them to agree to close up shop , which in practice would mean buying them out .

when , a few years ago , g.m .

actually did eliminate one of its brands , oldsmobile , it had to shell out around a billion dollars to pay dealers off — and it still ended up defending itself in court against myriad lawsuits .

as a result , dropping a brand may very well cost more than it saves , since it's the dealers who end up with a hefty chunk of the intended savings .

under the franchise system , the manufacturers and dealers have found different ways to make money .

all dealers are not the same ; some have one or more large stores selling one or more brands in one or more metropolitan areas , while others operate smaller dealerships in towns or rural areas .

some dealers focus more on selling new cars and others put more attention on service and selling used cars .

… g.m .

makes money ( when it does ) on new cars and on the financing of loans .

dealers , by contrast , make most of their money on servicing old cars and selling used ones .

so dealers can thrive even when the automaker languishes .

and at the state level they often have more political influence than automakers do .

in the late nineties , for instance , local dealers were challenged by companies that wanted to sell cars over the internet .

in response , some states , including texas , actually passed laws making it illegal to have a business selling cars online ( unless you already owned a local dealership ) , and regulators told internet companies to cease and desist .

when ford itself started experimenting with online sales , dealers' vigorous objections ( along with legal challenges ) caused the manufacturers to quickly retreat .

more than 57% of dealer sales stemmed from new vehicles , nearly 29% from used - car sales , and more than 14% from service and parts sales in 2008 .

new - vehicle sales , however , are becoming an increasingly less profitable segment of the dealer business .

dealer profits in new - car sales have evaporated and , since 2005 , dealers have generally not made a profit on their new - car departments , "slipping below breakeven. .

used - car sales and service work result in greater profits .

according to the nada , dealers make an average of more than $100,000 on used - car sales and as much as $350,000 through their service and parts departments .

in 2007 , u.s. new - car auto dealers sold more than $758 billion in motor vehicles , directly employed over 1 million men and women , and supported an annual payroll of over $54 billion .

new - car dealerships have a substantial presence in their communities , with an average of 54 employees , receiving wages of $48,339 a year per employee , for an average dealer payroll of $2.6 million .

there is a wide variance in dealer size and performance in different states .

for example , the average sales per new - car dealership range from $71 million in arizona to less than $16 million in vermont .

california has nearly 1,500 new - car dealers , and alaska has 35 .

total u.s. auto industry sales have been on a downward trajectory for nearly a decade .

as shown in table 1 , in 2006 and 2007 there were over 16 million new cars and light trucks sold in the united states , but only 13.2 million units were sold in 2008 and 10.4 million units in 2009 , the lowest annual sales since 10.35 million were sold in 1982 , also a recession year .

although the seasonally adjusted annual sales rate in the first six months of 2009 was only 9.5 million new vehicles , the cash for clunkers program in july and august and a rise in sales in december helped boost the annual sales of new vehicles for the full year .

according to some analysts , u.s. auto sales may not return to more than 12 million units per year until 2012 or later .

u.s. auto dealers , automotive manufacturers , suppliers , and workers have all been directly affected by the national recession , credit crisis , and the deteriorating economic situation in the united states .

the result has been the worst consumer - spending slump since the 1940s and the worst market for automobile sales since 1982 .

donald grimes , a university of michigan economist notes that from 1970 to 2001 , there were 0.76 vehicles sold per driver in the united states and that the figure has now dropped to 0.4 vehicles per driver — with little prospect for a rebound in coming years .

the decline in auto sales is attributable to a range of factors that affect the number and size of cars sold , including volatile gasoline prices , tight credit markets for auto dealers and customers , declining consumer confidence , concerns over personal discretionary spending , and high unemployment rates .

the finance arms of the manufacturers have faced higher than normal capital costs reflecting the credit risk posed by the detroit 3 .

as a result of these factors , the average dealership profile indicates total sales of over $33 million in 2004 dropped to just under $29 million in 2008 .

in the same years , the net profit before taxes for the average dealer was $559,000 and $280,000 , respectively .

auto dealer industry analysts predict that if prevailing unfavorable economic conditions continue , and , in particular , if the availability of automotive loans remains limited to those customers with higher credit ratings , this could affect the ability of some consumers to purchase cars .

thus , vehicle sales and margins of the auto dealers could continue to be adversely affected .

the recession has resulted in reduced sales and profits for all auto dealers and accelerating consolidations .

market share has also shifted away from gm and chrysler to foreign - owned automakers as concerns about their bankruptcies cut into their sales .

after the mid - may 2009 announcement by gm and chrysler that they planned to close approximately 2,000 dealers between them , many members of congress began to hear from dealers in their districts and states who were slated for termination .

as mentioned in the previous section of this report , committees in both the house of representatives and senate held lengthy hearings where gm and chrysler executives testified , as well as the nada chairman and several owners of automotive dealerships .

at the hearings , some members of congress were sympathetic to the concerns of the dealers , citing instances in their districts and states where long - standing dealers had been notified of termination .

these hearings served to raise the visibility of the dealers' concerns in congress and with the media .

the rising visibility of the dealers' concerns has led to the introduction of a wide range of legislative proposals .

these follow on more limited steps to help dealers that congress has taken this year , including: 1 .

sba loans .

expanding the sba 7 ( a ) loan program in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-5 ) , to establish a dealer floorplan financing program .

2. .

cash for clunkers . .

passage of a $1 billion , four - month fleet modernization program ( also known as cash for clunkers ) in the supplemental appropriations act of 2009 ( p.l .

111-32 ) .

 ( a similar $4 billion , year - long program was approved by the house prior to the vote on the supplemental appropriations , but this provision was not enacted into law. ) .

congress passed an emergency $2 billion extension of the program when it became clear that the $1 billion limit had been reached in only one week ; h.r .

3435 was signed by the president on august 7 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-47 ) , and ran until late august 2009 , when the funds were exhausted .

3 .

reversing dealer terminations .

on july 7 , 2009 , the house appropriations committee adopted by voice vote an amendment offered by representative latourette that would require automobile companies that receive federal funds and are partially owned by the federal government to reinstate agreements with franchise dealerships to the extent that a valid dealer agreement existed prior to a chapter 11 proceeding .

this amendment to the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2010 ( h.r .

3170 ) , was reported out of the appropriations committee on july 10 and approved by the house on july 16 , 2009 .

newspaper articles have indicated that the provisions of the amendment would apply to general motors and chrysler and their dealers ; however , crs legal analyses question whether it could effect that result .

representative latourette said that the amendment was needed because the bankruptcy judge had undercut state franchise laws and the dealerships have been closed in a "punitive and secretive" manner .

gm and chrysler opposed the amendment .

a chrysler statement said that it "would jeopardize the new company" and that chrysler used "sound business judgment" to eliminate 789 dealers .

gm issued a similar statement saying that failure to complete dealer restructuring would jeopardize its long - term viability .

the obama administration also opposed the amendment .

the house passed the financial services and general government appropriations act , 2010 ( h.r .

3170 ) , on july 16 , 2009 , by a vote of 219-208 .

final legislation affecting the terminated dealers was passed in december 2009 in the fy2010 consolidated appropriations act ( h.r .

3288 ) ; the earlier latourette amendment was replaced in conference committee with an entirely new provision .

president obama signed this appropriations bill on december 16 , 2009 ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

under the new law , terminated gm and chrysler dealers are provided the opportunity to participate in a binding arbitration process that must be completed by june 2010 .

under this provision ( section 747 of the consolidated appropriations act ) , gm and chrysler must provide each terminated dealer by mid - january 2010 a letter explaining why it was terminated and a summary of this new arbitration process .

affected dealers have 40 days to decide whether to seek arbitration , the costs of which will be split equally between the dealer and the manufacturer .

arbitrators are to be selected jointly by the dealer and manufacturer ; negotiations will be held in the state where the dealership is located and , in general , must be concluded by june 2010 .

the law specifies seven factors that arbitrators must evaluate , some of which were not part of the original criteria used by gm and chrysler when they developed their original list of dealer terminations .

if the arbitrator finds on behalf of a terminated dealer , gm or chrysler has seven days to send those dealers a letter of intent to enter into business .

4 .

administration's auto task force activities .

on july 17 , 2009 , the house committee on financial services agreed to h.res .

591 ( boehner ) , requesting that the president report to the house of representatives on the work of the auto task force within 14 days of passage of the resolution .

it requests that the president transmit to the house all information in his possession relating to specific communication with and financial assistance provided to general motors corporation and chrysler llc .

the legislation specifically asks for all records pertaining to auto task force actions with regard to dealer closures , retiree pensions , and allocation to labor unions of ownership of gm and chrysler and other restructuring decisions .

a similar resolution , h.res .

462 ( latourette ) , requests information relating to chrysler's restructuring .

the committee reported it without recommendation on june 10 , 2009 .

other legislation addressing dealer concerns includes: h.r .

2743 ( maffei ) , the auto dealer economic rights restoration act and the companion senate bill , s. 1304 ( grassley ) .

this legislation would restore the "economic rights" of gm and chrysler dealers , seeking to ensure that state franchise laws would still protect them as the automakers go through bankruptcy proceedings .

h.r .

2793 ( kline ) , the auto dealers pension fairness act , would require a report to congress from the auto task force on gm and chrysler dealer closings and suspension of certain pension actions until that report is delivered .

s. 1253 ( corker ) , the auto dealers assistance act , would require reimbursement by gm and chrysler to closed dealerships , through their federal loans .

s. 247 ( feinstein ) , the accelerated retirement of inefficient vehicles act of 2009 , a one - year cash for clunkers program that would require the purchase of new vehicles with higher fuel economy standards than some other proposals .

its companion bill is h.r .

520 ( israel ) .

subsequently , senator feinstein introduced s. 1200 , the short term accelerated retirement of inefficient vehicles act of 2009 , which would establish a temporary cash for clunkers program similar to the plan in s. 247 .

s. 1135 ( stabenow ) , the drive america forward act , a cash for clunkers proposal similar to the plan passed in the house in h.r .

2751 .

this legislation would authorize $4 billion for a one - year program .

h.r .

1606 ( manzullo ) , the new automobile voucher act , to encourage purchase of new cars .

h.r .

2224 ( terry ) , which would direct sba to provide dealer inventory financing through the 7 ( a ) program .

h.r .

2285 ( peters ) , the vehicle efficiency heightening investment credit to lift our economy act of 2009 , which would provide a tax break for a new - car purchase .

h.r .

2750 and h.r .

2796 ( latourette ) , the automobile dealer economic rights restoration act of 2009 , which would require restoration of franchise law protections to gm and chrysler dealers , prior to bankruptcy .

h.r .

3088 ( carson ) , the jeremy warriner consumer protection act , which would require the newly restructured gm and chrysler to carry liability insurance to cover claims made against them for any defective products produced by their predecessor companies .

s.amdt .

1189 , offered by senator hutchison in may 2009 during senate consideration of h.r .

2346 , the supplemental appropriations act , would have called on chrysler to allow for a 60-day wind - down of its 789 terminated dealers .

the amendment was withdrawn after reassurances about the company's dealer closing process , from then - chrysler president james press .

appendix a .

new - car dealerships by state appendix b. dealerships announced for closure by gm and chrysle .

