the global financial crisis has resulted in huge losses in wealth , jobs , and economic activity .

in some cases , it has led to public demonstrations and to changes in national governments .

academics and policymakers generally agree that the financial system can benefit from additional supervision or regulation that addresses issues of systemic risk .

such efforts , however , likely will require hard , and possibly politically unpopular , decisions concerning the supervision and regulation of domestic financial markets and new layers of international coordination that could challenge entrenched national interests .

furthermore , there are no metrics for gauging whether such measures are a prescription for curing the current crisis or are a policy framework for preventing the next crisis , since financial markets are constantly innovating and responding to regulation and oversight .

in addition , there are no models of market oversight or supervision that have proven to be clearly superior .

in the absence of such a model , policymakers face a blizzard of recommendations , but few assurances that changes to domestic and international financial frameworks , most likely achieved with considerable institutional and political resistance , will preclude another crisis .

currently , national governments are using a number of approaches to supervise financial markets .

while the current situation is quite fluid , there seems to be some movement in national supervisory frameworks toward an integrated approach , as used in great britain and germany .

regardless of which structural form is employed , regulating financial activities at the national level is complicated by the nature of modern financial markets that have become highly complex and interdependent .

while regulation is set largely in a national context , financial institutions are international in their activities .

without consistent regulatory standards across national boundaries , banks , insurers , and securities companies can move their activities to jurisdictions with looser standards .

national governments , however , generally are loathe to cede sovereignty to any supra - national institution , and efforts to reshape national financial authorities often face stiff opposition from entrenched interest groups .

furthermore , national financial markets are not clones of one another , but reflect differences in the way they have been organized and philosophical differences over the way they are regulated and supervised .

indeed , national financial markets are custom - made structures that reflect differences in national experiences , government institutions , laws , and national customs .

one thing the crisis has demonstrated , though , is that despite these differences , financial markets have become highly integrated .

as a result , it has become increasingly more difficult , as evidenced by the current financial crisis , to contain financial problems in one market from affecting markets in seemingly unrelated areas .

the european union has taken a number of steps to improve financial supervision among its members , including: strengthening the roles of advisory committees in the areas of securities , banking , and insurance regulators ; adopting regulations on credit rating agencies ; providing funding in support of international accounting standards ; and considering a measure to register hedge funds .

the eu also adopted a proposal to have a european systemic risk council and a european system of financial supervisors that will serve as advisors to ec members in providing advice in both macro and micro prudential supervision .

the united states has chosen to take a different approach that could potentially strengthen the role of the federal reserve and create a new consumer watchdog agency , among other proposals .

at the g - 20 summit in pittsburgh in september 2009 , the participants agreed to coordinate their actions on a number of financial reform issues .

as the financial crisis has eased , however , such coordination has proved to be more elusive .

eu banks have been slower than u.s. banks in meeting higher capital standards and less forthcoming in detailing their financial condition .

the u.s. , britain , and continental european regulators also have forged different policies regarding the issue of executive compensation .

eu finance ministers also disagree over strict new regulations that would have imposed restrictions on american hedge funds operating in europe .

u.s. treasury secretary geithner has called the new rules protectionist .

the measure would have barred foreign hedge funds from operating in europe unless standards similar to those that are enforced in europe were enforced in the home countries .

the british , in particular , have opposed the rules that are favored by the french and the germans , in part because nearly 80% of european hedge funds operate out of britain and are a major source of income .

the european union ( eu ) is a political and economic union of 27 member states , formally established in 1993 by the treaty of maastricht out of existing structures that had evolved in steps since the 1950s .

the eu has worked to develop a single economic market through a standardized system of laws which apply across all member states and which provide the freedom of movement of people , goods , services and capital .

this process of economic integration is complicated by a dual system that gives the members of the eu significant independence within the eu and broad discretion to interpret and implement eu directives .

eu economic integration is compounded further by sixteen member states , collectively known as the eurozone , which have adopted the euro as a common currency and operate as a bloc within the eu .

major institutions and bodies of the eu include the european commission , the european parliament , the council of the european union , the european council , the european court of justice , and the european central bank ( ecb ) .

through various directives , the eu has moved to increase financial integration within the union to make the monetary union represented by the eurozone operate more efficiently .

within the eu , the european commission operates as the executive branch and is responsible for proposing legislation , implementing decisions , upholding the union's treaties , and the general day - to - day running of the union .

the commission operates as a cabinet government , with one commissioner from each member .

one of the 27 is the commission president ( currently josé manuel barroso ) appointed by the european council , with the approval of the european parliament , for a term of five years .

relative to the financial sector , the eu process provides for each member to have its own institutional and legal framework , which complicates efforts to coordinate financial policies .

the economic and financial affairs council ( ecofin ) is one of the oldest bodies within the european council .

ecofin is responsible for economic policy coordination , economic surveillance , monitoring budget policy and preparing the eu's budget .

there are three main procedures the eu uses to enact legislation .

these procedures are co - decision , assent , and consultation .

the co - decision procedure , also known as the article 251 procedure ( article 251 of the treaty of rome ) , is the main legislative process the eu employs to adopt directives and regulations .

the council and the european parliament jointly adopt legislation based on a proposal by the european commission .

both parliament and the council are required to agree on an identical bill before the measure can be adopted .

in general terms , parliament is considered to have adopted a measure if it fails to reject the proposed measure within three months after it has been adopted by the council .

under the assent procedure , the council can adopt a measure proposed by the commission if it receives the assent of parliament .

under the consultation procedure , the council , acting unanimously or as a qualified majority , can adopt legislation developed by the commission after it has consulted with parliament .

since the start of the financial crisis , the european union has taken a number of steps to improve supervision of financial markets .

these actions include: strengthened the committee of european securities regulators .

the committee is an advisory body without any regulatory authority within the european commission .

the directive of january 23 , 2009 , strengthened the committee's authority to mediate and coordinate securities regulations between eu members .

strengthened the committee of european banking supervisors .

the committee is an advisory body without any regulatory authority that coordinates banking supervision .

the eu directive of january 23 , 2009 , broadened the role of the committee to include supervision of financial conglomerates .

strengthened the committee of european insurance and occupational pensions supervisors .

the committee is an advisory body without any regulatory authority within the european commission in the areas of insurance , reinsurance , and occupational pensions fields .

the january 23 , 2009 , directive authorizes the committee to coordinate policies among eu members and between the eu and national governments and other bodies .

the european parliament and the european council approved on april 23 , 2009 new regulations on credit rating agencies that are expected to improve the quality and transparency of the ratings agencies .

approved direct funding by the european union to the international accounting standards committee foundation , the european financial reporting advisory group , and the public interest oversight body .

the european commission proposed a set of measures to register hedge fund managers and managers of alternative investment funds and measures to regulate executive compensation .

adopted measures to create a new european systemic risk board ( esrb ) and a european system of financial supervisors .

the european central bank has been entrusted with providing analytical , statistical , administrative , and logistical support to the esrb .

the euro area countries initially sketched out a broad response to the financial crisis .

since then , their response to bank foreclosures and to subsequent issues has been characterized by some as somewhat disjointed .

the financial crisis and economic downturn have exposed deep fissures within the eu and even within the euro area countries over the policy course to follow .

as a first response to the financial crisis , eu governments and their central banks focused policy initiatives on reassuring credit markets that there was an availability of credit and liquidity , by reducing interest rates , and by providing foreign currency , primarily dollars , through currency arrangements .

in addition to continuing efforts to restore the financial markets , eu members also face a worsening economic climate that has required actions by individual central banks , international organizations , and coordinated actions by eu members and other governments .

as the loss of real and financial wealth worsened , eu governments worked both independently and in tandem to protect financial institutions and to sustain economic growth .

the actions eu leaders take are important to the united states , because eu members comprise some of the largest financial centers in the world , their financial markets are well developed , and european financial firms are often competitors to those in the united states .

the economic and financial crises , however , have exposed deep philosophical differences among eu members over the most effective policy course to pursue to address the financial crisis and the economic downturn and problems of integration and consistency across countries .

in part , these differences reflect the dual nature of the eu system , which gives great deference to the individual members of the eu in interpreting and implementing eu directives .

unlike the united states , where the federal government can implement policies that are applied systematically across all 50 states , eu - wide actions reflect compromise among 27 national authorities .

the financial crisis has made eu members especially concerned about the size and structure of financial systems and they are pursuing changes to the international financial system .

financial systems have become large , complex , interconnected structures that have grown so large that some observers question whether the current financial system is compatible with maintaining financial stability .

they also raise concerns about the ability of national governments to restrain the impact of financial firms on public resources should major financial firms face periods of serious distress .

the united kingdom and the united states , for instance , are the two largest international banking centers in the world .

as such , they operate as major conduits , or as intermediaries , through which capital flows from countries with excess capital to those countries in need of capital .

banking centers in the united kingdom , switzerland , and elsewhere are notable because they are large compared to their respective national gross domestic product ( gdp ) and large compared to the relative size of banking centers in the united states .

bank assets in switzerland , for instance , are nearly nine times the size of the country's gdp , while such assets are over four times gdp in the united kingdom .

in spain , germany , france , and ireland , bank assets are at least double gdp , while such assets run less than 60% of gdp in the united states .

in an effort to address the prospect that large banks or financial firms may become insolvent or fail and , thereby , cause a major disruption to the financial system , the british parliament in february 2009 passed the banking act of 2009 .

the act makes permanent a set of procedures the u.k. government had developed to deal with troubled banks before they become insolvent or collapse .

such procedures are being considered by other eu governments and others as they amend their respective supervisory frameworks .

within the eu system , the greatest share of responsibility for regulating and supervising financial markets rest with the national governments .

national authorities implement eu directives in ways they determine are consistent with their own national objectives and national interests , not necessarily to benefit the eu as a whole .

as a consequence of this focus at the national level , there is some potential for nations to act in their own interests at the expense of other eu members , especially during periods of financial and economic distress .

the financial crisis also has aggravated conflicts between broad eu - wide goals and the more focused national objectives of the individual eu members .

for instance , as financial markets faced serious shortages of liquidity , eu members were pressed to support a broad set of measures to increase the guarantees on bank accounts for depositors in response to actions by ireland , greece , and germany .

in addition , some eu members have been considering a set of procedures to deal with the bad loans of banks within their jurisdictions , which has pushed the eu as a whole to follow suit and consider the best approach to deal with the toxic loans of eu banks .

these differences may well become more pronounced as multilateral discussions shift from addressing the general goal of containing the financial crisis to the more contentious issues of specific market reforms , regulations , and supervision .

the globalization of financial markets raises the stakes for a coordinated response within the eu and between the eu and the united states .

in various ways , globalized financial markets challenge the effectiveness of the current framework of financial market supervision and coordination that is based on national interests .

significant differences remain among eu members and between eu members and the united states over the best approach to follow to supervise financial markets .

some eu members favor a strong central authority that can monitor financial markets , while others favor strong national authorities with a weaker role for an international body .

the eu approach is also complicated by the requirement that new policies must mesh with the carefully crafted and highly negotiated directives that already exist within the eu framework .

these directives act as guiding principles for eu members , and include the stability and growth pact , the lisbon principles , and the financial services action plan .

arguably , these agreements have helped stabilize economic conditions in europe by bringing down the overall rate of price inflation and by reducing government budget deficits .

in addition to these directives , the eu members have adopted a series of measures that deal directly with an eu - wide effort to coordinate financial policies across all the eu members .

as part of the overall eu effort to achieve financial and economic integration , the eu members have adopted such directives as the directive on financial services and the financial services action plan ( fsap ) .the integration of the financial services sector across borders , however , has been uneven , with integration progressing faster in the money , bond , and equity markets , and slower in the banking sector where much of the focus on international cooperation is being directed .

according to the european central bank , retail banking services remain segmented along national lines as a result of differences in national tax laws , costs of national registration and compliance , and cultural preferences .

nevertheless , cross - border mergers and acquisitions within europe have played an important role in internationalizing banking groups , which has led to significant cross - border banking activity .

integration within the banking sector in europe also has increased since the euro - area countries adopted the euro as their single currency .

national authorities are searching for consensus on an international framework to supervise and regulate the complex international financial system .

the financial crisis has demonstrated that financial markets are complex , highly integrated and interconnected .

at the same time , there are important gaps in the current state of knowledge concerning the nature of the complex linkages that characterize international financial markets .

there seems to be some consensus that any new financial architecture should correct the shortcomings of the current system by incorporating a number of features .

these features include increased transparency , greater oversight over credit rating firms and underwriting standards , mark - to - market accounting , registration and supervision over hedge funds and other derivative markets , and some supervision of the credit default swap market .

beyond supporting increased supervision over these broad areas of market activities , policymakers remain divided over the specific ways that such supervision should be administered .

some policymakers also argue that the international financial system can be strengthened through improvements in the data that are collected on financial activities .

the bank of england , for one , argues that the international financial system can benefit from collecting data on the international flow of funds comparable to the u.s. flow of funds accounts .

these accounts provide data on financial linkages between domestic and foreign residents and between different parts of the financial sector and the real economy .

policymakers are also focusing on the current size and structure of financial systems in which some institutions have such a far - ranging effect on the financial system that they are deemed to be too big to fail .

policymakers are weighing the benefits of having such firms hold higher amounts of capital and liquidity or limit their activities through regulation or oversight .

this issue is particularly pressing for some european countries in which the size of some financial firms is greater than the national gdp and the failure of such firms can be highly destabilizing to the economy .

furthermore , academics and policymakers are assessing various proposals to address the tendency for the financial system and the real economy to act in a mutually reinforcing , or procyclical , manner .

during periods of rapid economic growth and appreciation in the value of assets , the financial markets make credit more readily available , thereby reinforcing the economic boom and the prospects for an asset bubble .

similarly , as an economic boom ends and the real economy begins to slow down , credit markets tighten up , reinforcing the economic contraction .

central banks and policymakers are also focusing on methods and procedures to intervene with banks and other large financial firms that are facing insolvency or failure to provide for an orderly resolution of the firms to maintain market stability .

the uk experience with a set of procedures it made permanent in february 2009 may prove useful to some policymakers .

the eu acknowledges the importance of this issue , but it has left it up to individual eu members to develop their own approaches .

in the current environment , policymakers and academics also are reconsidering the role central banks play as systemic risk regulators .

central banks acted swiftly to address and contain the financial crisis , which has led some policymakers to weigh the benefits of expanding or amending the role of central banks in the supervision of financial markets .

expanding the role of central banks has some benefits , since central banks generally have the requisite economic resources , the political clout , and the ability to act quickly .

some policymakers , however , question the long - term impact of concentrating market power in an independent agency .

in comparing across countries , the statutory role of the central bank is not clear and can vary substantially .

as a result , some national governments apparently are considering altering the statutory authority of the central bank to make risk oversight a specific responsibility .

1 .

basel ii rules should be amended to: ( 1 ) gradually increase minimum capital requirements ; ( 2 ) reduce pro - cyclicality by encouraging dynamic provisioning of capital buffers ; ( 3 ) introduce stricter rules for off - balance sheet items ; ( 4 ) tighten norms on liquidity management ; ( 5 ) strengthen rules for band internal control and risk management .

2 .

adopt a common definition of regulatory capital , including which hybrid instruments should be considered as tier 1 capital .

3 .

relative to regulating credit rating agencies: ( 1 ) credit rating agencies should be regulated and supervised by a strengthened committee of european securities regulators ( cesr ) ; ( 2 ) the credit rating agencies' business model should be reviewed and an assessment should be made of separating rating and advisory activities ; ( 3 ) the use of ratings in financial regulation should be reduced ; ( 4 ) distinct codes should be introduced for rating structured products .

4 .

mark - to - market accounting rules should be reviewed to: ( 1 ) expedite solutions to the remaining accounting issues concerning complex products ; ( 2 ) ensure they do not bias business models , promote pro - cyclical behavior , or discourage long - term investment ; ( 3 ) allow the international accounting standard board ( iasb ) or other standards setting groups clarify and agree on a common , transparent methodology for valuing assets in illiquid markets ; ( 4 ) have the iasb open its standard - setting process to regulatory , supervisory , and business communities ; ( 5 ) strengthen the iasb's oversight and governance structure .

5 .

the solvency 2 directive regulations on insurers and reinsurers should be adopted and include a balanced group support regime , coupled with sufficient safeguards for host member states , a binding mediation process between supervisors , and established harmonized insurance guarantee schemes .

6 .

competent authorities in all member states must have sufficient supervisory powers , including sanctions , to ensure the compliance of financial institutions with the rules , and they must be equipped with strong , equivalent , and deterrent sanctions to counter all types of financial crimes .

7 .

relative to the "parallel banking system" ( hedge funds , investment banks , other funds , and mortgage banks ) : ( 1 ) appropriate regulations should be extended to all firms or entities conducting financial activities of a potentially systemic nature ; ( 2 ) transparency should be improved , especially for systemically important hedge funds ; there should be capital requirements on banks owning or operating hedge funds .

8 .

securitized products and derivatives markets should: ( 1 ) simplify and standardize over - the counter - derivatives ; ( 2 ) introduce and require the use of at least one well - capitalized central clearing house for credit default swaps in the eu ; ( 3 ) guarantee that issues of securitized products retain on their books for the life of the instrument a meaningful amount of the underlying risk .

9 .

common rules should be developed for investment funds , including definitions , codification of assets and rules for delegation , accompanied by tighter supervisory control over the independent role of depositories and custodians .

10 .

member states and the european parliament should work toward greater harmonization in rules by avoiding legislation that permits inconsistent transposition and application , and they should identify national exceptions that would improve efficiency by their removal , reduce distortions of competition and regulatory arbitrage , or improve the efficiency of cross - border financial activity in the eu .

11 .

compensation incentives must be better aligned with shareholder interests and long - term firm - wide profitability by basing the structure of financial sector compensation schemes on the following principles: ( 1 ) bonuses should be set in a multi - year framework ; ( 2 ) the same set of rules should be applied to proprietary traders and asset managers ; and ( 3 ) bonuses should reflect actual performance and not be guaranteed in advance .

12 .

internal risk management should be: independent and responsible for effective , independent stress testing ; senior risk officers should hold a very high rank in the company ; and internal risk assessment and proper due diligence must not be neglected by overreliance on external ratings .

13 .

the eu should have a coherent and workable regulatory framework for crisis management ; a framework that is transparent ; the relevant authorities should be equipped with appropriate and equivalent crisis prevention and crisis management tools ; and legal obstacles that prevent the use of these tools in a cross - border crisis should be removed .

14 .

deposit guarantee schemes should be harmonized and prefunded by the private sector and provide high , equal protection to all bank customers throughout the eu ; the schemes should protect all customers ; and the existing authorities of host countries regarding cross - border bank branches should be reviewed .

15 .

member states should agree on more detailed criteria for burden sharing ( providing financial aid from the public and private sector ) than those contained in existing agreements .

16 .

the eu should create a new body called the european systemic risk council ( esrc ) to pool and analyze all information , relevant for financial stability , pertaining to macro - economic conditions and to macro - prudential developments in all the financial sectors .

17 .

the eu should put in place an early warning system under the auspices of the esrc and of the economic and financial committee ( efc ) to: ( 1 ) prioritize and issue macro - prudential risk warnings ; ( 2 ) direct risks that potentially could affect the financial sector or the economy to the efc to implement a strategy to address those risks ; ( 3 ) warn the imf , the fsf , and the bis if risks relate to global dysfunction of the monetary and financial system ; and ( 4 ) take additional action if the response of a national supervisor is inadequate .

18 .

a european system of financial supervisors ( esfs ) should be established to: ( 1 ) work with the existing national supervisors who would continue to carry out day - to - day supervision ; ( 2 ) replace three existing structures ( committee of european banking supervisors ( cebs ) , committee of european insurance and occupational pensions supervisors ( ceiops ) , and the committee of european securities regulators ( cesr ) with three new european authorities tasked with coordinating supervisory standards and guaranteeing strong cooperation between national supervisors ; also ( 3 ) colleges of supervisors should be established for all major cross - border institutions .

19 .

national supervisory authorities should be strengthened to upgrade the quality of supervision , including: ( 1 ) reforming national systems by aligning supervisors' competences and powers on a comprehensive system in the eu , increasing supervisors' remuneration , facilitating exchanges of personnel between the private sector and supervisory authorities , and ensuring that all supervisory authorities implement a modern and attractive personnel policy ; and ( 2 ) intensifying the training and personnel exchanges of the level 3 committees ; carrying out an examination of the degree of independence of all national supervisors .

20 .

the eu should develop a more harmonized set of financial regulations , supervisory powers , and sanctioning regimes .

21 .

the level 3 committees ( national regulators ) should: ( 1 ) gain a significant increase in their resources ; ( 2 ) upgrade the quality and impact of peer review processes ; ( 3 ) prepare for establishing supervisory colleges for all major cross - border financial firms in the eu by the end of 2009 .

22 .

the eu should establish an integrated european system of financial supervision ( esfs ) and the level 3 committees should be transformed into three european authorities – a european banking authority , a european insurance authority , and a european securities authority – with boards comprised of the chairs of the national supervisory authorities and have their own autonomous budget and a set of key competencies that include: legally binding mediation between national supervisors ; adoption of binding supervisory standards ; and binding technical decisions applicable to individual financial institutions .

23 .

planning for an integrated european system of financial supervision should begin immediately with a detailed plan for implementation developed before the end of 2009 .

24 .

the esfs should be reviewed within three years of its implementation and additional reforms considered .

25 .

the financial stability board should be in charge of promoting the convergence of international financial regulation to the highest benchmarks , the board should be enlarged , it should report to the imf , and it should be transformed into a decision - making council .

26 .

supervisory colleges for large complex , cross - border financial groups should carry out robust , comprehensive risk assessments , should pay greater attention to banks' internal risk management practices and should agree on a common approach to aligning incentives in private sector remuneration schemes .

27 .

the imf should be placed in charge of developing and operating a financial stability early warning system , accompanied by an international risk map and credit register .

28 .

efforts should be intensified to encourage jurisdictions that currently are poorly regulated or "uncooperative" to adhere to the highest level of international standard and to exchange information among supervisors .

supervisors should increase capital requirements for those financial institutions that are investing in or doing business with poorly regulated jurisdictions .

29 .

eu members should show their support for strengthening the role of the imf in macroeconomic surveillance and to contribute towards increasing the imf's resources in order to strengthen its capacity to support member countries facing acute financial or balance of payment distress .

30 .

the eu should organize itself so it can represent itself in a coherent manner in the new global economic and financial architecture .

31 .

in its bilateral relations , the eu should intensify its financial regulatory dialogue with key partners .

