the department of veterans affairs ( va ) offers directly , or in conjunction with other federal agencies , several benefits for surviving spouses , children , and dependent parents of deceased veterans to provide them with financial , educational , and emotional support .

among these various programs , dependency and indemnity compensation ( dic ) is a monthly tax - free cash payment for eligible surviving spouses , children , and dependent parents .

dic has been paid in some form ( monthly cash payments or insurance benefits ) to survivors since the revolutionary war .

there were modifications after each war until the 1950s , when the federal government mandated a more streamlined process that created the system used currently for survivors of veterans and military servicemen .

several policy issues are associated with dic , including the dic offset of survivor benefit plan ( military retirement survivor ) payments , often referred to as the "widow's tax" ; adequacy of the payments for surviving spouses compared with the payments made by other retirement systems to surviving spouses ; remarriage age of 57 ; length of time for a totally disabled rating for non - service - connected deaths to qualify for dic ; and maximum dic payment for parents based on income levels that have not been adjusted for inflation .

this report outlines the eligibility requirements and benefit levels for dic and the policy issues associated with dic .

the eligibility for dic by survivors is based on ( 1 ) the eligibility of the veteran , which is determined by the circumstances of the veteran's death and his or her disability compensation rating ; and ( 2 ) the survivor meeting certain criteria related to either relationship to the veteran , age , or income .

to claim dic benefits , a survivor must complete and submit to the local va office va form 21-534a and department of defense ( dd ) form 1300 .

the effective date of dic entitlement is the first day of the month that the death occurred for claims filed within one year of the death .

after one year , the dic entitlement starts on the date the claim is received by the va .

in fy2013 , 376,979 spouses , children , and parents of veterans received more than $5.8 billion in dic .

on average , each spousal survivor received $15,744 in annual compensation .

child recipients received an average of $7,094 in annual compensation .

several policy issues are associated with dic , including the dic offset of survivor benefit plan ( military retirement survivor ) payments , often referred to as the "widow's tax ; " adequacy of the payments for survivors compared with other retirement systems' payments to surviving spouses ; remarriage age of 57 ; length of time for a totally disabled rating for non - service - connected deaths to qualify for dic ; and maximum dic payment for parents based on income levels that have not been adjusted for inflation .

dic has been paid in some form to survivors since the revolutionary war .

at that time , women and children survivors of officers received a seven - year pension amounting to half of the officer's entitled pay ( according to a 1780 act of the continental congress ) .

during the civil war , survivor compensation was expanded to cover all servicemembers at a rate that would be payable to totally disabled veterans .

the civil war also led to other changes to survivor compensation , especially for survivors of servicemembers with service - connected disabilities .

they were covered under the act of july 14 , 1862 , which was referred to as general law and amended various times in the 19 th century .

in 1917 , congress passed the war risk insurance act to eliminate the need for non - service pensions and highlighted that service - connected payments for death and disability were compensation payments .

the act changed the system to meet the current needs of world war i veterans and their survivors and eliminated the pay discrepancy between officers and soldiers .

the servicemen's indemnity act of 1951 replaced this life insurance system with a new system where the servicemembers did not contribute to the insurance program , but the government provided monthly payments to eligible survivors of $120 with a 2.25% increase per year until a $10,000 insurance maximum was reached .

potentially eligible survivors included spouses , children , parents , and siblings .

because legislation had been written in response to need , dependency and indemnity compensation was unorganized and administered by four different administrations by the mid - 1950s , and congressional and executive committees were formed to make the issuance of compensation more streamlined and manageable .

death compensation was set up similar to the way it is now by the time the final report of the president's commission on veterans' pensions , veterans' benefits in the united states: report to the president by the president's commission of veterans pensions ( hereafter referred to as the bradley report ) was written in 1956 .

death compensation was provided to survivors ( except for dependent parents ) regardless of income .

the rate of compensation depended on whether the veteran served in peacetime or wartime .

in 1969 , after review of the bradley report , recommendations from a commission headed by robert m. mccurdy in 1967 , and extensive testimony from several other federal administrations and veterans service organizations , congress devised a different , more equitable system for survivor compensation that gave fixed rates to each pay grade .

the base rate was adjusted for a cost - of - living increase to reflect changes in the cost of living since the last base rate had been determined in 1956 , 13 years earlier .

in 1969 , years of service were no longer a factor in determining dic .

there were no subsequent changes of significance to dic legislation until 1993 , when the rate tables for surviving spouses were eliminated and one flat monthly rate was reinstated .

in 2003 , surviving spouses who remarried after reaching the age of 57 were able to retain dic .

