the united states is recovering from a broad recession that is considered the longest - lasting economic downturn since world war ii .

the national bureau of economic research ( nber ) determined that the recession officially began in december 2007 and ended in june 2009 , followed by a period of recovery .

while nber declared an end to the recession , it has not reported favorable economic conditions or a return to economic strength .

the united states remains in a period of recovery — what some have characterized as slow and uneven .

various indicators of economic strength , such as the unemployment rate and foreclosures , reached their worst showings in decades during the recession and the following months .

while some newspapers across the country have published stories linking the depressed economy with localized increases in crime , others have reported decreases in crime .

the current state of the economy has continued to spark debate concerning whether economic factors can affect crime .

any increase in crime rates during a period of economic uncertainty could exacerbate an already difficult situation for communities across the united states .

congress has voiced concern over this issue and deliberated funding for federal programs that provide support for state and local law enforcement agencies .

advocates of increasing funding for state and local law enforcement assistance believe that additional funding is needed for a number of reasons , including that crime rates tend to increase during periods of economic uncertainty and that state law enforcement agencies facing budget cuts may be forced to stop hiring new officers or filling vacated positions .

opponents of this funding argue that there is no documented link between economic downturns and increases in crime rates , and that the federal grant programs in question are inefficient .

this report examines the relationships between selected variables of economic strength and crime .

it begins with an overview of crime rates during times of economic recession in the united states .

it then reviews the existing literature in the field analyzing various data sets that examine whether the unemployment rate and foreclosures can be related to increases in the national crime rate .

this report focuses primarily on national - level data rather than on state - or local - level data .

because of the aggregation of national - level data , local trends may be lost .

therefore , this report presents a picture of the relationship between crime and economic indicators for the nation as a whole , but it does not discuss these relationships that may exist at the state or local level .

further , conclusions drawn about the relationship between national crime rates and economic variables may not be able to be generalized to the relationship between the economy and crime in all states and localities around the country .

in essence , there may exist a relationship between the economy and crime in specific areas of the country , even if this relationship is not visible at the national level .

the report also considers other economic indicators that may warrant further research with respect to their relationship with crime .

lastly , the report raises several issues that congress may debate should it consider the relationship between the current state of economic recovery and crime , including whether crime rates are related to periods of economic turmoil and whether hiring additional police officers can reduce crime .

according to nber , "[a] recession is a significant decline in economic activity spread across the economy , lasting more than a few months , normally visible in production , employment , real income , and other indicators .

a recession begins when the economy reaches a peak of activity and ends when the economy reaches its trough. .

nber has identified seven recessions in the united states since 1960 .

figure 1 and figure 2 illustrate the violent and property crime rates , respectively , from 1960 through 2009 .

both figures identify each of the seven recessions identified by nber .

in general , property crime rates increased fairly steadily from the early 1960s through the mid - 1980s and violent crime rates continued to increase through the early 1990s .

both property crime and violent crime rates have generally been decreasing since the early 1990s .

figure 1 and figure 2 show that , since 1960 , there has been no consistent relationship between periods of economic recession and the crime rates .

while the violent crime and property crime rates did increase during some recessions ( generally in the 1970s ) , during others they either remained relatively stable or actually decreased .

the unemployment rate is one of the most widely referenced economic indicators .

in discussions of potential impacts of the economy on crime rates , many scholars and policy makers use the unemployment rate as a proxy for economic strength .

congress has shown interest in the relationship between the economy — unemployment , in particular — and crime rates since the 1970s .

the most recent recession , which was accompanied by a rise in the unemployment rate , once again focused attention on the relationship between unemployment and crime rates .

in fact , according to the bureau of labor statistics , at the beginning of the most recent recession in december 2007 , the national unemployment rate was 5.0% .

this rate continued to increase throughout the recession , reaching 9.5% at the official end of the recession in june 2009 .

this rate grew further and peaked at 10.1% in october 2009 before decreasing slightly .

the most recent data indicates that unemployment in november 2012 was at 7.7% .

the current unemployment rate represents the highest level of unemployment in the united states since the early 1990s .

the most recent recession has been linked by some to falling home prices and increases in mortgage delinquencies that led to home foreclosures .

essentially , as home prices fell over several years , homeowners across the country increasingly found themselves owing more on their mortgages than the market value of their homes .

this , in turn , led to a rapid increase in the delinquency rate on mortgage payments and to the rate at which banks entered into the foreclosure process .

as mentioned earlier , nber indicates that the economic recession began in december 2007 .

home foreclosure data from that time ( the fourth quarter of 2007 ) indicate that 2.04% of all home loans were in foreclosure .

at the official end of the recession in june 2009 , 4.30% of all home loans were in foreclosure .

data indicate that this percentage continued to increase beyond the recession itself , as 4.43% of all home loans were in foreclosure at the end of september 2011 .

foreclosures have since begun to decline , and at the end of september 2012 , 4.07% of all home loans were in foreclosure .

given the still - elevated percentage of home foreclosures across the nation — relative to foreclosure rates before the most recent economic downturn — there has been interest concerning what kind of impact foreclosures , which can lead to houses sitting empty for some time , have on crime rates .

although a number of newspaper articles have cited anecdotal evidence that crime rates increase in neighborhoods where many foreclosures have occurred , there is a dearth of scientific studies on the impact that home foreclosures have on crime rates .

for example , one academic study addressing the link between foreclosures and crime examined this foreclosure - crime relationship in one particular locale rather than on a national level .

while much research on the relationship between economic variables and crime rates has focused on macroeconomic variables such as unemployment and home foreclosures , some research suggests that other economic variables could fluctuate more strongly with crime rates and could thus serve as better proxies for evaluating the relationship between the economy and crime .

as discussed earlier , no two recessions are identical , and thus some economic variables may be at greater flux during some recessions than during others .

similarly , as illustrated in figure 1 and figure 2 , crime rates may fluctuate more during some recessions than during others .

as also mentioned , while research is inconclusive regarding the true relationship between economic indicators and crime rates , some have found lag or time - delay relationships between changes in economic indicators and subsequent changes in crime rates .

as such , if crime rates were to increase in the wake of the most recent recession , policy makers may focus on the nature of the relationship between this recession and crime rates .

of note , however , in the immediate years following the recession , 2010 and 2011 , crime rates — both violent and property crime rates — have continued to decline .

the literature reviewed by crs has several possible implications for policy makers .

it does not appear that recessions — as measured by macroeconomic variables such as the unemployment rate or home foreclosures — can be definitively linked to increases in crime rates .

however , preliminary research on other ( though less - studied ) factors , such as gdp ( or gsp ) as well as consumer sentiment , indicates there may be some correlation between these factors and crime rates , and these relationships warrant further research .

in addition , research on economic indicators and crime rates using aggregate data — particularly on the national level — appears to produce less conclusive results than research using state or city - level data .

congress may also consider issues including whether the current state of the country's economic health is linked to crime rates and , if so , whether changes in the number of law enforcement officers may impact crime rates .

