perhaps paradoxically , the storage of electricity does not usually involve the storage of the electric energy itself .

rather , the storage device converts the electricity to another form — such as the kinetic energy in a spinning flywheel or the potential energy in water that has been pumped to a higher elevation — and then later converts the energy from the new form back to electricity .

with the exception of hydroelectric pumped storage , eps technologies are still in various stages of development .

this section of the report discusses the storage technologies and their applications .

the technologies are summarized in table 1 .

eps technologies can be broadly categorized into two groups , each of which is discussed below: centralized bulk power storage and distributed storage .

this section also discusses the relationship between eps and the smart grid .

eps does not fit neatly into traditional utility planning , or current regulatory and financing structures , which have approached power system needs with central station power plants and large transmission projects .

as one analysis notes: we know from years of operating pumped hydroelectric facilities that incorporating them into market and grid operations is a nontrivial task .

optimally scheduling the use of these facilities in a market with dynamic pricing can be a complicated problem .

there are not so many of these facilities in use , however , that the problems have had to be generally solved for scale application .

today , though , we can foresee a future with many electric storage systems out there — at wind farms and other generation sites , grid - connected at transmission and distribution substations , and deployed along distribution feeders and behind the meters .

storage will represent a new class of electric infrastructure apparatus and will require that we develop new algorithms , tools , protocols , and regulatory paradigms for planning , financing , and operating these assets .

the greatly increased flexibility that storage brings to the electric system will best be exploited only when we have the right new methods and understanding in place .

this section of the report discusses environmental , cost , regulatory , and institutional issues which may impede the deployment of eps systems .

as noted above , eps faces regulatory , economic , and institutional barriers to widespread acceptance .

this concluding section of the report discusses oversight and legislative approaches to addressing these barriers that may be of interest to congress .

electricity storage is one of several technologies and methods of meeting power demand that are of current congressional interest ( including distributed generation , renewable power , and demand response ) which do not fit the traditional power industry paradigm .

that paradigm involves reliance on large - scale central power plants and long - distance transmission lines to meet demand .

as noted above , this raises the question of how quickly and effectively the power industry and its federal and state regulators will be willing to pursue and deploy new approaches that are cost - effective .

a doe study sums up the adoption issue: a utility that is guaranteed [by regulators] to receive cost recovery of either a transmission or generation project , or both , may have little incentive to put an energy storage project in place .

rather than invest in energy storage technology , a utility may simply opt to construct a transmission and / or generation facility , the costs of which are more likely to be approved and recovered .

in addition , state utility regulators may be reluctant to allow cost recovery for an innovative energy storage technology .

state utility regulators may instruct the utility to rely on proven technology to address issues that could be solved through energy storage technology .

as discussed above , efforts are underway at the state and federal level to address the regulatory issues .

but because utility regulation is decentralized in the united states , this is likely to be a lengthy process that congress may want to monitor .

another possible issue for congressional oversight is whether executive agencies are taking appropriate cognizance of eps in studies and actions .

this is part of the larger issue of whether executive agencies , like their counterparts in industry and the states , are considering the full range of non - traditional solutions ( when they are cost - effective ) to power systems needs .

two recent studies of electric power issues , one by doe and another by ferc , illustrate potential oversight issues .

in 2008 doe published 20% wind energy by 2030: increasing wind energy's contribution to u.s. electricity supply , a major study that "examines some of the costs , challenges , and key impacts of generating 20% of the nation's electricity from wind energy in 2030. .

a major issue in integrating large amounts of wind capacity into the power system is the variability of wind power .

large - scale wind integration requires steps to compensate for the times when wind power is either reduced or unavailable due to weather conditions .

to date this has not been a major issue because few areas have sufficient wind power to create integration issues , but this is expected to change in the future .

the conventional approach to wind integration is to install quick - start natural gas - fired combustion turbine power plants to back up wind power .

other options that have been proposed include geographic dispersion of wind farms , improved wind power forecasting techniques , implementation of demand response and smart grid technologies and procedures , aggregation of utility control areas , and eps .

however , doe's study essentially disregards the eps option .

there is no unanimity of opinion on the extent to which eps will be needed , if at all , to integrate large amounts of wind and other renewable power capacity into the grid .

the american wind association , for example , believes that electricity storage is too costly and is unnecessary for wind integration .

however , this opinion is not universally held .

for example , a recent north american electric reliability corp. ( nerc ) study of renewable integration concluded that "additional flexible resources , such as demand response , plug - in hybrid electric vehicles , and storage capacity , eg , compressed air energy storage ( caes ) , may help to balance the steep ramps associated with variable generation. .

a white paper issued by the american society of chemical engineers concluded that large - scale electricity storage "is the critical technology needed by renewable power if it is to become a major source of baseload dispatchable power to eventually replace fossil / nuclear plants. .

the chief of the pjm interconnection , the operator of the power grid in much of the middle atlantic and midwest , believes that 1,000 mw or more of caes will be needed on the pjm system to support growing wind capacity , and two utilities in california have recently announced proposed caes and battery projects to facilitate wind power integration .

with this diversity of opinions , it is unclear why the doe study would not take more cognizance of options like eps and demand response as part of the suite of tools available to integrate wind into the power system .

another example of a perhaps narrow agency focus is a recent ferc study , a national assessment of demand response potential .

in response to a mandate included in the energy independence and security act of 2007 , the report assesses the demand response potential , state by state , for the period 2010 through 2019 .

the estimates are made for several scenarios which incorporate varying levels of technological advancements and changes to rate structures , including: dynamic rates , in which the rates charged for electricity vary daily or in real time to reflect wholesale power prices and scarcity in electricity supplies .

this is a substantial departure from the average price rates typically charged to residential customers .

dynamic rates combined with "enabling technologies" that automatically respond to high power prices by reducing a home's electricity demand .

direct load control of consumer equipment , such as air conditioners , by the utility .

interruptible tariffs , in which large industrial and commercial customers agree to reduce demand under certain conditions in return for a financial incentive .

other programs aimed at reducing demand as needed from large industrial and commercial customers .

some of these approaches to demand response are currently routine or can be easily implemented , such as interruptible tariffs and direct load control .

dynamic rates , as noted , would represent a substantial change for residential customers and have been controversial .

the enabling technologies that can augment dynamic rates have been pilot tested at a residential scale but not widely deployed .

depending on the scenario , the study assumes up to universal installation of smart meters , 60% to 70% customer participation in dynamic pricing , and 60% of customers using enabling technologies .

a potential oversight issue is whether ferc has been unnecessarily restrictive in the choice of technologies and options it examined for reducing and shifting peak demands ( a central goal of demand response programs ) .

the report states that: other examples [of currently high - cost options] include battery storage and thermal energy storage .

both items hold the potential to significantly reduce peak demand on a permanent basis by shifting it to off - peak periods .

as in the case of photovoltaic arrays , cost is a significant barrier to their rapid market penetration today .

another example is behind - the - meter generation which includes a diverse set of technologies including small conventional generation units that are used as back - up generation during emergencies and cogeneration systems that combine heat and power , largely in industrial process applications .

it is not clear why universal roll - out of smart meters ( itself a multi - billion - dollar expense ) , widespread deployment of thermostats that respond to power prices , or large - scale implementation of dynamic pricing ( a ratemaking approach currently almost unknown in the residential sector ) would be more likely than deployment of eps systems by 2019 .

also unclear is the treatment of distributed generation — which in the industrial and commercial sectors has been used routinely for decades — as a developmental option .

ferc perhaps had to limit the range of options it could consider in its demand response report , but this study and the doe wind report also reflect the risks of not giving fuller attention to the full range of options available to meet power system needs .

as discussed below , two major pieces of proposed legislation before the 111 th congress both treat eps as a demand response option for managing peak loads .

to the degree that congress is interested in the advancement of eps technology , it may want to monitor how this option is being considered in agency studies and programs .

this section of the report reviews the treatment of electric power storage in three current legislative proposals: s. 1091 , the storage technology of renewable and green energy act of 2009 ( storage act ) .

h.r .

2454 , the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( aces ) .

s. 1462 , the american clean energy leadership act of 2009 ( acela ) .

this section also summarizes the financial incentives available to eps projects in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) .

the storage act would amend the tax code to create incentives for eps deployment .

these incentives include: a 20% business investment tax credit for investments in eps systems that deliver stored power for sale , and have a minimum output capacity of 0.5 mw during a four - hour delivery period .

a 20% business investment tax credit for investments in eps systems located at the consumer site , and used primarily to store and deliver renewable energy generated onsite that is used to reduce onsite peak power demand .

these can be small systems: the minimum required output is five kilowatts during a four - hour delivery period .

a 30% residential tax credit for an eps system installed in a home , and used primarily to store and deliver renewable energy generated onsite that is used to reduce onsite peak power demand .

no minimum size requirements are specified .

the bill would allow government and cooperative power agencies to issue clean renewable energy bonds for storage projects .

the storage act was introduced on may 20 , 2009 , and referred to the finance committee .

as of late august 2009 no further action had been taken on the bill .

aces is a climate change and energy policy act passed by the house on june 26 , 2009 , and referred to the senate .

many of the objectives of the bill , including increased use of renewable power , peak demand reductions , and reductions in carbon emissions , might be facilitated by cost - effective eps .

with respect to transmission planning , the bill would establish a national transmission planning policy that takes: into account all significant demand - side and supply - side options , including energy efficiency , distributed generation , renewable energy and zero - carbon electricity generation technologies , smart - grid technologies and practices , demand response , electricity storage , voltage regulation technologies , high capacity conductors … superconductor technologies , underground transmission technologies , and new conventional electric transmission capacity and corridors .

the bill's peak demand reduction section also specifies eps as one of the technologies that can be used to meet reduction goals .

acela is an energy bill that was introduced on july 16 , 2009 , when it was reported out of the senate energy committee .

the bill includes a peak reduction and load shifting goal that would be met through the "widespread implementation" of several demand response technologies , including dynamic pricing , smart grid technology , distributed generation , and electricity storage .

the bill would also establish a multi - faceted national transmission policy .

the first principle listed is "support for the development of new renewable energy generation capacity," but there are numerous other objectives , including cost savings , reliability enhancement , reduced power plant emissions , and maximizing "the contribution of demand side management ( including energy efficiency and demand response ) , energy storage , distributed generation resources , and smart grid investments. .

transmission planning would be required to reflect these policy objectives .

both aces and acela therefore anticipate transmission planning processes that would take the integrated approach discussed earlier in this report .

both bills also include electricity storage among the demand response technologies that can be used to meet goals for reducing peak demand .

if either bill becomes law , congress may want to monitor whether storage and other non - traditional approaches actually receive appropriate attention from industry , regulators , and executive agencies .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; p.l .

111-5 ) added or expanded funding and incentives for electricity storage .

however , many of the programs seem to be focused primarily on one application , battery technology for pure electric and plug - in hybrid electric vehicles .

arra provides $6.0 billion that is expected to leverage more than $60 billion in federal loan guarantees for transmission grid construction that supports renewable energy projects .

these guarantees can presumably be used to support applicable eps projects .

this new loan guarantee program expands the existing innovative technology loan guarantee program created by the energy policy act of 2005 ( epact05 ) .

although the epact05 program is limited to supporting "pre - commercial" innovative technology , the new program can also support commercial technology .

qualifying projects must be capable of starting construction no later than september 30 , 2011 .

arra provides $300 million for a department of defense "near term energy efficiency technology demonstrations and research" program .

according to the conference committee report , electricity storage is one of the applications to which this money can be applied .

the act provides $4.5 billion to doe's office of electricity delivery and energy reliability for grid modernization and related technologies , such as electricity storage .

the law establishes a tax credit that can be used to re - equip , expand , or establish a facility that is designed to manufacture equipment that is used to produce , for example , electricity storage systems for electric / hybrid vehicles , renewable energy systems , fuel cells , and other specified technologies .

the law allows for up to $2.3 billion in credits .

arra establishes a new program of $2.0 billion for facility funding grants to manufacturers of advanced battery and battery system components .

covered activities include the production of lithium ion batteries , hybrid electrical systems , system components , and software .

arra modifies an existing tax credit for the purchase of new plug - in vehicles ( plug - in hybrids and pure electric vehicles ) to cap the per - vehicle credit at $7,500 for light - duty vehicles and heavy - duty vehicles up to 14,000 pounds gross weight .

the law adds $2.4 billion to an existing $800 million energy conservation bond program .

the bonds can be applied to many purposes , including advanced automobile batteries and advanced battery manufacturing technology .

to the extent that congress is interested in widespread adoption of cost effective eps technologies , it may want to oversee the extent to which these incentives are committed to electricity storage devices other than vehicle battery systems .

