c ommonly known as the "8 ( a ) program," the minority small business and capital ownership development program is one of several federal contracting programs for small businesses .

the 8 ( a ) program provides participating small businesses with training , technical assistance , and contracting opportunities in the form of set - asides and sole - source awards .

a "set - aside" is an acquisition in which only certain contractors may compete , while a sole - source award is a contract awarded , or proposed for award , without competition .

eligibility for the 8 ( a ) program is generally limited to small businesses "unconditionally owned and controlled by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who are of good character and citizens of and residing in the united states" that demonstrate "potential for success. .

however , small businesses owned by alaska native corporations ( ancs ) , community development corporations ( cdcs ) , indian tribes , and native hawaiian organizations ( nhos ) are eligible for the 8 ( a ) program under somewhat different terms .

in fy2014 , the federal government spent over $16 billion on contracts and subcontracts with 8 ( a ) firms .

other programs provide similar assistance to other types of small businesses ( eg , women - owned , hubzone ) .

the 8 ( a ) and other programs for small businesses are of perennial interest to congress , given that it is the declared policy of the congress that the government should aid , counsel , assist , and protect , insofar as is possible , the interests of small - business concerns in order to preserve free competitive enterprise , to insure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts or subcontracts for property and services for the government ( including but not limited to contracts or subcontracts for maintenance , repair , and construction ) be placed with small - business enterprises , to insure that a fair proportion of the total sales of government property be made to such enterprises , and to maintain and strengthen the overall economy of the nation .

however , recent congresses have had particular interest in the 8 ( a ) program because of the recession of 2007-2009 , its effects on minority - owned small businesses , and small businesses' role in job creation .

this report provides a brief history of the 8 ( a ) program , summarizes key requirements , and discusses legal challenges alleging that the program's presumption that members of certain racial and ethnic groups are socially disadvantaged violates the constitutional guarantee of equal protection .

under the current 8 ( a ) program , participating firms are eligible for set - asides or sole - source awards of federal contracts , as well as training and technical assistance from sba .

detailed statutory and regulatory requirements govern eligibility for the program ; set - asides and sole - source awards to 8 ( a ) firms ; and related issues .

these requirements are generally the same for all participants in the 8 ( a ) program , although there are instances where there are "special rules" for 8 ( a ) firms owned by groups .

an appendix to this report compares the requirements applicable to individual owners of 8 ( a ) firms to those applicable to groups owning 8 ( a ) firms ( i.e. , ancs , cdcs , nhos , and indian tribes ) .

the 8 ( a ) program has periodically been challenged on the grounds that the presumption that members of certain racial and ethnic groups are disadvantaged violates the constitutional guarantee of equal protection .

the outcomes in early challenges to the program varied , with some courts finding that the plaintiffs lacked standing to bring such challenges because they were not economically disadvantaged , or were otherwise ineligible for the program ; and other courts finding that the program was unconstitutional as applied in specific cases .

more recently , in its 2012 decision in dynalantic corporation v. u.s. department of defense , the u.s. district court for the district of columbia found that the 8 ( a ) program was not unconstitutional on its face because ( 1 ) "breaking down barriers to minority business development created by discrimination and its lingering effects" constitutes a compelling government interest ; ( 2 ) the government had a strong basis in evidence for concluding that race - based action was necessary to further this interest ; and ( 3 ) the 8 ( a ) program is narrowly tailored to "minimize the burden on non - minority firms. .

however , the court found that the program was unconstitutional as applied in the military simulation and training industry because the department of defense ( dod ) conceded it had "no evidence of discrimination , either in the public or private sector , in the simulation and training industry. .

particularly in its rejection of the facial challenge to the 8 ( a ) program , the court emphasized certain aspects of the program's history and requirements when finding that the government had articulated a compelling interest for the program and had a strong basis in evidence for its actions .

specifically , the court rejected the plaintiff's assertion that the 8 ( a ) program was "not truly remedial," but rather favored "virtually all minority groups … over the larger pool of citizens," because non - minority individuals may qualify for the program , and all 8 ( a ) applicants must demonstrate economic disadvantage .

the court also noted that the history of the 8 ( a ) program prior to 1978 ( when congress expressly authorized set - asides for disadvantaged small businesses ) had evidenced that race - neutral methods were insufficient to promote contracting with minority - owned small businesses .

the court further noted that the 8 ( a ) program was intended to be a business development program , not a means to "channel contracts" to minority firms ; that section 8 ( a ) of the small business act expressly provides that awards may be made through the 8 ( a ) program only when sba determines that "such action is necessary and appropriate" ; and that the act requires the president and sba to report annually to congress on the program , thereby ensuring that congress has evidence as to whether there is a "continuing compelling need for the program. .

similarly , in finding that the program was narrowly tailored to meet the government's interests , the court noted ( 1 ) that goals for contracting with small disadvantaged businesses are purely aspirational , and there are no penalties for failing to meet them ; ( 2 ) the nine - year limits on program participation for individual owners and firms ; and ( 3 ) that sba may not accept a requirement for the 8 ( a ) program if it determines that doing so will have a adverse effect on another small business or group of small businesses .

the court emphasized that the last two factors , in particular , helped ensure that race - conscious remedies do not "last longer than the discriminatory effects [they are] designed to eliminate," and "work the least harm possible to other innocent persons competing for the benefit. .

a 2015 decision by the u.s. district court for the district of columbia in rothe development , inc. v. department of defense subsequently adopted the reasoning of the dynalantic court in finding that the 8 ( a ) program is not unconstitutional on its face .

in so doing , the court noted the same attributes of the 8 ( a ) program that the dynalantic court had emphasized .

in particular , in its brief discussion , the court noted the following six factors: 1. alternative , race - neutral remedies had proved unsuccessful in addressing the discrimination targeted here ; 2. the 8 ( a ) program is "appropriately flexible" because it imposes no quotas and prescribes no consequences for failure to meet the aspirational goals as to the percentage of federal contract dollars awarded to small disadvantaged businesses ; 3. the program is neither under - nor over - inclusive , since it "does not provide that every member of a minority group is disadvantaged" ; 4. the program imposes temporal limits on individuals' participation in the program , and sba continuously monitors participants' eligibility ; 5. the aspirational goals for contracting with small disadvantaged businesses are "numerically proportionate" to the evidence regarding the availability of minority firms that are ready , able , and willing to perform government contracts ; and 6. various aspects of the 8 ( a ) program minimize the program's burden on non - minority firms ( eg , sba cannot accept a contract for award through the 8 ( a ) program if it determines that doing so would have an "adverse impact" on other small businesses ) .

the decision in rothe has been appealed to the u.s. court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit .

the litigation in dynalantic , however , was reportedly settled by the parties while their appeals to the d.c .

circuit were pending .

