the democratic party of japan ( dpj ) defeated the ruling liberal democratic party ( ldp ) in august 30 , 2009 elections for the lower house of parliament .

the dpj won 308 seats , compared to 119 for the ldp in the 480-seat lower house chamber ( see figure 1 below ) .

the dpj is now the main ruling party , in coalition with at least two smaller parties , the social democratic party ( sdp ) and the people's new party ( pnp ) .

incumbent prime minister taro aso has announced that he will resign as head of the ldp , effectively ending his premiership , to take responsibility for his party's defeat .

he will likely be succeeded as prime minister by dpj party leader yukio hatoyama , who is expected to be confirmed as the next prime minister in a special session of parliament scheduled for mid - september .

the political changeover in tokyo could significantly affect u.s. interests and goals in asia , although most analysts predict the dpj will not fundamentally alter the u.s. - japan alliance relationship .

the dpj has long called for a more "independent" relationship with the united states and has been critical of aspects of the u.s. - japan alliance , such as plans to realign u.s. military forces based in japan , japan's "host nation support" ( hns ) payments ( worth around $4 billion ) that defray about 75% of the costs of maintaining american troops and bases in japan , and some provisions of the status of forces agreement ( sofa ) .

the party also calls for closer relations with asia and greater participation in united nations - mandated activities .

now in power , the dpj is expected to focus initial attention on sweeping domestic reforms , particularly reforming the political - bureaucratic structure , and on a large - scale stimulus package aimed at transforming japan's struggling economy .

aside from a 10-month period in the early 1990s , the conservative ldp has governed japan since 1955 as either a stand - alone ruling party or , as is currently the case , in coalition with other parties .

throughout this period , the ldp has been a staunch supporter of the u.s. - japan security treaty and , in recent years , has sought a major expansion of bilateral defense cooperation .

the ldp's grip on power was significantly weakened in 2007 , when the left - leaning dpj won control of the upper house of japan's bicameral parliament ( known as the diet ) in coalition with the sdp and pnp .

the resulting "twisted diet" was marked by legislative gridlock across a range of domestic and foreign policies .

over the past year , the dpj has increased its popular support by attacking the ldp's handling of the economy , opaque governing style , and unpopular leadership .

this strategy increasingly put the ldp on the defensive , and on july 12 , 2009 , the dpj defeated the ldp in the tokyo metropolitan assembly elections , prompting prime minister aso to dissolve the lower house on july 21 and schedule nationwide elections .

although the dpj won a decisive victory over the ldp on august 30 it fell just short of winning a two - thirds supermajority in the lower house .

in japan's parliamentary system , the lower house can pass legislation over opposition in the weaker upper house if there is a two - thirds majority of votes .

had the dpj won a supermajority on its own , it would have had the option of shedding its coalition partners .

as it is , the dpj will maintain the coalition with the leftist social democratic party ( sdp ) and the anti - reform people's new party ( pnp ) in order to maintain control of the upper house of the diet .

the next upper house elections are scheduled for july of 2010 .

now that the dpj is the main ruling party , it will be expected to make good on at least some of its ambitious campaign proposals to "change japan. .

the party is expected to focus initial attention on implementing a number of domestic programs , including an allowance for families with children , a reduction of highway toll charges , and a reorganization of the power structure between politicians and central government bureaucrats .

according to dpj sources and media reports , foreign policy and alliance relations with the united states will not be the immediate focus of the new government .

in the run - up to the august 30 election , the dpj toned down some of its criticism of the bilateral alliance , indicating a potentially more pragmatic approach toward the united states .

however , the party remains deeply divided on foreign policy issues and party leaders continue to send conflicting signals about the kind of relationship they seek to strike with the united states over the short and long term .

the political changeover in tokyo following the august 30 elections represents something of a watershed moment for u.s. - japan relations .

cooperation between washington and previous ldp - backed governments has been virtually unbroken for much of the postwar period .

many experts believe that the high point of bilateral relations occurred earlier this decade , partly as a result of the close personal rapport between former president george w. bush and former ldp prime minister junichiro koizumi , which set the tone for close working - level coordination between their two governments .

in the wake of the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks , the koizumi government stated its unequivocal support for the united states and took unprecedented steps to provide rear - area assistance for u.s. - led anti - terror operations in afghanistan .

in 2003 , koizumi dispatched ground and air units of the jsdf to contribute to humanitarian reconstruction efforts in iraq .

these measures were followed by major bilateral agreements in 2005 and 2006 to "transform" the u.s. - japan alliance in order to meet emerging security challenges .

the dpj has often expressed skepticism , and at times outright opposition , to many of these bilateral security initiatives , giving rise to questions among many u.s. - based experts as to the potential impact a dpj government might have on the u.s. - japan alliance .

these concerns are compounded by a relative lack of familiarity between dpj leaders and counterparts in the united states , although interaction between both sides has increased in the months leading up to this year's lower house elections .

a review of stated dpj foreign policy positions indicates some areas of concern for u.s. interests , but does not rule out potential avenues for enhanced bilateral cooperation with the incoming dpj - led government .

the political changeover in japan requires the united states to cooperate with a new and largely unfamiliar government in tokyo .

several upcoming high - level events , such as the opening session of the u.n. general assembly and the g20 summit , both in september , and a planned u.s. - japan bilateral summit in tokyo this november , may present president obama with multiple opportunities to interact with the new japanese prime minister in the coming months .

it remains to be seen whether the two leaders will see eye to eye on strengthening the u.s. - japan alliance and enhancing bilateral cooperation to confront a range of global challenges .

in a statement released shortly after the august 30 lower house elections , the white house stated its confidence that the close partnership between japan and the united states will continue to flourish under the new leadership in tokyo .

