prompted in part by proposals to close the detention facility or transfer detainees to the united states , the continued detention of alleged enemy combatants at the u.s .

naval station in guantanamo bay , cuba , was the subject of considerable interest during the 111 th congress .

seven enacted measures contain provisions that directly restrict the transfer or release of guantanamo detainees , particularly into the united states .

many of the restrictions applied only to funds appropriated during the 2010 fiscal year .

however , congress temporarily extended conditions imposed by fy2010 appropriations measures through march 4 , 2011 .

additionally , the ike skelton national defense authorization act for fy2011 ( 2011 ndaa , p.l .

111-383 ) , which was signed into law on january 7 , 2011 , contains blanket restrictions on the use of military funds either to transfer or release guantanamo detainees into the united states , or assist in the transfer or release of such persons into the country .

the act also imposes restrictions on the transfer of detainees to the custody of certain foreign countries , in an effort to minimize the likelihood that transferred detainees return to hostilities .

this report surveys provisions restricting transfer , together with other provisions enacted in the 111 th congress relating to guantanamo detainees .

for more detailed explorations of the legal issues related to the potential closure of the detention facility or the transfer , release , and treatment of detainees , see crs report r40139 , closing the guantanamo detention center: legal issues , by [author name scrubbed] et al .

in 2001 , congress authorized the president's use of "all necessary and appropriate force" against those responsible for the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks .

pursuant to that authority , the united states has captured suspected al qaeda and taliban members and detained them at several locations , including guantanamo .

most of the 779 persons detained at guantanamo at some point during post - 9 / 11 military operations have been transferred to a foreign government for continued detention or release .

as of january 11 , 2010 , 173 detainees continue to be held at the facility .

a number of issues concerning the remaining detainees are unsettled .

in some instances , the united states has encountered difficulties repatriating or resettling guantanamo detainees who are no longer believed to be enemy belligerents , either because it has been unable to find a country willing to accept them , or because of concerns that a detainee would face torture if transferred to a particular country .

other issues have arisen concerning whether to try certain detainees for criminal offenses in either military or civilian courts , or whether some detainees may lawfully be held for the duration of the conflict with al qaeda and the taliban so as to prevent their return to hostilities .

since its inception , the policy of detaining suspected belligerents at guantanamo has been the subject of controversy .

shortly after taking office , president barack obama issued three executive orders affecting u.s. policy towards guantanamo detainees .

most notably , executive order 13492 called for the guantanamo detention facility to be closed as soon as practicable , and no later than january 22 , 2010 .

it also ordered an immediate review of each detainee's status by a special task force and temporarily halted all proceedings before military commissions .

although the order's deadline for the closure of the guantanamo detention facility was not met , the obama administration has stated that it remains committed to closing the facility as expeditiously as possible .

military commission proceedings for some guantanamo detainees charged with war crimes have also resumed .

two additional executive orders addressed overall wartime detention policy .

one limited the methods for interrogating persons in u.s. custody ( as part of any armed conflict ) to those listed in the army field manual on human intelligence collector operations , although it provides an exception for interrogations by the federal bureau of investigation ( fbi ) , stating that the fbi may "continu[e] to use authorized , non - coercive techniques of interrogation that are designed to elicit voluntary statements and do not involve the use of force , threats , or promises. .

another executive order established the special task force on detainee disposition , tasked with "identif[ying] lawful options" for the disposition of guantanamo detainees and others captured by the united states .

because executive orders can be revoked or modified by subsequent presidential directives , legislation would be necessary to make the president's policies permanent .

likewise , congress may reverse or adjust the approach of the executive orders by statute in any area in which it has the authority to act .

key issues implicated by the potential closure of the guantanamo detention facility include the transfer or release of detainees and procedures for prosecuting them or assessing their enemy belligerency status .

some members of congress have noted that issues related to the disposition of the remaining detainees complicate any legislative actions to fund , mandate , or prohibit closure of the detention facility .

for example , when introducing a bill proposing a timeline for closure of the facility , senator dianne feinstein noted that "the hard part about closing guantanamo is not deciding to go do it ; it is figuring out what to do with the remaining detainees. .

thus , much of the legislative activity related to guantanamo has focused on the transfer , release , and treatment of detainees .

proposed transfers to the united states have garnered particular attention .

in november 2009 , the u.s. department of justice announced that five guantanamo detainees would be transferred to new york for prosecution for criminal offenses related to the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks ( one guantanamo detainee had already been transferred to the united states in june 2009 to face criminal charges related to the bombing of the u.s. embassies in tanzania and kenya ) .

in december 2009 , the president issued a memorandum directing the acquisition of the thomson correctional center , a maximum - security facility in illinois , so that designated guantanamo detainees could be transferred there for continued detention .

the implementation of these proposals was reportedly placed on hold , with alternative approaches being developed .

provisions relating to guantanamo detainees were enacted as part of nine laws in the 111 th congress .

seven of these measures limit the use of funds to transfer or release guantanamo detainees in the united states: the 2009 supplemental appropriations act ( p.l .

111-32 ) ; the department of homeland security appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-83 ) ; the 2010 national defense authorization act ( p.l .

111-84 ) ; the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-88 ) ; the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-117 ) ; the department of defense appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-118 ) ; and the 2011 ndaa ( p.l .

111-383 ) .

the majority of these enactments contain restrictions on the use of appropriated funds to transfer or release guantanamo detainees into the united states ; the most stringent restriction being found in the 2011 ndaa , which includes a blanket prohibition on the use of authorized funds to transfer or release guantanamo detainees into the country for any purpose .

two other measures enacted in the 111 th congress , the supplemental appropriations act , 2010 ( p.l .

111-212 ) , and the intelligence authorization act for fy2010 ( p.l .

111-259 ) , do not contain provisions directly affecting guantanamo detainees , but do require the executive to supply certain information to congress or the public that pertains to such persons .

congress did not enact any fy2011 regular appropriations acts by the end of the 2010 fiscal year , instead , congress passed a series of continuing resolutions to temporarily extend funding for federal agencies .

on december 22 , 2010 , president obama signed the continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( p.l .

111-322 ) into law .

the act generally extends funding for federal agencies at the fy2010 enacted spending levels through march 4 , 2011 , under the authority and conditions provided for under fy2010 appropriations acts .

accordingly , restrictions imposed by fy2010 appropriations measures on the use of funds for the transfer and release of guantanamo detainees remain in place .

numerous legislative proposals introduced during the 111 th congress addressed the disposition or treatment of guantanamo detainees .

early in the congress , several proposals were introduced that would have required the closure of the guantanamo detention facility within a specified period .

however , more recent legislative proposals , including enacted legislation discussed earlier in this report , sought to restrict the transfer or release of guantanamo detainees into the united states , significantly impacting efforts by the obama administration to close the facility .

other proposals introduced during the 111 th congress raised issues not addressed in the enacted or pending authorization and appropriations measures .

it is possible that the proposals , though not enacted into law , might inform legislation in the 112 th congress .

soon after taking office , president obama issued an executive order to effectuate the closure of the guantanamo detention facility within a year .

the announced deadline for closing the facility has not been met , arguably in part because of a series of congressional enactments limiting executive discretion to transfer or release detainees into the united states .

congress has passed numerous measures which suggest strong opposition to the possibility that a detainee might be released into the united states , even if he is found not to have been an enemy belligerent .

until recently , congress had been less resistant to the possibility of transferring detainees into the united states for criminal prosecution , provided that the executive first provides congress with a risk assessment and other information relating to the proposed transfer .

however , at the end of the 111 th congress , legislative activity involved measures to bar the transfer of detainees to the united states for any purpose , including criminal prosecution .

these restrictions were ultimately enacted into law pursuant to the 2011 ndaa .

by prohibiting military funds from being used to transfer or release detainees into the united states , or assist in the transfer or release of detainees into the country , the act seems to ensure that the guantanamo detention facility remains open and at least through the 2011 fiscal year , and perhaps for the foreseeable future .

moreover , the measure appears to make military tribunals the only viable forum by which guantanamo detainees could be tried for criminal offenses , as no civilian court operates within guantanamo .

other changes effected by legislation enacted in the 111 th congress , such as the establishment of new military commission procedures , may also significantly impact the treatment and disposition of guantanamo detainees .

these and other proposals in the 111 th congress are likely to inform future legislative debates regarding the treatment and rights of detainees at guantanamo and elsewhere .

