article ii , section 2 of the u.s. constitution provides that the president shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , judges of the supreme court , and all other officers of the united states , whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for , and which shall be established by law: but the congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers , as they think proper , in the president alone , in the courts of law , or in the heads of departments .

a number of the appointments made by president barack h. obama to his administration or by cabinet secretaries to their departments have been referred to , especially by the news media , as "czars. .

for some , the term is being used to convey an appointee's title ( eg , climate "czar" ) in shorthand .

for others , it is used to convey a sense that power is being centralized in the white house or certain entities .

when used in political science literature , the term generally refers to white house policy coordination or an intense focus by the appointee on an issue of great magnitude .

congress has noticed these appointments and in the 111 th congress examined some of them .

the senate subcommittee on the constitution of the committee on the judiciary , and the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs , for example , conducted hearings on the "czar" issue on october 6 , 2009 , and october 22 , 2009 , respectively .

legislative action has focused on prohibitions on the use of appropriated funds to compensate certain appointees .

p.l .

113-76 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2014 , enacted on january 17 , 2014 , prohibits the use of funds to pay the salaries and expenses for the ( 1 ) director , white house office of health reform ; ( 2 ) assistant to the president for energy and climate change ; ( 3 ) senior advisor to the secretary of the treasury assigned to the presidential task force on the auto industry and senior counselor for manufacturing policy ; and ( 4 ) white house director of urban affairs .

a similar provision was included in p.l .

112-74 , the consolidated appropriations act , 2012 , enacted on december 23 , 2011 .

division c of the law included the financial services and general government ( fsgg ) appropriations act .

the office of management and budget's statement of administration policy on this provision reiterated the president's authority with regard to appointments in stating that , section 632 would prohibit the use of funds for several positions that involve providing advice directly to the president .

it also would deny funding for any "substantially similar positions. .

as the president indicated in an april 15 , 2011 statement regarding virtually identical provisions in prior legislation , the president has well - established authority to supervise and oversee the executive branch , and to obtain advice in furtherance of this supervisory authority .

the president also has the prerogative to obtain advice that will assist him in carrying out his constitutional responsibilities , and do so not only from executive branch officials and employees outside the white house , but also from advisors within it .

one issue of interest to congress may be whether some of these appointments ( particularly some of those to the white house office ) , made outside of the advice and consent process of the senate , circumvent the requirements of the appointments clause of the u.s. constitution .

a second issue of interest may be whether the activities of such appointees are subject to oversight by , and accountable to , congress .

this report provides background information and selected views on the role of some of these appointees , provides legal analyses of the appointments clause and oversight by congress of presidential advisors , and discusses options to enhance the accountability of such appointees to congress .

every american president , since george washington , has needed advice and assistance .

the president's committee on administrative management ( commonly referred to as the brownlow commission ) , which had been established by president franklin d. roosevelt , closely examined this need .

the committee's charge , "a careful study of the organization of the executive branch of the government ... with the primary purpose of considering the problem of administrative management," resulted in a report that was submitted to the president and then released to congress on january 12 , 1937 .

stating that , "the president needs help," the committee recommended that the president "should be given a small number of executive assistants who would be his direct aides in dealing with the managerial agencies and administrative departments of the government. .

the reorganization act of 1939 "empowered the president to propose plans of reorganization , subject to a veto by a majority of both houses of congress , and to also appoint six administrative assistants. .

on september 8 , 1939 , president roosevelt issued executive order ( e.o. ) .

8248 , to create the enclave of federal agencies known as the executive office of the president ( eop ) .

many , if not most , of the president's closest advisors and assistants on matters of policy , politics , administration , and management are within the eop .

over time , some of the eop's components have been created by the president and others have been established by congress .

some components , such as the white house office ( who ) , office of management and budget ( omb , formerly the bureau of the budget ) , the council of economic advisers , and the national security council , have endured to the present day , appearing to hold permanent status .

notwithstanding these continuing functions , a president may have need for special assistance that a new white house office or position may provide .

as described by one scholar , no president is confined by the organization charts of the past.... a president's priorities change — as do his views of the nation's priorities — and may well expand in new directions .

the white house , as the support center for furthering those priorities , will be flexible and will adapt to those changes .

its organizational structure will jump beyond the "continuing" arrangements .

if a president wants to begin important new initiatives , to dramatize the extent of his personal commitment , to respond quickly to today's crisis or tomorrow's threat , he will be pressed to create new organizational forms to support his efforts .

the "czar" moniker has been attached to some of these special assistant positions since at least the administration of president roosevelt .

a cartoon drawn by clifford kennedy berryman and published on september 7 , 1942 , probably in the evening star ( washington , dc ) , showed three of president roosevelt's appointees — "czar" of prices , leon henderson ; "czar" of production , donald nelson ; and "czar" of ships , emory s. land — crowded together on one throne , wearing crowns and ermine - trimmed robes , and wondering where the new economic "czar" would sit .

succeeding presidents appointed special assistants who were similarly , at times , referred to by the news media as "czars. .

as examples , president richard nixon appointed john love , the so - called energy "czar," as the director of the office of energy policy in 1973 , and president clinton appointed john koskinen , the so - called y2k "czar," as the chairman of the president's council on y2k conversion in 1998 .

early in his administration , president obama created several new positions , including the assistant to the president for energy and climate change , the deputy assistant to the president and director of urban affairs , and the director , white house office of health reform , that were not subject to senate confirmation , the incumbents of which were dubbed "czars. .

additionally , several sub - cabinet - level positions that require senate confirmation have similarly been termed "czars. .

for example , david hayes was referred to by some in the news media as the "water czar'' during his tenure as deputy secretary at the department of the interior .

further , the incumbents of some other positions that are authorized in statute and subject to senate confirmation , such as the administrator of the office of information and regulatory affairs at the office of management and budget , have also been referred to as "czars. .

several special envoy or special representative positions , such as the special envoy for the middle east , have been similarly described .

concern has been raised that the president's hiring , or use , of various presidential advisors circumvents the requirements of the appointments clause of the u.s. constitution .

the appointments clause establishes that the president shall nominate , and by and with the advice and consent of the senate , shall appoint ambassadors , other public ministers and consuls , judges of the supreme court , and all other officers of the united states , whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for , and which shall be established by law: but the congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers , as they think proper , in the president alone , in the courts of law , or in the heads of departments .

under the text of the clause , it is "[o]fficers of the united states," whose appointments are established by law that are to be subject to senate confirmation .

thus , principal officers will be appointed in this manner ; however , congress may choose to vest the appointment of those they consider "inferior [o]fficers" in either the president , the courts of law , or in the heads of departments .

before delving further into the appointments clause , it is first useful to briefly discuss the authority of congress in relation to the creation and operation of the executive bureaucracy .

although the infrastructure of the executive branch and other entities charged with the execution of the law is not specified by the constitution , it is clear that the framers intended to vest the task of creating the governmental structure in congress alone .

thus , it seems evident that the president cannot establish executive offices .

congress has been generally given wide latitude to use its legislative power to structure the modern administrative state by creating and locating offices , determining qualifications for officeholders , prescribing their appointment , and establishing general standards for the operation of the offices under the necessary and proper clause .

the judiciary generally will interfere with this legislative power only in cases where such an exercise clearly constitutes an attempt by congress at aggrandizement or encroachment .

accordingly , because the appointments clause has been deemed "among the significant structural safeguards of the constitutional scheme," congress is to ensure that it adheres to the strictures of the appointments clause when prescribing the appointment for certain offices .

in examining the concerns surrounding presidential advisors , congress may decide that no action is needed .

however , should it decide otherwise , there are some legislative and non - legislative options .

two senate committees conducted hearings on the issue of the appointment of so - called "czars" in the executive branch in october 2009 .

this section of the report provides a summary of selected viewpoints expressed at each hearing .

the senate subcommittee on the constitution of the committee on the judiciary conducted a hearing entitled "examining the history and legality of executive branch 'czars'" on october 6 , 2009 .

in his opening statement , the subcommittee chairman , senator russell feingold , noted that no one disputes that the president is allowed to hire advisers and aides... .

but congress and the american people have the right to ensure that the positions in our government that have been delegated legal authority are also the positions that are exercising that authority .

if — and i am not saying this is the case — individuals in the white house are exercising legal authority or binding the executive branch without having been given that power by congress , now , that's a problem .

and congress also has the right to verify that any directives given by a white house czar to a cabinet member are directly authorized by the president .

the ranking member , senator tom coburn , stated the importance of "open , transparent government" in his opening remarks: and the president ought to be about ... re - establish[ing] the confidence ... that everything's above board , that it's transparent , that we can see it's working .

and if people truly do have significant authority and are not confirmed by the senate , then that's a problem .

and so i don't know whether that's the case or not .

two senators submitted statements for the hearing record .

in his statement , senator richard durbin noted the "important principles" of "transparency and accountability to congress": public officials , including those who work for the president , should be responsive to congressional inquiries .

members of congress can expect to be fully and timely informed about the activities of executive branch officials who are designated by the president to coordinate policy across executive agencies .

his statement also expressed disagreement "with those who say the obama administration is acting differently than past administrations when it comes to the use of czars and presidential advisers," noted that "there is ample opportunity for congressional oversight over these advisors," and concluded that "president obama's advisors aren't doing anything more than the law and the constitution allow. .

senator john cornyn's statement noted that , "these czars present serious accountability concerns" and included these points: first , it seems that some of president obama's czars may wield a measure of authority usually reserved to principal officers of the united states .

in particular , some appear to exercise significant authority and have broad terms of duty , jurisdiction , and tenure... .

if these czars are principal officers , they must be subject to senate confirmation as required by the constitution.... second , even if none of the czars are principal officers , their ability to exercise decision - making authority absent congressional oversight is troubling .

controlling access to the president and possessing great responsibilities , czars can act unchecked in ways that significantly influence or duplicate the duties of senate - confirmed officials.... third , any distribution of taxpayer funds by unaccountable czars is unacceptable .

because we do not know exactly what the czars do , it is difficult to determine how much influence they have over the granting of federal money .

five witnesses presented testimony before the subcommittee , each of whom presented an opening statement .

among the viewpoints expressed in those statements were the following .

bradley h. patterson , jr. , scholar on the presidency and author of "to serve the president," discussed the meaning of the term , "czar," and the issues of confirmation for and testimony from white house advisors: my definition of czar means , first , that this person reports only to the president.... public [law] 95-570 is silent about any requirement for senate confirmation of these appointments .

i interpret this silence as evidencing the intent of congress to reconfirm in 1978 the historic practice of not requiring senate approval of white house staff members , whether they're called czars or not .

likewise , white house staffers do not give formal testimony to congressional committees , unless , as in the watergate instance , criminality is alleged.... white house officers constantly visit the hill for informal conferences with members and staffs.... white house staff members have no legal responsibility other than to assist and advise the president... .

it would be unthinkable that law clerks at the supreme court should be in any way accountable to the president or to congress .

it would be unthinkable that the appointments of any of the personal legislative or committee staff here at the capitol should be approved by the white house , and likewise , vice versa... .

the president's personal staff are independently responsible only to the president .

and in the end , he [the president] is the only czar that is .

and he is accountable to the american electorate .

matthew spalding , director , b. kenneth simon center for american studies , the heritage foundation , discussed "czars" and the bureaucratic state: czar is ... a clever label .

it's clearly meant to imply ... certain positions a breadth of authority and leveled status beyond the particulars of the formal title , seemingly beyond the confines of the normal process... .

the rise of government by bureaucrats , largely due to the delegation of power from congress to administrative agencies , combined with the removal of those agencies from the president's control , has given rise to efforts by presidents from both political parties to get the bureaucratic state under control through various mechanisms .

the rise of czars in the current administration is merely another manifestation ... of this phenomenon .

tuan samahon , associate professor , villanova university school of law , discussed the meaning of the term , "officer," under the constitution: this line between non - officer and officer is not defined by the appointments clause , itself , but we do have some authority .

recently , under the bush administration , the justice department's office of legal counsel in april of 2007 issued an opinion that synthesized and harmonized the supreme court's opinions on who is an officer for appointments clause purposes ... two requirements that are necessary ... in order to be an officer , you must hold an office , which in turn is defined as a position to which is delegated by legal authority a portion of the sovereign powers of the federal government , what the supreme court in buckley v. valeo termed significant authority .

the second requirement is that this position must be continuing .

john c. harrison , james madison distinguished professor of law , university of virginia school of law , discussed the requirements that underlie the exercise of legal authority and whether white house staff have such authority: there are two governing legal principles.... the first one , the appointments clause .

it is a necessary condition for the exercise of actual legal authority in the government for someone in the executive branch , for anyone other than the president to have been appointed to an office pursuant to the appointments clause , to be either a superior officer or an inferior officer .

the other necessary condition for the exercise of power by anyone other than the president is some source of statutory authority , because only the president has constitutional power and the president's constitutional powers are essentially non - delegable .

the consequence of those two principles is that it is extremely doubtful whether anyone on the white house staff , the sort of person sometimes called a czar , could actually exercise legal authority , at least as a formal matter.... although it is common for there to be a divergence between influence in the government and actual formal legal authority , especially with respect to the white house staff — it is extremely common for members of the white house staff to be extremely influential , even though they cannot take any genuinely legal binding decision — whether that division between legal authority and informal practical influence is a good thing is a difficult question of policy .

tj halstead , deputy assistant director , american law division , congressional research service , library of congress , testified on the application of the appointments clause to white house advisors and the viability of any legislative proposal to limit the use of such advisors: [t]here's no indication that these advisers — particularly those serving in unconfirmed positions within the executive office of the president — have been vested with any actual executive authority , and that precludes a categorical conclusion that the requirements of the appointments clause apply to their service.... under current jurisprudential principles , it's difficult to discern a basis upon which a review in court would conclude as a legal matter that the existence of these advisers runs contrary to our constitutional system.... also , it's not clear that legislative proposals , even if enacted , would have much , if any , effect on presidential utilization of advisers , as it does not appear possible for congress to prohibit either implicitly or explicitly a president from relying upon personal advisers irrespective of whether they are confirmed or draw salary .

mr. halstead also discussed the oversight authority of congress: given the limitations that are inherent in any judicial or legislative response to this controversy , it seems that the most effective congressional response may be one that is based simply on persistent and aggressive assertion of the oversight prerogatives of the house and senate .

longstanding supreme court precedent recognizes the power of congress to engage in oversight of any matter related to its legislative function .

and even while there is no explicit provision in the constitution authorizing congressional oversight , the supreme court has declared that that power is so essential as to be implicit in the general vesting of legislative authority in the congress.... congress's power in the oversight context certainly extends to the receipt of testimony from presidential advisers .

research conducted by my colleagues at crs has revealed numerous instances where such advisers have testified before committees , effectively disposing of the argument that separation of powers principles impose a structural bar to the appearance of these advisers before congress.... [t]he oversight process ... requires sustained and focused effort from members of congress and their staff ... a robust oversight regime focusing on specific , substantive executive action taken in areas over which such advisers have political influence could be an extremely effective approach and would enable congress as an institution to more forcefully assert its constitutional prerogatives and to ensure compliance with its enactments .

following the opening statements , senator feingold established for the record that none of the witnesses had appointments clause concerns "for so - called czars that are housed in federal agencies and report to senate - confirmed officials. .

several specific questions were then discussed .

first , senator feingold asked "what would these [white house] advisers have to be doing ... that would trigger an appointments clause issue ? .

and specifically , how should we analyze the widely reported duty that some of these officers have to ... 'coordinate policy development' ... between two or more departments ? .

in response , mr. harrison replied , i think the sort of thing that would be problematic would be if someone like that were to do one of two things: one , to give an order to someone with actual legal authority that did not simply represent carrying forward the president's order , that was not just communicating the president's order ; or were that person — and i think this is highly unlikely — to purport to take some actual binding measure himself or herself , for example , issuing a regulation or authorizing an expenditure , an exercise of formal legal authority .

mr. spalding stated as an example that he found "to be somewhat troubling ... the climate czar being a chief negotiator , doing automobile emissions standards based on a supreme court interpretation of the clean air act ... [y]ou're now at several stages of separation , getting into some operational regulatory questions , not the epa administrator , whom you have approved. .

responding to a similar question raised by senator sheldon whitehouse later in the hearing , he cited as any instance "if an agent of the president is actually doing things that go to the extent of seeming to step on an officer that has been approved by congress.... given the legislative instructions from congress to carry out the law , that strikes me as potentially raising a serious issue. .

in another question , senator feingold queried whether the senate should "be concerned about the possibility that an nsc [national security council] staffer may end up having more ability to influence foreign policy decisions than , say , a senate - confirmed ... assistant secretary of state," given that "the nsc plays an important role in coordinating the work of different departments and agencies. .

in response , mr. patterson noted that president obama had not accepted the recommendation of the project on national security reform "that the assistant to the president for national security affairs be confirmed by the senate and be given a great deal more authority," and he didn't think "any future president would , either. .

he further stated that recommendations of nsc staff members would be made to the president through the national security advisor .

senator coburn quoted the special master for tarp executive compensation , kenneth feinberg's statement that "i have the discretion conferred upon by congress [sic] to attempt to recover compensation that has already been paid to executives" and then asked for a legal analysis of the special master's position .

in response , mr. harrison stated that two questions would have to be answered: so the question , first , would be whether the secretary of the treasury had the statutory authority to create that office pursuant to his authority under tarp or some other legislation and then whether he has appropriately exercised it so as to constitute mr. feinberg an inferior officer... .

the second question — because he is an inferior officer , clearly not a principal or superior officer , because the senate didn't confirm him — ... would be whether he receives adequate supervision from a principal officer , someone who is senate - confirmed , ... and to know that , you would need to know the extent to which he is overseen presumably by the secretary of the treasury , perhaps some other higher officer in the ... department of the treasury .

there are a number of cases in the supreme court , in the lower courts about exactly how much supervision is required... .

but the basic principle is that for an inferior officer to operate permissibly , the inferior officer has to be subject to substantial supervision from somebody higher up... .

i don't think there's any difficulty with your calling an inferior officer to testify ... [y]ou can call the secretary of the treasury , so you can find out about the legal nature of the relationship ... [y]ou could find out about both sides , about whether the secretary thinks he's supervising mr. feinberg and how much supervision mr. feinberg thinks he's getting .... and i think the treasury department would have to take the position that mr. feinberg is at least — is an inferior officer , because i believe he is exercising some significant authority pursuant to the laws of the united states .

mr. spalding testified that "congress needs to be more careful in the types of legislative discretion it gives , which in many cases gave rise to the creation of these czars in the first place" and cited the tarp legislation as "a great example of that. .

he further explained , "do you give too much discretion , which then allows for the type of policy this person is pursuing ... is that actually violating your legislative direction to the officer , secretary of treasury , in carrying out your legislative intent ? .

building on mr. spalding's statements , mr. samahon reiterated the importance of statutes stating clearly who has the power to appoint , thereby making clear the "judgment of who is actually an inferior officer," and noted that , under the case of morrison v. olson "you could just be very , very powerful and therefore , deemed not an inferior officer. .

senator feingold asked mr. halstead "if he [mr. feinberg] is an inferior officer in the treasury department , is there any reason he can't be asked to" testify ? .

mr. halstead replied , no , not at all ... there are roughly 75 instances since ... the end of the world war ii era where presidential advisers , high - level presidential advisers , have appeared before congressional committees .

now the fact that there's no structural separation of powers prohibition against the appearance of these individuals is a much different thing than saying it's going to be easy to get them to appear before congress .... [when the invitation to testify is declined] at that point , it becomes a question for a committee and congress as an institution as to whether or not to assert the institutional prerogatives and powers that it has to compel testimony from certain individuals .... [i]t's not uncommon as a practical matter for the senate to obtain the commitment of a nominee to an advice and consent position that they will affirmatively agree to appear before the committee when requested .... to get a commitment from the secretary of the treasury or to any individual so appointed or to any other position that they would not only adhere to that agreement in relation to their general duties , but also to inquiries from the committee as to the impact that these advisers or other personnel are having on their carrying out or conduct of the legal authorities that are vested specifically in them .

responding to a question asked by senator coburn on a so - called "czar" perhaps exercising authority that he or she doesn't have by statute , mr. spalding expressed this viewpoint: "[t]he main question at issue is responsibility and accountability .

one of the problems with the modern administrative state is it's not oftentimes clear who's actually responsible and thus who is accountable , especially from a ... congressional or executive point of view.... congress could write clear laws that make these things known. .

finally , senator feingold noted , "as chairman of the african affairs subcommittee of the foreign relations committee , i've supported the appointment of a special envoy to sudan .

there's also a senate - confirmed inferior officer who's the assistant secretary for the bureau of african affairs .

should i be concerned that this special envoy and his staff may unconstitutionally infringe ... or ignore the assistant secretary's authority ? .

mr. harrison responded: i doubt an arrangement like that would create a constitutional question , provided that the special envoy was appointed appropriately as an inferior officer ... and the lines of authority were clearly drawn ... both in the statute and in whatever the president and the state department set up.... the real concern is less constitutional ... and more practical .

any time you have overlapping responsibilities , it's extremely important that people know who ... makes what decisions and ultimately ... who is in charge of actually acting for the united states .

responding to senator feingold's follow - up question , "and i take it a legitimate concern for the congressional oversight , regardless of whether it raises legal issues," he stated , "making sure ... that the government is set up properly ... and is functioning properly is a central role of the congress. .

mr. samahon stated his view that , "i think there is potentially a problem ... [g]oing back to the olc [office of legal counsel] april 2007 opinion that , if one is exercising diplomatic functions , one would plainly seem to be an officer .

what the question would then be is whether being a special envoy is a continuing office such that the second requirement for officerhood is met .

if that's the case , then we have someone who should be subject to presidential nomination with senate advice and consent .

mr. halstead noted that , "with regard to congressional oversight prerogatives in such a context , the supreme court has stated that the ... oversight prerogatives of congress are at their peak when looking into allegations of maladministration , governmental inefficiency .. .

so it would clearly be something that would be very suited for congressional inquiry. .

senator feingold concluded the hearing by stating that administrations going back decades have created positions with important portfolios that are not subject to senate approval .

this is certainly not an isolated issue with the obama administration ... congress may need to act to make sure that , going forward , the proper checks and balances are in place .

the senate committee on homeland security and governmental affairs conducted a hearing entitled "presidential advice and consent: the past , present , and future of policy czars" on october 22 , 2009 .

in his opening statement , the chairman , senator joseph lieberman , stated that these questions would be examined: "have presidents of both parties , including president obama , consolidated power excessively in the white house through the appointment of these officials contrary to at least the spirit of the constitution if not our laws , particularly as against the authority of members of the cabinet," .... "does the growing use of czars in the white house , in the administration this and past ones , frustrate congress in carrying out its constitutional responsibility to oversee the expenditure of the public's money , which we appropriate," and what can or should be congress's response .

senator susan collins , the ranking member , expressed these concerns about "czars" in her opening statement: the proliferation of czars diminishes the ability of congress to conduct its oversight responsibilities and to hold officials accountable for their actions .

these czars can create confusion about which officials are responsible for various policy decisions .

they can duplicate or dilute the statutory authority and responsibilities that congress has conferred on cabinet officials and other senior executive branch officials ... .

in addition the proliferation of czars can circumvent the constitutionally mandated process of advice and consent .

czars can exercise considerable power and influence over major policy , and yet they are not required to clear the rigorous senate confirmation process .

czars bypass this important constitutional protection through a unilateral grant of authority from the president .... positions subject to senate confirmation or otherwise recognized by our laws such as the director of national intelligence , the national security advisor and the chairman of the recovery accountability and transparency board do not raise the same concerns with accountability , transparency and oversight because they are recognized in law and because many of these positions are subject to senate confirmation .

later , she provided an example to illustrate her concerns and discussed an amendment that she had offered during the senate's consideration of the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act for fy2010: for example , i think congress should be able to call the president's climate czar , carol browner , the energy and environmental czar , to ask her about the negotiations that she conducted with the automobile industry that led to very significant policy changes with regard to emission standards .

i think that's particularly important because the supreme court in 2007 held that it was the environmental protection agency that had that very responsibility under the clean air act .

and yet these negotiations were not undertaken by the epa administrator , but rather by the white house czar .... [w]hat i offered on the senate floor , but it fell to a point of order unrelated to the merits , is that ... the president make available to congress to testify , upon a reasonable request , individuals who have responsibility for interagency development or coordination of any rule , regulation or policy and that it would apply to only those individuals who are without statutory authority ... the second half of the amendment also called on the president to provide us twice a year with a written summary of the activities of these officers within the white house .

senator robert bennett requested "as a point of personal privilege a few moments in an opening statement" to make remarks , that included the excerpts below , "because the white house has specifically identified me as being hypocritical on this issue by virtue of my position with respect to a y2k czar" : in november of 1997 i requested that president clinton appoint a y2k czar .

i was the chairman of the y2k committee ... in the congress to deal with a problem that ... cut across the entire government .... [i]n february of 1998 president clinton appointed a y2k czar , john koskinen ... [o]ne of the first things ... [he] did ... was to call me ... and set up a pattern of regular consultation .

every wednesday afternoon ... [he] called me ... and set up a pattern of regular consultation .... that was a very different situation than the situation described by senator collins and the letter which i saw .... the kind of circumstance we created then was very different from the kind of circumstance that we see now .

later , he expressed this observation: congress passed a law creating the council of economic advisers , and yet there is an economic czar , paul volcker ... and the question is , who has the president's ear on the economy ? .

and then there's ... larry summers .

and if you want to influence the president , if you're a member of the congress , whom do you call ? .

... the council of economic advisers ? .

... larry summers ? .

or ... paul volcker ? .

... we do happen to have a cabinet officer of health and human services with whom i have never had a conversation about health care , not because i have any opposition to her but because it's my perception that nancy - ann deparle is calling the shots rather than the secretary sebelius .

senator claire mccaskill's opening remarks noted that [t]alking about the y2k czar ... that was not confirmed by the senate .... how ubiquitous the czar was working with the legislature that he was constantly around .

i kept thinking of nancy - ann deparle ... we can't walk down the hall without seeing her .

she is in the chairman's offices constantly of the committees , and the ranking members .

and she's visited across the aisle time after time .. .

so i think there is [sic] situations where a special advisor is created and that doesn't mean they're not working closely with congress in order to solve a problem .

during the discussion on white house advisors and testimony before congress in the question and answer period , senator lieberman read this excerpt from the letter sent by senator robert byrd to president obama: whether an executive official is confirmed by the full senate or appointed by the president alone to serve on the white house staff , that official holds the position by virtue of the authority that the congress has granted to the president .

such white house staffers receive a salary by virtue of the spending authority that congress has granted to the executive branch .

even presidential assistants and advisors have a constitutional obligation to answer questions before the congress , if it is necessary for the congress to fulfill its constitutional oversight and investigative functions .

four witnesses presented testimony before the subcommittee .

each of the witnesses presented an opening statement .

among the viewpoints expressed in those statements were the following .

thomas j. ridge , former assistant to the president for homeland security , and secretary of homeland security , discussed the importance of clear responsibilities for white house advisors: [p]residents have the discretion and authority to appoint advisors who can assist them in carrying out their presidential obligations .

my interest ... reside[s] in the issues of effective management , transparency , and lines of authority .

who's reporting to whom ? .

how specific is the job description ? .

does the individual initiate , coordinate or execute policy ? .

to whom does that individual report ? .

is it the same person to whom the individual is accountable ? .

... .

some of today's white house czars have come to their positions with little public clarification of duty , and they already have a department of subject authority led by a senate - approved secretary .... [d]o these individuals - these so - called 'czars' ... direct or develop policy ? .

are they accountable to the president , to the secretary , or to both ? .

to whom do private constituencies look to provide input , guidance or opinion ? .

who resolves the conflict between the two ? .

... [w]ithout a clear delineation of responsibilities and reporting authority , this creates both a huge potential management problem and , clearly , the appearance of potential conflict ... [i]t can diminish the capacity of both advisor and secretary to operate effectively in accordance with the department's mission ... [f]rom time to time , it can cause confusion for those under the chain of command of the secretary , as well as outside the department purview .

james p. pfiffner , professor , school of public policy , george mason university , discussed the role of white house advisors: [s]taff personnel certainly may have considerable power or influence as opposed to authority .

but this power is entirely derivative of the president .

white house staffers may communicate orders from the president , but they cannot legally give orders themselves ... white house staffers often make important decisions , but the weight of their decisions depend entirely on the willingness of the president to back them up .... white house czars play essential roles that lift the burden of coordination from the president .

they help to reduce the range of options .

but if the number of czars proliferate , they can clog and confuse presidential authority .... czars may create layers between the president and cabinet secretaries .... members of congress , as well as national leaders , may be confused as to the locus of authoritative decisions .

foreign leaders may not know who speaks for the president ... [c]zars can pull problems into the white house that could be , and should be , settled at the cabinet level ... [o]nly those issues that are central to the president's policy agenda should be in the white house .... czars are often frustrated because they're supposed to be in charge of a policy area , but they do not have the authority commensurate with their responsibilities .

czars cannot enforce decisions on departments or agencies ... [they] control neither personnel nor budgets , and for these they must depend on cabinet secretaries .... white house staffers enjoy proximity to the president .. .

cabinet secretaries are often at a disadvantage in securing presidential attention .

he also noted the role of congress: the framers of the constitution ... placed congress in article i for a reason .

in republican governments , the legislature should predominate in policymaking , as james madison made clear in federalist 51 .

lee a. casey , partner , baker hostetler , and former attorney - advisor , office of legal counsel , u.s. department of justice , discussed the authority of white house advisors: [white house] advisors ... have no power beyond the fact that they are close to the president .

they cannot transform executive branch policy into the policy of the united states .

they can't sign regulations .

they can't submit legislation to congress .

their authority is very limited ... [i]t has been the consistent position of the justice department under both republican and democratic administrations that people in those advisory roles need not be appointed in accordance with the appointments clause , that is by and with the advice and consent of the senate ... [t]hey cannot take action that would create a legal obligation , either on behalf of the government or ... the citizenry at large .

the president can implement policy and transform it into government policy , only through officers that have been appointed under the appointments clause , and who are responsible through the oversight process to congress .

during a discussion on testimony and documents from white house advisors , in the question and answer section of the hearing , he stated , whenever you start getting close to advice that is prepared for and given to the president , you start , obviously , getting into some very difficult separation of powers issues .

but to the extent that the czars who actually hold offices at the agencies , some of which have been confirmed by the senate , undertake a policymaking role in addition to the role they serve in their office , that is fine ... so long as they do not attempt to exercise authority that was not otherwise properly delegated to them .

[author name scrubbed] , former specialist in american national government , congressional research service , library of congress , discussed the history of the use of policy "cars" by presidents: for war mobilization , [franklin d.] roosevelt had at least three successive primary czars: william s. knudsen at the office of production management ... donald nelson , chairman of the war production board ... and james f. byrnes , who led the office of war mobilization ... it also appears that these 'czars' were accountable to congress .

an examination of the april 1941 to april 1943 hearings of the ... senate special committee investigating the national defense program ... chaired by senator harry s. truman ... indicate that knudsen appeared once , his deputy appeared twice , and nelson thrice .

at the conclusion of his statement , mr. relyea suggested several options for congress to consider: when a president prohibits congressional testimony by a czar or other presidential agent , efforts should be made to obtain the desired information in some other way , such as the provision of responsive , factual documents ... a freedom of information act request ... or written answers to interrogatories , testimony by a department or agency official heading the unit in which the czar or presidential agent is located , or a briefing of congressional committee leaders or staff .

the authorization [for the white house office , executive office of the president , and the office of the vice president] might be revisited with a view to the adequacy of its allotments , ... reporting requirements and ... scope , should it be extended to other executive office entities .

following the opening statements , senator lieberman asked , with regard to white house advisors , what if they "actually begin to act like officers , that they are making decisions , they're forcing decisions on cabinet secretaries ... what should our response be ? .

in response , mr. casey stated that "to the extent they act like officers , their actions are not valid , their actions are not legally enforceable .

a court will not enforce an order or a rule signed by a presidential advisor. .

as follow - up questions , senator lieberman asked about the validity of claims that such advisors "should not be called to testify on their policy coordination" and whether congress "should legislate to compel" white house advisors "to testify ... about the policy coordination role that they're playing ? .

mr. casey noted that , "the advice someone gives directly to the president ... is clearly privileged" and stated that "it is difficult to think of a system ... regulating the independence of presidential advice ... that would not raise serious separation of powers issues. .

to mr. ridge , "one of the challenges associated with the ability of congress to even have a basis for inquiry , ... would be resolved , if , in making the appointment , there was public revelation of precisely the function that that advisor was going to play within the white house. .

he added that he thought that congress is not "in a position to do that , because ... the president hasn't outlined specifically what those coordinating responsibilities are. .

senator collins provided an "example of a czar position that i think is very troubling" and then asked the witnesses to comment: in 2007 , this committee wrote legislation that became law that created within the executive office of the president a senate - confirmed position to be coordinator for the prevention of weapons of mass destruction .

and the coordinator's role — which is defined in this law — says that this individual should serve as the principal adviser to the president on all matters relating to the prevention of weapons of mass destruction , proliferation and terrorism ... .

this was to be a senate - confirmed coordinator located within the executive office of the president .

now , neither president bush nor president obama ever filled this statutorily created position , but both of them created and filled a white house policy czar for weapons of mass destruction .

that individual , the wmd czar , has exactly the same functions that were set forth in the law .... [t]his is ... a prime example of ... both presidents appointing a white house policy czar , which completely circumvents a statutorily confirmed position created by congress .

both mr. ridge and mr. pfiffner responded that this circumstance is "very troubling. .

according to mr. ridge , "the conditions are ... so evident ... that your claim for this individual to testify before you should be legitimized – since you created the position , they filled it , but they didn't send a name to the hill. .

to mr. pfiffner , "the fact that that confidential responsibility overlaps or duplicates a position that is supposed to be" a presidential appointment with consent of the senate "is very troubling. .

mr. casey stated that he did not "find it troubling" and suggested that perhaps , "why the office hasn't been filled" is "because there is a feeling that it's simply too close to the president's own authority," thereby raising "very serious separation of powers concerns. .

mr. relyea noted: "in 1944 , with [james] byrnes at the head ... of the office of war mobilization [owm] , that was seen as too powerful in some regards .

he was the president's agent ... appointed without senate confirmation .

owm had been created by executive order .

congress said 'we're going to reconstitute the office,' and they did by statute .... set it up as a senate - confirmed , statutorily created entity .

i think that might be an answer here ; that you eliminate , either by funding or by its role , this white house unit and ... [replace it with] a congressional creation. .

senator mccaskill , while noting that the weapons of mass destruction commission had recommended repeal of the wmd coordinator position because "they don't think it's an appropriate senate - confirmed position," stated that she tended to agree with senator collins that "it would [be] incumbent to fill it , unless and until it is repealed. .

senator lieberman also queried whether "some of these positions that are now within the white house , that appear to be policy coordinating , not within the inner circle ... of the president" should be made statutory .

in response , mr. relyea noted that , "even though congress creates ... a staff authorization for the white house office , provides the funds for the white house office personnel , thus far ... congress has not seen fit to invade that domain and has left it to the president. .

mr. casey stated: "i think the real question is whether by creating one of these offices , you can then effectively prevent the president from looking to someone else to be his adviser on the issue .

and i think that , ... is where the constitutional problem is .... it raises very serious separation of powers issues .

i'm not exactly sure what the courts would do. .

mr. pfiffner suggested , as a solution , "comity between the branches from both sides , so the president doesn't keep trying to keep things away from congress ... and that congress doesn't get too heavy handed , on the other hand. .

mr. ridge cautioned that , "if you decide to legislate ... don't undermine the credibility and the function of the secretary who , ultimately ... is accountable to you. .

later , during the discussion of senator collins's amendment to the department of the interior , environment , and related agencies appropriations act for fy2010 , mr. relyea asked whether consideration had been given to "legislation that would overturn the implementation capacity in that executive order," referring to the type of document issued by the president for some of the white house advisor positions .

senator lieberman concluded the hearing by stating that "i think we both [he and senator collins] share a desire to do something about this to help congress uphold our constitutional responsibility for oversight .

but ... we understand the balance here , as reflected in the constitution. .

