the u.s. department of agriculture ( usda ) combines its research activities into the research , education , and economics ( ree ) mission area .

the mission area is composed of four agencies with the federal responsibility to advance scientific knowledge for agriculture .

activities include the biological , physical , and social sciences related broadly to agriculture , food , and natural resources , delivered through research , statistics , extension , and higher education ( table 1 ) .

federally funded intramural research is intended in part to address issues of national importance and promote basic research , regional coordination , and spillover .

federally funded extramural research activities are decentralized and are often regionally specific and / or applied in nature .

the federal - state research system also supports usda's regulatory programs in the areas of meat , poultry , and egg inspection ; foreign pest and disease exclusion ; and control and eradication of crop and livestock threats , among other things .

although all four usda research agencies are headquartered in washington , dc , much of the work is executed through a set of agency field stations and a network of university partners throughout the united states that operate at the state and local levels .

the agricultural research service ( ars ) has about 100 research centers and work locations across the united states , puerto rico , and the virgin islands ( figure 1 ) .

the national institute of food and agriculture ( nifa ) partners with colleges of agriculture at land - grant universities in 50 states and eight u.s. territories , affiliated state agricultural experiment stations ( saess ) , schools of forestry and veterinary medicine , and the cooperative extension system .

these colleges include the traditional land - grant colleges of agriculture established by the morrill act of 1862 ( "1862 institutions" ) , 19 historically black colleges of agriculture ( "1890 institutions," hbcus ) that were created by the second morrill act of 1890 , and 31 native american colleges ( referred to as tribal colleges ) that gained land - grant status in 1994 ( figure 2 ) .

the economic research service ( ers ) is the only ree agency based entirely in washington , dc .

the house and senate agriculture committees are the committees of jurisdiction for the authorizing statutes and oversight of agricultural research , education , and extension programs .

in recent years , congress has modified agricultural research policy in the "farm bill," most recently in 2014 ( p.l .

113-79 , title vii ) .

annual appropriations bills and hearings provide more frequent opportunities for oversight and determination of funding .

public investment in agricultural research has been linked to productivity gains and economic growth .

studies consistently report high social rates of return ( 20% - 60% annually ) from public agricultural research .

the rate of return may depend on the type of research ( basic vs. applied ) , the duration of the research investment , and the specific commodity being studied .

advances in agricultural research and extension were critical to the huge productivity gains in the united states after world war ii ( figure 6 ) .

yields for some major crops grew about 2% annually from the 1950s through the 1980s , but that growth has moderated since 1990 ( table 2 ) .

advances in the basic and applied agricultural sciences — such as disease - resistant crop varieties , efficient irrigation practices , and improved marketing systems — are considered fundamental to achievements in agricultural yields , increases in farm sector profitability , higher competitiveness in international agricultural trade , and improvements in nutrition and human health .

some want more public spending on agricultural research to maintain u.s. competitiveness and increase agricultural productivity in the face of world population growth and food demand .

but agricultural research competes for federal funding in relation to other federal agricultural programs , such as conservation , farm income and risk management programs , food safety inspection , rural development , and domestic and foreign food aid programs .

the 2008 farm bill required the reeo to develop and implement a usda roadmap for agricultural research , education , and extension to plan and coordinate across the entire department both capacity and competitive programs , as well as usda - administered intramural and extramural programs .

the objective was to identify current trends , constraints , gaps , and major opportunities that no single entity within the usda would be able to address individually .

the research provisions , including changes to the management and structure of ree in the 2008 farm bill , drew heavily on proposals and recommendations put forth by key stakeholder groups , including the usda task force on research , education , and extension and the association of public and land - grant universities ( aplu ) .

usda subsequently published an "action plan" that builds upon the roadmap .

some argue that the stagnant growth in inflation - adjusted usda funding for agricultural research , education , and extension over the past few decades has hurt the ability of the u.s. agricultural sector to stay productive and competitive .

it is widely acknowledged that new innovations and technologies related to production , processing , marketing , and natural resource management are essential for continued productivity gains and economic growth of the sector .

some of these same critics argue that usda has not been successful at elevating agricultural research to the same priority level with policymakers as other sectors , such as health , and that u.s. agriculture will suffer over the long term because of a lack of new innovations .

these critics argue that the lack of public investment in new agricultural innovations will have dire consequences in the future , especially given new and varied challenges , such as rising production costs , especially for fuel and inputs ; new pest and disease outbreaks ; increasing frequency of extreme weather events , such as droughts and floods ; and climate change .

on the other hand , some argue that the federal government should have a limited role in funding agricultural research and that taxpayer dollars should not be used to support what should be a private sector endeavor .

in addition , due to a severely constrained federal budget in recent years , limited resources are available to support the agricultural sector .

historically , congress has not prioritized increasing funding for agricultural research , education , and extension activities , and instead has tended to fund programs designed to provide more immediate benefits to farmers , such as income support and crop insurance .

others believe that the states and the private sector should fill the research funding gap left by the federal government .

at the same time , while private sector funding has increased over time to fill some of the gap in public spending , there is growing concern that private sector funding focuses primarily on taking existing technologies to market ( i.e. , more applied research ) and does not focus on basic problems and / or longer - term challenges that the agricultural sector may face in the future , such as environmental sustainability or adaptation to climate variability .

some advocates have argued that some of usda's agricultural research portfolio duplicates private sector activities on major crops , including corn , soybeans , wheat , and cotton .

they argue that funding should be reallocated to basic , noncommercial research to benefit the public good that is not addressed through private efforts .

others point out that these crops are economically important to the food , feed , and energy sectors and should continue to receive significant amounts of public funding , especially for emerging threats , such as new pests and pathogens , limited water availability , and impacts of agriculture on human and environmental health .

