h.r .

3962 , affordable health care for america act , was passed by the house of representatives on november 7 , 2009 .

h.r .

3962 is based on h.r .

3200 , america's affordable health choices act of 2009 , which was originally introduced on july 14 , 2009 , and was reported separately on october 14 , 2009 , by three house committees — education and labor , energy and commerce , and ways and means .

on november 6 , the congressional budget office ( cbo ) released an estimate of the direct spending and revenue effects of h.r .

3962 that includes the manager's amendment proposed on november 3 and reflects the enactment of h.r .

3548 , the worker , homeownership , and business assistance act of 2009 .

cbo projects the bill would reduce federal deficits by $109 billion over the 10-year period of 2010-2019 and , by 2019 , would insure 96% of the non - elderly , legally present u.s. population .

the gross 10-year cost of the exchange subsidies ( $610 billion ) , increased federal medicaid expenditures ( $425 billion ) , and tax credits for small employers ( $25 billion ) would total $1.052 trillion .

taking into account employer and individual tax penalties and other issues pertaining to coverage , the net cost of the coverage provisions , according to the cbo analysis , would be $891 billion over 10 years .

"over the 2010 – 2019 period , the net cost of the coverage expansions would be more than offset by the combination of other spending changes , which cbo estimates would save $427 billion , and receipts resulting from the income tax surcharge on high - income individuals and other provisions , which jct [the joint committee on taxation] and cbo estimate would increase federal revenues by $574 billion over that period. .

this report summarizes the key provisions affecting private health insurance in the affordable health care for america act , as passed by the house of representatives on november 7 , 2009 .

the bill focuses on reducing the number of uninsured , restructuring the private health insurance market , setting minimum standards for health benefits , providing financial assistance to certain individuals , and , in some cases , small employers .

the bill also includes provisions to raise revenues .

in general , h.r .

3962 would include the following: individuals would be required to maintain health insurance , and employers would be required to either provide insurance or pay a payroll assessment , with some exceptions .

several market reforms would be made , such as modified community rating and guaranteed issue and renewal .

both the individual and employer mandates would be linked to acceptable health insurance coverage , which would meet required minimum standards and incorporate the market reforms included in the bill .

acceptable coverage would include coverage under a qualified health benefits plan ( qhbp ) , which could be offered either through the newly created exchange or outside the exchange through new employer plans ; grandfathered employment based plans ; grandfathered nongroup plans ; and other coverage , such as medicare and medicaid .

the exchange would be established under a new independent federal agency ( the health choices administration ) , headed by a commissioner .

the exchange would offer private plans alongside a public option .

certain individuals with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty level could qualify for subsidies toward their premium costs and cost - sharing ; these subsidies would be available only through the exchange .

in the individual market ( the nongroup market ) , a plan could be grandfathered indefinitely , but only if no changes were made to the terms and conditions of the plan , including benefits and cost - sharing , and premiums were only increased as allowed by statute .

the bill would also establish a consumer operated and oriented plan ( co - op ) program under which grants and loans would be provided to encourage the creation of not - for - profit , member - run health insurance cooperatives that would operate in the exchange .

this bill would not affect plans covering specific services , such as dental or vision care .

most of these provisions would be effective beginning in 2013 .

revenues would be raised by limiting employer deductions for certain health insurance plans and modifying tax - advantaged accounts currently used for health care spending and coverage , among other provisions .

this report begins by providing background information on key aspects of the private insurance market as it exists currently .

this information is useful in setting the stage for understanding how and where h.r .

3962 would reform health insurance .

the report summarizes key provisions affecting private health insurance in division a of h.r .

3962 , passed by the house of representatives on november 7 , 2009 .

although most of the provisions would be effective beginning in 2013 , the table in the appendix shows the timeline for implementing provisions effective prior to 2013 .

although the description that follows segments the private health insurance provisions into various categories , these provisions are interrelated and interdependent .

for example , h.r .

3962 includes a number of provisions to alter how current private health insurance markets function , primarily for individuals who purchase coverage directly from an insurer or through a small employer .

h.r .

3962 would require that insurers not exclude potential enrollees or charge them premiums based on pre - existing health conditions .

in a system where individuals voluntarily choose whether to obtain health insurance , however , individuals may choose to enroll only when they become sick , known as "adverse selection," which can lead to higher premiums and greater uninsurance .

when permitted , insurers often guard against adverse selection by adopting policies such as excluding preexisting conditions .

if reform eliminates many of the tools insurers use to guard against adverse selection then , instead , america's health insurance plans ( ahip ) , the association that represents health insurers , has stated that individuals must be required to purchase coverage , so that not just the sick enroll .

furthermore , some individuals currently forgo health insurance because they cannot afford the premiums .

if individuals are required to obtain health insurance , one could argue that adequate premium subsidies must be provided by the government and / or employers to make practical the individual mandate to obtain health insurance , which is in turn arguably necessary to make the market reforms possible .

in addition , premium subsidies without cost - sharing subsidies may provide individuals with health insurance that they cannot afford to use .

so , while the descriptions below discuss various provisions separately , the removal of one from the bill could be deleterious to the implementation of the others .

the private health insurance provisions are presented under the following topics within division a of h.r .

3962 : individual and employer mandates: the requirement on individuals to maintain health insurance and on employers to either provide health insurance or pay into the exchange , with penalties and taxes for noncompliance .

private health insurance market reforms .

immediate reforms .

health insurance exchange , through which the following can only be offered: public health insurance option .

premium and cost - sharing subsidies .

co - op program .

selected revenue provisions related to health insurance .

other provisions abortion .

medical malpractice .

end - of - life care .

americans obtain health insurance in different settings and through a variety of methods .

people may get health coverage in the private sector or through a publicly funded program , such as medicare or medicaid .

in 2008 , 60% of the u.s. population had employment - based health insurance .

employers choosing to offer health coverage may either purchase insurance or choose to self - fund health benefits for their employees .

other individuals obtained coverage on their own in the nongroup market .

however , there is no federal law that either requires individuals to have health insurance or requires employers to offer health insurance .

approximately 46 million americans were estimated to be uninsured in 2008 .

individuals and employers choosing to purchase health insurance in the private market fit into one of the three segments of the market , depending on their situation — the large group ( large employer ) market , the small group market , and the nongroup market .

more than 95% of large employers offer coverage .

large employers are generally able to obtain lower premiums for a given health insurance package than small employers and individuals seeking nongroup coverage .

this is partly because larger employers enjoy economies of scale and a larger "risk pool" of enrollees , which makes the expected costs of care more predictable .

employers generally offer large subsidies toward health insurance , thus making it more attractive for both the healthier and the sicker workers to enter the pool .

so , not only is the risk pool larger in size , but it is more diverse .

states have experimented with ways to create a single site where individuals and small employers could compare different insurance plans , obtain coverage , and sometimes pool risk .

although most of these past experiments failed ( eg , california's pacadvantage ) , other states have learned from these experiences and have fashioned potentially more sustainable models ( eg , massachusetts' connector ) .

there are private - sector companies that also serve the role of making various health insurance plans easier to compare for individuals and small groups ( eg , ehealthinsurance ) , available in most , but not all , states because of variation in states' regulations .

less than half of all small employers ( less than 50 employees ) offer health insurance coverage ; such employers cite cost as the primary reason for not offering health benefits .

one of the main reasons is a small group's limited ability to spread risk across a small pool .

insurers generally consider small firms to be less stable than larger pools , as one or two employees moving in or out of the pool ( or developing an illness ) would have a greater impact on the risk pool than they would in large firms .

other factors that affect a small employer's ability to provide health insurance include certain disadvantages small firms have in comparison with their larger counterparts: small groups are more likely to be medically underwritten , have relatively little market power to negotiate benefits and rates with insurance carriers , and generally lack economies of scale .

allowing these firms to purchase insurance through a larger pool , such as an association , gateway or an exchange , could lower premiums for those with high - cost employees .

depending on the applicable state laws , individuals who purchase health insurance in the nongroup market may be rejected or face premiums based on their health status , which can make premiums lower for the healthy but higher for the sick .

even when these individuals obtain coverage , there may be exclusions for certain conditions .

reforms affecting premiums ratings would likely increase premiums for some , while lowering premiums for others , depending on their age , health , behaviors , and other factors .

states are the primary regulators of the private health insurance market , though some federal regulation applies , mostly affecting employer - sponsored health insurance ( esi ) .

the health insurance portability and accountability act ( hipaa ) requires that coverage sold to small groups ( 2-50 employees ) must be sold on a guaranteed issue basis .

that is , the issuer must accept every small employer that applies for coverage .

all states require issuers to offer policies to firms with 2-50 workers on a guaranteed issue basis , in compliance with hipaa .

as of january 2009 in the small group market , 13 states also require issuers to offer policies on a guaranteed issue basis to the self - employed "groups of one. .

and as of december 2008 in the individual market , 15 states require issuers to offer some or all of their insurance products on a guaranteed issue basis to non - hipaa eligible individuals .

most states currently impose premium rating rules on insurance carriers in the small group and individual markets .

the spectrum of existing state rating limitations ranges from pure community rating to adjusted ( or modified ) community rating , to rate bands , to no restrictions .

under pure community rating , all enrollees in a plan pay the same premium , regardless of their health , age , or any other factor .

only two states ( new jersey and new york ) use pure community rating in their nongroup markets , and only new york imposes pure community rating rules in the small group market .

adjusted community rating prohibits issuers from pricing health insurance policies based on health factors , but allows it for other key factors such as age or gender .

rate bands allow premium variation based on health , but such variation is limited according to a range specified by the state .

rate bands are typically expressed as a percentage above and below the index rate ( i.e. , the rate that would be charged to a standard population if the plan is prohibited from rating based on health factors ) .

federal law requires that group health plans and health insurance issuers offering group health coverage must limit the period of time when coverage for preexisting health conditions may be excluded .

as of january 2009 , in the small group market , 21 states had preexisting condition exclusion rules that provided consumer protection above the federal standard .

and as of december 2008 , in the individual market , 42 states limit the period of time when coverage for preexisting health conditions may be excluded for certain enrollees in that market .

in fact , while there are a handful of federal benefit mandates for health insurance that apply to group coverage , there are more than 2,000 benefit mandates imposed by the states .

one issue receiving congressional attention is whether a publicly sponsored health insurance plan should be offered as part of the insurance market reform .

some proponents of a public option see it as potentially less expensive than private alternatives , as it would not need to generate profits or pay brokers to enroll individuals and might have lower administrative costs .

some proponents argue that offering a public plan could provide additional choice and may increase competition , since the public plan might require lower provider payments and thus charge lower premiums .

some opponents question whether these advantages would make the plan a fair competitor , or rather provide the government with an unfair advantage in setting prices , in authorizing legislation , or in future amendments .

ultimately , they fear that these advantages might drive private plans from the market .

the relative performance of health insurance organization by profit status has received some attention .

health insurance is provided by organizations that are either for - profit or non - profit in terms of their tax status .

some studies have suggested that non - profits perform better in key areas such as quality .

for example , a study published in the journal of the american medical association ( jama ) in 1999 found that non - profit health maintenance organizations ( hmos ) scored higher on all 14 healthplan employer data and information set ( hedis ) quality measures studied .

these results were generally replicated in a study published in 2006 of 272 health plans conducted by researchers at the university of california at berkeley and the national committee for quality assurance ( ncqa ) .

health insurance co - operatives , a subset of non - profit plans , have performed particularly well as detailed in recent case studies of group health cooperative of seattle ( ghc ) and healthpartners of minnesota .

as of 2008 , 47% of the enrollment in private health plans was in non - profit health insurance organizations .

however , there are relatively few health insurance co - operative organizations in the united states .

some congressional attention has been focused on options to incentivize the creation of new health insurance co - operatives .

advocates of this position argue that co - operatives invest retained earnings back into the plan or to enrollees in the form of lower premiums , lower cost - sharing , expanded benefits , and innovations such as wellness programs , chronic disease management , and integrated care .

opponents of the proposal assert that co - operatives have not been successful in most of the country and that evidence is lacking that co - operatives would make health insurance more affordable .

several provisions of the bill would take effect prior to the full implementation on january 1 , 2013 .

many of these requirements would be administrative in nature and are necessary steps leading up to full implementation .

these provisions are not discussed here .

see the appendix for these items .

however , some of the provisions that would take effect prior to january 1 , 2013 , are more substantive and include the following: postretirement reductions in retiree health benefits would be prohibited .

individuals would be allowed to keep their cobra coverage until the exchange is up and running .

the secretary would establish a temporary national high - risk pool program to provide health benefits to eligible individuals during the period beginning on january 1 , 2010 , and ending when the health insurance exchange is established .

each health insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage in the small or large group market would provide a rebate if the coverage has a medical loss ratio below a level specified by the secretary ( but not less than 85% ) .

the provision sunsets once plans are offered via the exchange .

this provision would also apply to the individual market unless the secretary determines that the application of this policy may destabilize the existing individual market .

health insurance issuers would have to submit a justification to the secretary and the states for any premium increases prior to implementation of the increase .

the bill would allow individuals through age 26 who were not otherwise covered to remain on their parents' group or individual plans , at their parents' discretion .

in both the group and individual markets ( prior to the complete prohibition in 2013 ) , the bill would reduce the window that plans can look back for pre - existing conditions from 6 months to 30 days and shorten the period that plans may exclude coverage of certain benefits .

the bill would prohibit acts of domestic violence from being treated as a pre - existing condition .

for both the group and individual markets , plans would have to cover benefits for a dependent child's congenital or developmental deformity or disorder .

for both the group and individual markets , the bill would prohibit aggregate dollar lifetime limits on benefits .

the secretary would issue guidance implementing the prohibition on rescission in the group and individual markets .

this guidance would limit the situations in which an insurer may rescind , or cancel , a person's health insurance policy .

the secretary would establish a temporary reinsurance program to assist participating employment - based plans with the cost of providing health benefits to retirees and to eligible spouses , surviving spouses and dependents of such retirees .

the house bill includes a number of provisions to raise revenues to pay for expanded health insurance coverage .

some of these provisions are directly related to current health insurance coverage .

these provisions limit employer deductions for certain health insurance plans and modify tax - advantaged accounts currently used for health care spending and coverage .

they are discussed in greater detail in this section .

table 4 identifies these provisions , their effective date , and recent estimates by the joint committee on taxation ( jct ) of the how much revenue each raise over a 10-year period .

those provisions not directly relating to health insurance will not be discussed in this section .

under current law , employers providing prescription drug coverage to retirees that meet federal standards are eligible for subsidy payments from the federal government .

these qualified retiree prescription drug plan subsidies are excludible from the employer's gross income for the purposes of regular income tax and alternative minimum tax calculations .

the employer is also allowed to claim a business deduction for retiree prescription drug expenses even though they also receive the federal subsidy to cover a portion of those expenses .

h.r .

3962 would require employers to coordinate the subsidy and the deduction for retiree prescription drug coverage .

in this provision , the amount allowable as a deduction for retiree prescription drug coverage would be reduced by the amount of the federal subsidy received .

according to the jct , this provision would raise $2.2 billion over a 10-year period ( see table 4 ) .

there are a number of tax - advantaged accounts and tax deductions for health care spending and coverage that will be affected by the revenue provisions in h.r .

3962 .

under current law , flexible spending accounts ( fsas ) , health spending accounts ( hsas ) , health reimbursement accounts ( hras ) and medical saving accounts ( msas ) all allow workers under varying circumstances to exclude a certain portion of qualified medical expenses from income taxes .

health fsas are employer - established benefit plans that reimburse employees on a pre - tax basis for specified health care expenses ( e.g .

deductibles , co - payments , and non - covered expenses ) .

about one - third of workers in 2007 had access to an fsa .

fsas are generally funded through the employee's election amount for salary reduction .

under current law , it is at the discretion of each employer to set limits on fsa contributions .

in 2008 , the average fsa contribution was $1,350 .

h.r .

3962 would limit the amount of annual fsa contributions to $2,500 per person beginning in 2013 .

this threshold would be indexed to inflation in subsequent years .

according to the jct , this provision would raise $13.3 billion over 10 years ( see table 4 ) .

hsas are also tax - advantaged accounts that allow individuals to fund unreimbursed medical expenses on a pre - tax basis .

eligible individuals can establish and fund accounts when they have a qualifying high deductible health plan and no other health plan ( with some exceptions ) .

unlike fsas , hsas may be rolled over and the funds accumulated over time .

distributions from an hsa that are used for qualified medical expenses are not included in taxable income .

distributions taken by individuals from an hsa that are not used for qualified medical expenses are taxable as ordinary income and , for those under age 65 , are subject to an additional 10% penalty tax .

h.r .

3962 increases the penalty on non - qualified distributions to 20% of the disbursed amount .

according to the jct , this provision would raise $1.3 billion over 10 years ( see table 4 ) .

in addition to the specific provisions in h.r .

3962 that directly modify these tax - advantaged plans , the house proposal would also modify the definition of qualified medical expenses , which affects all of the tax - advantaged accounts .

under current law qualified medical expenses for fsas , hsas , and hras can include over - the - counter medications .

h.r .

3962 would not allow over - the counter prescriptions to be covered by these tax - advantaged account unless they are prescribed by a physician .

according to the jct , this provision would increase revenues by $5.0 billion over 10 years ( see table 4 ) .

under h.r .

3962 , state laws regarding the prohibition or requirement of coverage or funding for abortions , and state laws involving abortion - related procedural requirements , would not be preempted .

federal conscience protection and abortion - related antidiscrimination laws , as well as title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 , would also not be affected by the measure .

h.r .

3962 would prohibit a federal agency or program , or state or local government that receives federal financial assistance under the measure , from subjecting any individual or institutional health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the health care entity does not provide , pay for , provide coverage of , or refer for abortions , or requiring any health plan created or regulated under the bill to subject any individual or institutional health care entity to discrimination on the basis that the health care entity does not provide , pay for , provide coverage of , or refer for abortions .

h.r .

3962 would restrict the recommendation and adoption of standards related to abortion as part of the essential benefits package .

a qhbp would not be prohibited , however , from providing coverage for either elective abortions or abortions for which federal funds appropriated for hhs are permitted .

currently , such funds may be used to pay for abortions if a pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest , or where a woman suffers from a physical disorder , physical injury , or physical illness that would place the woman in danger of death unless an abortion is performed .

the stupak amendment , adopted by a vote of 240-194 , added additional restrictions on the use of funds authorized or appropriated by h.r .

3962 .

under the stupak amendment , such funds could not be used to pay for an abortion or to cover any part of the costs of any health plan that includes coverage of abortion , except where a woman suffers from a physical disorder , physical injury , or physical illness that would place the woman in danger of death unless an abortion is performed , or if a pregnancy is the result of an act of rape or incest .

the stupak amendment would permit nonfederal entities , including individuals and state or local governments , to purchase separate supplemental coverage for elective abortions or a plan that includes coverage of such abortions , but would require that the supplemental coverage or the plan be paid for entirely with funds not authorized or appropriated by h.r .

3962 .

in addition , the supplemental coverage or plan could not be purchased with either premium payments toward which an affordability credit is applied or nonfederal funds that are required to receive an affordability credit .

the stupak amendment would not restrict nonfederal qhbp offering entities from offering separate supplemental coverage for elective abortions or a plan that covers such abortions .

however , premiums for that coverage or plan would have to be paid for entirely with funds not authorized or appropriated by h.r .

3962 , and the administrative costs and all services offered through the supplemental coverage or plan would have to be paid for using only premiums collected for such coverage or plan .

in addition , a nonfederal qhbp offering entity that offers an exchange - participating health benefits plan that includes coverage for elective abortions would have to offer an identical plan that did not cover such abortions .

finally , exchange plans would be prohibited from discriminating against any individual health care provider or health care facility because of its unwillingness to provide , pay for , provide coverage of , or refer for abortions .

h.r .

3962 would permit a state to receive an incentive payment if it enacted and implemented an alternative medical liability law that complied with the bill .

an alternative medical liability law would be in compliance if the secretary is satisfied that ( 1 ) the state enacted the law after the date of enactment of the bill and is implementing the law , ( 2 ) the law is "effective," and ( 3 ) the law met certain requirements .

to determine the effectiveness of a law , the secretary would consider whether it made the medical liability system more reliable through the prevention of or prompt and fair resolution of disputes , it encouraged the disclosure of health care errors , and it maintained access to affordable liability insurance .

the state law would be required to provide for either , or both , an "early offer" system , a "certificate of merit" program , and the law must not limit attorneys' fees or impose caps on damages .

generally , an early offer system would permit a defendant to offer to a claimant within 180 days after a claim is filed , periodic payment of the claimant's net economic losses plus reasonable legal fees .

economic losses under an early offer system would cover medical expenses , including rehabilitation , plus lost wages , to the extent that all such costs are not already covered by insurance or other third party sources .

if an early offer is not made , the injured party can proceed with a tort claim for both economic and noneconomic damages .

however , if an early offer is made and the claimant declines the offer and proceeds with litigation , both the standard of misconduct and standard of proof are raised .

a certificate of merit program requires claimants , when a medical malpractice suit is first filed , to include testimony from a qualified medical expert that establishes that there is merit to the claim .

a state that received an incentive payment would have to use it to improve health care in the state .

the bill would authorize appropriation of such sums as may be necessary for the incentive payments , but would not actually provide funds for such payments .

the bill would clarify that nothing in the act or amendments to the act would modify or impair state law governing legal standards or procedures used in medical malpractice cases .

qhbps would be required to provide for the dissemination of information related to end - of - life planning to individuals who seek enrollment in exchange - participating plans .

qhbps would also be required to present individuals with the option to establish advance directives and physician's orders for life sustaining treatment , according to state laws , as well as present information related to other planning tools .

however , the qhbp would be prohibited from promoting suicide , assisted suicide , or the active hastening of death .

