the authorization of the museum and library services act ( mlsa ) expired with fy2009 .

its reauthorization may be considered by the 111 th congress .

one issue that may arise during reauthorization is the current status of conservation and preservation of museum and library collections .

other issues that may arise include general issues of funding across museum and library services , the changing role of libraries in communities , and alternative funding models for museum services .

this report describes the background , history , and current policy and programs of both library services and museum services .

in addition , it discusses major changes related to the 2003 reauthorization of mlsa and issues for congress to consider in the next reauthorization .

 table a - 1 in the appendix shows the fy2000-fy2010 appropriations for museum services and library services and technology .

for fy2010 , the museum services program was funded at $33.727 million .

in addition , the museum grants for african american history and culture was funded at $1.485 million in fy2010 .

for fy2010 , lst was funded at $213.523 million .

one issue likely to be considered during reauthorization concerns the conservation and preservation needs of museum and library collections .

a report on conservation issues , commissioned by imls , was issued in 2005 .

the study found significant problems with the current status of conservation and preservation of museum and library collections .

according to the study: 820 million objects are at risk ; 190 million objects urgently need conservation care ; 59% of institutions need better storage ; 80% of institutions lack adequate emergency plans ; and 40% of institutions have no budget for conservation .

in june 2007 the imls held a national summit on this subject .

it has subsequently been working to educate the public , and libraries and museums nationwide , about collection conservation and preservation .

potential reauthorization issues related to lst may include the following: funding .

as discussed earlier in this report , fy2009 was the first year initial state grant awards had increased ( from $340,000 to $680,000 ) since 1971 .

some argue that $340,000 is simply too small an amount for states to use to implement a state grant program .

the upcoming reauthorization may include consideration of whether the authorization of appropriations for lst should be increased to help ensure that initial state grant awards do not fall below $680,000 .

the laura bush 21 st century librarian program .

this program was originally created via fy2003 appropriations legislation .

it has been funded each year since its inception , with funding increasing from $9.9 million in fy2003 to $25.5 million in fy2009 .

this program has funded 3,220 master's degree students , 186 doctoral students , 1,256 pre - professional students , and 26,206 continuing education students .

some argue that there is a continuing need for this program , and they argue that it should receive a specific authorization in the upcoming reauthorization .

the fy2003 budget request to congress stated that librarians had "one of the highest median ages of any occupation ( 47 years old ) . .

the budget request indicated that impending retirements , among other things , supported the need for a new program to recruit and educate the next generation of librarians .

the most recent bls employment projections indicate that more than two out of three librarians are 45 or older .

bls reports that the retirement of these librarians will result in several job openings over the next decade .

bls also notes that recent enrollments in mls programs have been rising — potentially increasing the pool of new librarians entering the field .

r ole of libraries as a community hub .

libraries have increased the variety of resources and services they provide to communities .

the free internet access provided by libraries has become increasingly important in many communities ; 72.5% of libraries indicated that they provided the only free internet access in their communities .

many individuals rely on this access to download government forms and learn about government services .

libraries also provide access to job announcements and training resources for job seekers .

in addition , they provide after school activities , online homework help , early childhood literacy programs , technology training , and adult literacy classes , among other things .

library advocates argue that the involvement of libraries in this wide array of community resources and services could be expanded with more support ; they are encouraging that an increased emphasis on these activities be incorporated into the upcoming legislation reauthorizing the imls .

they also argue that the role for libraries in providing needed services to communities during national disasters should be addressed in the upcoming reauthorization .

role of libraries as a p rovider of employment and job - training resources .

one of the new activities being provided by more libraries is assistance for job seekers .

many employers now require all job applications to be filed online .

in addition to free internet access , examples of services that are currently being provided by libraries include online job searches , provision of career information , and training on resume development .

reauthorization may include discussion of how to expand these services , and how to coordinate them with existing federal government job - training programs and related services .

more flexibility in the use of lst state grant funds .

lst state grants are intended to provide states with wide latitude in their use of funds .

funds are to be used to expand services in a variety of formats to all types of libraries , to improve electronic and other linkages to better serve consumers of library services , and to target library services to underserved or disadvantaged populations .

an important aspect of meeting these objectives is continually improving the capacity of library staff to become experts in the new technologies and services being provided by libraries .

library advocates indicate that there is an ongoing need for continuing education for library staff , but that the current legislative language in lst may not be sufficiently flexible to allow funds to be used for this purpose .

for that reason , some recommend that language be added during reauthorization to ensure that lst state grant funds can be used for continuing education for library staff .

enhancing policy research and coordination of library services .

as discussed earlier in the report , the 2003 reauthorization of imls included new language requiring the agency to undertake analyses of the impact of library and museum services .

the upcoming reauthorization may consider making this role more expansive by including more extensive , detailed requirements of imls .

possible amendments would also reflect consideration of the implementation of existing provisions to date .

in addition , there may be proposals for new authorizing language regarding the responsibilities ( previously housed with nclis and the department of education ) that have been delegated to imls ( also discussed earlier in this report ) .

potential reauthorization issues related to museum services may include the following: funding .

the issue of federal funding levels for museums consistently arises during reauthorizations of museum services .

beyond rethinking the federal role for funding museum services , museum organizations are requesting significant increases in funding .

for example , the american association of museums has recommended the reauthorization of oms within imls and an incremental appropriation reaching $95 million over a five - year time period .

the fy2010 appropriation for museum services was approximately $34 million .

an annual appropriation of $95 million over a period of five years would represent a significant increase in the rate of funding over the previous five years .

assistance to small and midsize museums .

in public hearings conducted by imls , participants expressed concern about the special needs of small to midsize museums .

because imls support for museum services is distributed through competitive grants , small and midsized museums may be disadvantaged in competing for these grants due to their relative lack of institutional capacity , lack of grant writers on staff , and lack of experience needed to administer federal funds .

in addition , some participants felt that the accountability requirements attached to federal funds made them less likely to apply because the application and reporting requirements placed a heavy burden on a small staff .

although there was general consensus about the special needs of small and midsized museums , there was disagreement concerning the most appropriate way to address these needs .

a frequently cited solution was to develop federal - state partnerships for museum services ( see below ) .

federal - state partnerships .

in response to requests from several members of congress , imls conducted several studies regarding the state of public support for museum services and the feasibility of alternate funding mechanisms .

one study was an initial investigation of federal - state partnership models as a mechanism for distributing federal funds .

a federal - state partnership model would require the creation of intermediary organizations at the state level that would represent museum services as a whole .

the study found that current federal - state partnership programs for museum services tend to be discipline based ; that is , art museums , planetariums , zoos , and other museum disciplines had their own state - level organization .

currently , there is no state - level organization that represents museums as a whole .

other federal arts and humanities agencies , such as the nea and neh , have state - level organizations that represent the arts or the humanities sector as a whole ( i.e. , the state arts agencies and state humanities councils , respectively ) .

using federal - state partnerships as a mechanism to distribute federal funds for museum services may require the cooperation of multiple state - level organizations or a reorganization of state - level organizations .

imls states that there are several potential barriers to the development of federal - state partnerships for museum services .

first , there is a lack of consistent state - level information on the number of museums and the capacity of museums that make up the sector .

systemic data collection activities may be required to assess state - level infrastructure and institutional capacity .

similar data collection activities have been undertaken by the library sector ; however , given the decentralized , discipline - based organization of museums , these data collection activities may be more cumbersome for the museum sector .

grants to states program .

imls has also investigated the potential of using a population - based state grant program as a mechanism to distribute federal funding for museum services .

at the imls public hearings , some participants advocated for a federal funding formula for museum services ; however , other participants had concerns that the current funding levels for oms would not support a federal funding formula and that , in the current fiscal climate , oms could not reasonably expect an increase in funding that would allow a formula grant program to be effective .

in addition to interest at the public hearing , several organizations have created a national initiative to institute a federal funding formula .

most advocates of a federal funding formula prefer a population - based state grant program .

one potential difficulty with using a population - based formula is that the number of museums per state varies , and there is no clear correlation between the number of museums in a state and the state's population .

if congress chose to implement a state grant program for museum services , it might consider several approaches toward equitable or optimal allocation of funds .

for example , congress might chose to design a population - based funding formula that allows the museums within a state a proportional share of funding based on the number of likely visitors to the museums within that state .

alternatively , congress might choose to design an institution - based funding formula that provides states with a greater number of museums more federal funding than states with fewer museums , independent of the state's population .

on september 25 , 2003 , the museum and library services act of 2003 was signed into law ( p.l .

108-81 ) .

the lsta was reauthorized as title ii , library services and technology of the mlsa .

the msa was reauthorized as title iii , museum services of the mlsa .

the major changes in the reauthorized museum and library services act of 2003 include the following: prohibiting the funding of projects deemed obscene ; defining "obscene" and the term "determined to be obscene" ; clarifying and expanding the definition of "museum" to include aquariums , arboretums , botanical gardens , art museums , children's museums , general museums , historic houses and sites , nature centers , history museums , natural history and anthropology museums , planetariums , science and technology centers , specialized museums , and zoos ; revising the museum subsection on "purpose" to restate the importance of museums' public service role of connecting the whole of society to our cultural heritage ; reemphasizing the educational role of museums through leadership and innovative technologies ; creating the highest standards of management and services for museum operations ; and supporting resource sharing and partnerships among museums , schools , and other community organizations ; requiring the director of the imls to establish procedural standards for reviewing and evaluating grants ; increasing initial state grants for library services to $680,000 if the amount appropriated for a year , and available for state grants , exceeds the amount of grants to all states in fy2003 .

increasing initial state grants for outlying areas to $60,000 if appropriations in a given year are sufficient to meet the higher initial state grants of $680,000 ; if remaining funds are insufficient to reach $60,000 , they are to be distributed equally among outlying areas receiving such funds ; authorizing $232 million for library services and $38.6 million for museum services for fy2004 , and such sums as may be necessary for fy2005-fy2009 ; authorizing the director to enter into contracts and cooperative agreements to help pay the federal share ( 50% share , with an exception that , by arrangement , 20% of the funds may be used to pay above a 50% share for museum services ) for a broader range of museum activities , including learning partnerships and collaborations among museum , libraries , schools , and other community organizations ; new technologies to enhance access to museums ; and specialized programs for underserved areas ; locating advisory functions ( which for libraries were previously delegated to the national commission on libraries and information sciences ) within a new national museum and library services board ( previously , solely a museum services board ) in the imls ; requiring the director to carry out and publish analyses of the impact of museum and library services , and increasing from 3% to 3.5% the amount available for federal administrative costs , to provide funding for this new function ; prohibiting the use of imls funds for construction ; and permitting the director of the imls to make national awards for library service , in addition to the already authorized national awards for museum service .

