the american clean energy leadership act of 2009 ( acela , s. 1462 ) , an energy policy bill reported out of the senate committee on energy and natural resources on july 16 , 2009 , would expand the deployment of clean energy technologies , improve energy efficiency and energy security , encourage innovation and workforce development , and strengthen the monitoring functions over energy markets , according to the committee ( s.rept .

111-48 ) .

this report provides a summary of the provisions under each of the titles and subtitles in the bill , and compares them with other relevant legislation .

in particular , the report relates the provisions of s. 1462 to similar or identical provisions contained in the house - passed version of h.r .

2454 , the american clean energy and security act of 2009 ( aces ) , and to spending or tax provisions contained in the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra , p.l .

111-5 ) .

although this bill is compared with certain energy provisions in h.r .

2454 , substantial differences exist between the provisions of this bill and the energy provisions of the combined energy - climate change bill in the house .

h.r .

2454 is a broader bill that includes a greenhouse gas cap - and - trade system not found in the senate committee bill .

instead , separate climate legislation is to be developed in the senate committee on environment and public works and in the senate finance committee .

climate change legislation developed in the senate may or may not be combined with these energy provisions in s. 1462 to produce a package that might be conferenced with h.r .

2454 .

 ( for more details on the house bill , see crs report r40643 , greenhouse gas legislation: summary and analysis of h.r .

2454 as passed by the house of representatives , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] and [author name scrubbed]. ) .

several crs analysts contributed to this summary and analysis of s. 1462 ; their names and contact information are located at the back of the report .

this title would direct the completion of a number of policy studies and reports , summarized briefly here .

taken together , these studies are intended to provide congress and other decision makers with improved information and understanding for the management of resources and formulation of policy .

sec .

601 of this title would direct the u.s. geological survey to conduct a national assessment of helium resources , which are important for a variety of industrial and medical applications , with information on other gases associated with the helium .

sec .

602 calls for an assessment and report on known and undiscovered potash deposits in the united states , and would include provisions for a drilling program and an evaluation of assessment methodologies .

potash is a general term applied to potassium oxide , potassium carbonate , and a variety of related potassium salts that go into fertilizer and the manufacture of glass .

sec .

603 would amend the department of energy organization act ( 42 u.s.c .

7321 ) with the aim of improving national energy planning and strategies .

the improved planning process would include input from relevant federal agencies and would examine federal policies that affect energy production , energy efficiency , reduction of air pollution , and the reduction , avoidance , or sequestration of greenhouse gases .

this provision would require the national academy of sciences to participate in the planning process and would provide authorization of funding for such studies .

sec .

604 acknowledges that international climate change strategies will depend in part on the actions of china and india , and that improved understanding of their actions will benefit strategies undertaken by the united states to help reduce global emissions of greenhouse gases .

this section would establish an interagency task force to investigate and analyze national or subnational policies , programs , laws , regulations , incentive mechanisms , and other measures that might reduce energy use and greenhouse gas emissions in china and india .

the report would include the current status of , and opportunities and recommendations for , research cooperation and technology deployment and trade , and would be submitted to congress within six months of passage .

under sec .

605 , carbon leakage is defined as a substantial increase in greenhouse gas emissions by a manufacturing facility located in a country without a greenhouse gas emission regulation commensurate to a cap - and - trade program , or an increase in emissions caused by an increase in the incremental cost of production in the united states as a result of a domestic cap - and - trade program .

this section would require doe , in consultation with other relevant federal agencies , to conduct a study that characterizes the relative risk of such carbon leakage and changes in output and investment in u.s. industrial sectors resulting from the implementation of a cap - and - trade program in the unites states .

the study is to include an assessment of price and trade elasticity of u.s. industries , as well as other economic indicators .

doe would also be directed to conduct a study evaluating the impact of potential measures that might be implemented to mitigate carbon leakage , including an analysis of measures used by other jurisdictions to reduce carbon leakage , the risk of carbon leakage from u.s. industries under potential prices of greenhouse gas emissions , and scenarios for international climate policy .

sec .

606 would require the secretary of energy , in consultation with the secretaries of state and commerce , to conduct a study and report to congress on the impact of foreign fuel subsidies on global energy supply and demand , and on the global economy , with associated recommendations for mitigating actions .

sec .

607 would amend sec .

201 ( b ) of epact05 to require the secretary of energy , as part of the current requirement for an annual assessment of renewable energy , to assess the quantity of biomass needed for thermal applications , biofuels , and biomass - based electricity , the highest efficiency energy use of biomass resources , the requirements and costs associated with the deployment for each of these applications , and the market penetration for each renewable energy resource that could be accomplished by 2030 .

sec .

608 calls for a review to quantify the efficiencies of u.s. electric generation facilities .

it would require identification of , among other things , the technologies that may be deployed to increase the efficiency of the electric generation facilities and any obstacles that could impede the deployment of those technologies .

sec .

609 would require doe , in cooperation with other relevant federal agencies , to evaluate the emissions from the use of alternative transportation fuels and fuel blends used in heavy - duty and light - duty diesel engines and in the aviation sector .

the study would evaluate the effect of using alternative transportation fuels on air quality and public health .

"such sums as are necessary" are authorized for the study .

sec .

610 includes findings expressing the vulnerability of the united states resulting from reliance on imported oil , and calls for "transformative steps to wean itself from its addiction to foreign oil. .

this section contains an explicit statement that it is the policy of the united states to reduce its dependence on foreign oil .

an interagency task force composed of doe and other relevant agencies would submit a report to congress describing options for agency actions that would reduce forecasted u.s. oil consumption in stages by 10,000,000 barrels of oil per day by 2030 .

recommended actions would be required to comply with the policy statement above , include only options directly related to reduced oil consumption , describe advantages and disadvantages for each option , and avoid increases in lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions above levels in effect on the date of enactment .

reports to congress under this provision would be allowed to request additional legislative authority to implement recommendations .

an annual report of progress would also be required .

h.r .

2454 contains a number of study provisions , but none are precisely the same as the studies mandated in this title .

studies proposed in this title would certainly inform some of the processes and programs established in h.r .

2454 .

for example , the assessment of national plans and policies for climate change mitigation in china and india in sec .

604 of this title would directly support the requirement in h.r .

2454 that the epa administrator submit an annual report on the details of any greenhouse gas standards adopted by china and india .

likewise , the report on carbon leakage proposed in this title would support the efforts to address carbon leakage contained in title iv of h.r .

2454 .

arra contains several funding provisions for various energy and climate change programs , but none are precisely for the studies mandated here .

