in the past , many academic institutions have enacted rules that protect individuals who are gay from discrimination on campus .

as a result , some high schools and institutions of higher education have sought to bar military recruiters from their campuses and / or to eliminate reserve officer training corps ( rotc ) programs on campus in response to the military's "don't ask , don't tell" ( dadt ) policy , which prohibits homosexual conduct by members of the armed services .

these efforts , however , have largely been thwarted due to several laws that bar giving federal funds to campuses that block access for military recruiters .

these laws include the no child left behind ( nclb ) act of 2001 , which amended the elementary and secondary education act ( esea ) by requiring high schools that receive federal funds to provide certain student contact information to military recruiters upon request and to allow recruiters to have the same access to students as employers and colleges .

this provision is different from similar department of defense ( dod ) provisions that allow dod to compile directory information on high school students for military recruitment purposes and that require colleges and universities that receive federal funds to give military recruiters the same access to students and campuses that is provided to other employers .

known as the solomon amendment , the latter provision was upheld as constitutional by the supreme court in the 2006 case rumsfeld v. forum for academic and institutional rights ( fair ) .

this report describes the various laws regarding military recruitment on high school and college campuses , as well as discusses the policy and legal issues that they may raise .

congressional concerns over military access to campuses for recruiting purposes have led to the enactment of several legislative proposals over the years .

under perhaps the most well - known law , colloquially known as the "solomon amendment" or "solomon - pombo amendment" in recognition of its earlier proponents , institutions of higher education risk losing certain federal funds if they deny military recruiters and rotc access to campuses and students at institutions of higher education .

another provision authorizes dod to collect and compile directory information pertaining to certain high school students and requires high schools that receive federal financial assistance under the esea to provide military recruiters with access to student information and school campuses .

similar requirements are reiterated under a separate education law .

many colleges , universities , and in some cases , high school campuses have been in the vanguard of the effort to expand civil rights for individuals who are gay .

in certain cases , schools have sought to challenge dod policy regarding homosexuality , including taking steps to limit or eliminate various types of military presence on campus .

for example , in certain instances , military personnel have been prevented from recruiting on campus , and actions have been taken to limit or sever rotc and junior rotc ( jrotc ) connections with the campus .

some of these disputes are discussed below .

generally speaking , efforts to recruit on high school and college campuses have been addressed separately in legislation .

for purposes of clarity , they are also treated separately here .

on some occasions , the clash between schools that want to restrict access to military recruiters and the laws that prohibit such restrictions has led to legal challenges .

the most prominent of these challenges involved supreme court review of the solomon amendment in rumsfeld v. forum for academic and institutional rights ( fair ) , but other legal issues have arisen as well .

in rumsfeld v. forum for academic and institutional rights ( fair ) , the supreme court unanimously rejected arguments by fair , an association of law schools and professors , that it was unconstitutional for the federal government to condition university funding on compliance with the solomon amendment .

previously , a divided third circuit panel had agreed that the solomon amendment had compelled the law schools to convey messages of support for the military's policy of discriminatory exclusion , but the court reversed the lower court's decision .

the appellate panel had relied in part on a 2000 supreme court decision , dale v. boy scouts of america — which held that the boy scouts have an expressive right to exclude gay scoutmasters — for the converse proposition that the nation's universities have a right to "expressive association" in opposing military recruiters where there is a conflict between the dod stance on sexual orientation and academic nondiscrimination policies .

in the case , the universities objected that because of the military's dadt policy , permitting recruiters on campus would undermine their policies against discrimination and that the federal law therefore violated their free speech rights .

fair's core argument was that the solomon amendment amounts to an "unconstitutional condition" because it exacts a penalty for the law schools' engaging in first amendment expressive conduct .

while the government may impose reasonable conditions on the receipt of federal largesse , fair contended , it "cannot attach strings to a benefit to 'produce a result which [it] could not command directly.' .

when a law school violates the equal access rule , the government threatens loss of funding not only to the law school but to the entire university .

thus , they claimed , requiring equal access forces laws schools to "propagate , accommodate , [or] subsidize an unwanted message. .

the government countered by pointing to the plenary powers of congress to "raise and support armies" and to "provide for the common defence. .

the third circuit decision could "undermine military recruitment in a time of war," it argued , while neither the law schools' right to free speech nor to expressive association were infringed by allowing military recruiters to conduct on campus interviews .

in particular , the solicitor general distinguished the boy scouts case in that "recruiters are not a part of the institution itself and do not become members through their recruiting activities. .

recruiters speak for their employers , the brief claimed , not the schools , unlike the scoutmaster who represented the boy scouts in the earlier case .

moreover , the government emphasized that the law schools remain free to protest the military's message as long as they give recruiters equal access .

if the schools choose not to allow equal access , it was argued , they simply forgo funding .

in general , the court was receptive to each of the government's arguments .

first , the court was unmoved by fair's theory of unconstitutional conditions , largely because of fatal flaws they found in the law schools' first amendment analysis .

this unsettled area of the law , however , may be further obscured by the observation that indirect compulsion by congress via "a funding condition cannot be unconstitutional if it could be constitutionally imposed directly. .

whether this implies that congress may even legislate access for military recruiters ( to college campuses and elsewhere ) , regardless of federal funding or federal policy with respect to all other recruiters , may be a fertile subject for future legal debates .

on the question of whether the solomon amendment impairs the first amendment rights of the objecting institutions , the court's opinion rejected all three arguments put forward by the law schools .

first , while expressive conduct may be subject to first amendment scrutiny , there is nothing in this case approaching a government - mandated pledge or motto that the school must endorse ... [and] ... "it has never been deemed an abridgement of speech or press to make a course of conduct illegal merely because the conduct was in part initiated , evidenced , or carried out by means of language. .

otherwise , practices having nothing to do with government dictating the content of speech — expressing disapproval of the internal revenue service by refusing to pay taxes , for example — would enjoy first amendment protection .

requiring law schools to facilitate recruiters' access by sending out e - mails and scheduling military visits were deemed "a far cry from the compelled speech" found in earlier cases .

"accommodating the military's message does not affect the law school's speech , because the schools are not speaking when they host interviews and recruiting receptions. .

nor , the opinion finds , would they be endorsing , or be seen as endorsing , the military policies to which they object .

"a law school's decision to allow recruiters on campus is not inherently expressive. .

secondly , the court distinguished the doctrine of "expressive association," as applied by dale v. boy scouts of america .

"if the government were free to restrict individuals' ability to join together and speak , it could essentially silence views that the first amendment is intended to protect. .

such was not the situation here , however , according to the court .

merely allowing recruiters on campus and providing them with the same services as other recruiters did not require the schools to "associate" with them .

nor did it prevent their expressing opposition to military policies in other ways .

they could put up signs , they could picket , they could make speeches , and they could hold forums of protest .

moreover , unlike the boy scouts case , no group membership practices or affiliations were implicated by the solomon amendment .

recruiters do not become components of the law schools — like the scout leaders there — but "are , by definition , outsiders who come onto campus for [a] limited purpose" and "not to become members of the school's expressive association. .

finally , the court recognized as "[beyond] dispute" that congress has "broad and sweeping" powers over military manpower and personnel matters — "includ[ing]the authority to require campus access for military recruiters" — the exercise of which is generally entitled to judicial "deference. .

accordingly , in rejecting fair's position , the court concluded: the issue is not whether other means of raising an army and providing for a navy might be adequate ... ( regulations are not 'invalid' simply because there is some other imaginable alternative that might be less burdensome on speech ) .

that is a judgment for congress , not the courts .. .

it suffices that the means chosen by congress add to the effectiveness of military recruitment .

in the wake of the fair case , most litigation regarding military recruitment on college campuses appears to have subsided , although one recent case raised questions about the extent to which dod enforces the law .

in the case , young america 's foundation v. gates , an advocacy organization sued to compel dod to withhold funds from the university of california - santa cruz , alleging that the school's failure to control protests against military recruiters effectively denied the recruiters access to campus .

the court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit , however , concluded that the plaintiffs lacked standing and dismissed the case .

like the objections to military recruitment on college campuses that were raised in the fair case , some opponents of military recruiting in high schools have raised legal concerns .

in particular , some critics have questioned whether the provisions permitting collection of student contact information violate a student's right to privacy , but neither statutory nor constitutional analysis appears to support this argument .

indeed , from a statutory perspective , the provisions regarding release of student contact information are consistent with the family educational rights and privacy act ( ferpa ) , the long - standing law that protects the educational privacy rights of students .

currently , ferpa allows the release of student directory information in the absence of parental objections .

thus , even in the absence of the military recruitment provisions , such student contact information is potentially available to outside entities .

likewise , these military recruitment provisions , for the reasons discussed below , do not appear to raise constitutional concerns .

under the auspices of the fourteenth amendment , the supreme court has recognized that there is a constitutional right to privacy that protects against certain governmental disclosures of personal information , but it has not established the standard for measuring such a violation .

in the absence of explicit standards , the circuit courts have tended to establish a series of balancing tests that weigh the competing privacy interests and government interests in order to determine when information privacy violations occur .

in falvo ex rel .

pletan v. owasso independent school district no .

i - 011 , the court of appeals for the tenth circuit weighed the plaintiff's claim that peer grading and the practice of calling out grades in class resulted in an impermissible release of her child's education records in violation of ferpa .

the plaintiff also claimed that the practice of peer grading violated her child's constitutional right to privacy .

although the court , in a holding that was later reversed by the supreme court , ruled that the practice of peer grading violated ferpa , the tenth circuit denied the plaintiff's constitutional claim .

in rejecting this claim , the court applied a three - part balancing test that considers " ( 1 ) if the party asserting the right has a legitimate expectation of privacy , ( 2 ) if disclosure serves a compelling state interest , and ( 3 ) if disclosure can be made in the least intrusive manner. .

based on the first prong of this test , the tenth circuit rejected the plaintiff's constitutional claim because it ruled that student's school work and test grades were not highly personal matters that deserved constitutional protection .

like peer graded student homework assignments , the release of student names , addresses , and telephone numbers to military recruiters would probably not be viewed by a court as violating a student's constitutional right to privacy under such a balancing test .

unlike social security numbers or medical records , for example , it is unlikely that a court would hold that individuals have a legitimate expectation of privacy in the type of basic contact information that is typically found in a telephone book .

furthermore , the government could argue persuasively that the release of such information serves a compelling state interest in facilitating the maintenance of the nation's armed forces .

finally , a court would probably view the disclosure required by the law as minimally intrusive , given that students can either opt out of the information release or decline to join the military , or both .

ultimately , a court reviewing any privacy - based challenge to such data collection provisions would be likely to reject such a claim , especially in light of the fact that congress was clearly acting within the scope of its constitutional authority when it enacted the provisions .

under the spending clause of the constitution , congress frequently promotes its policy goals by conditioning the receipt of federal funds on state compliance with certain requirements .

indeed , the supreme court "has repeatedly upheld against constitutional challenge the use of this technique to induce governments and private parties to cooperate voluntarily with federal policy," and the court recently reaffirmed this principle in the fair case .

thus , the court would likely uphold the student data collection provisions in part on the basis of congressional authority under the spending clause .

