on january 21 , 2011 , the department of labor's ( dol's ) employment and training administration ( eta ) published in the federal register a notice of solicitation for grant applications ( sga ) for the taa community college and career training grant ( ccct ) program .

the notice of availability of funds and solicitation for grant applications set april 21 , 2011 , as the closing date for the receipt of applications .

h.r .

1 , the full - year continuing appropriations act , 2011 ( sections 4106-4018 ) , as passed by the house on february 19 , 2011 , would prohibit the dol from using the annual appropriation to implement the mandatory fy2011 program funding appropriated in the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 ( p.l .

111-152 ) in fy2011 .

none of the funds that would be made available by h.r .

1 could be used to carry out the provisions of p.l .

111-152 or to pay an employee at the dol to implement the relevant provisions of p.l .

111-152 .

on august 18 , 2009 , the department of commerce's economic development administration ( eda ) published in the federal register final rules and regulations governing the implementation of the trade adjustment assistance for communities ( ctaa ) grant program .

the regulations outline the responsibilities of eda in administering the program including determining a community's eligibility for ctaa planning and implementation grants , providing technical assistance to impacted communities , and evaluating grant applications .

on january 11 , 2010 , eda published in the federal register a notice soliciting applications for ctaa grant assistance .

the notice set april 20 , 2010 , as the deadline for the submission of applications for ctaa grants , established the criteria for awarding funds and directed potential applicants to the grants.gov website for the complete application .

on september 20 , 2010 , doc announced the awarding of $36.768 million in ctaa grant funds to 36 grant recipients .

the ctaa grant program was created with the passage of the american recovery and reinvestment act ( arra ) of 2009 , p.l .

111-5 , as part of a larger effort by the obama administration and the 111 th congress to address an economic recession that began in december 2007 .

included among the subtitles of division b of arra was the trade and globalization adjustment assistance act ( tgaaa ) of 2009 .

tgaaa amends the trade act of 1974 , extending and revising trade adjustment assistance provisions affecting various constituencies including trade - impacted workers , farmers , firms , and communities .

included among the amendments to the trade act were provisions reestablishing a trade adjustment assistance for communities ( ctaa ) grant program .

the ctaa program , as authorized by arra , comprises four subchapters: subchapter a establishes the ctaa programs within the department of commerce ; subchapter b creates the community college and career training grant program ( ccct ) ; subchapter c establishes industry or sector partnership grants program for communities impacted by trade ( isp ) ; and subchapter d includes general provisions related to program implementation .

congress appropriated significantly less funding than the $150 million it authorized for the ctaa program for fy2009 .

the supplemental appropriations act of 2009 , p.l .

111-32 , included a $40 million appropriation to be used to fund both ctaa and the trade adjustment assistance for firms programs for fy2009 .

in addition , the consolidated appropriations act for fy2010 included $15.8 million for ctaa and the trade adjustment assistance for firms programs .

in appropriating funds for communities and firms congress did not include language in the supplemental act or the accompanying conference reports outlining how it intended the funds to be split between the two programs .

given the $5 million maximum amount that can be awarded for a single ctaa implementation grant , the combined $55.8 million appropriation will only fund a modest number of ctaa grant awards .

in addition , grant funds must be used to fund strategic planning grant activities and trade adjustment assistance for firms .

eda's implementation of the ctaa program may have been slowed by the process of filling vacant politically appointed positions .

as a result , important agency decisions were delayed due to the absence of leadership .

the agency's new assistant secretary for economic development , john r. fernandez , was confirmed by the senate on september 11 , 2009 .

in addition , the appointment of a director of adjustment assistance within eda was also delayed .

this absence of leadership may have also contributed to delay in the creation of the interagency community assistance working group ( icawg ) , charged with facilitating access to other federal programs in coordination with implementation grant activities under the ctaa program .

eda is the lead agency of the icawg. .

although eda has published regulations governing subchapter a , trade adjustment assistance to communities , the department of labor has not yet published regulations governing assistance to community colleges and sector partnership grants .

the absence of such guidance may delay timely implementation of program activities and undermine the program's effectiveness .

in addition , congress did not immediately provide an initial appropriation for the subchapter b ( ccct ) and subchapter c ( ispg ) grants for fy2009 or fy2010 .

congress did appropriate $500 million for ccct grants for each of the fiscal years fy2011 through fy2014 when it passed the health care and education reconciliation act of 2010 , p.l .

111-152 , which was signed by the president on march 30 , 2010 .

this was well over a year after passing initial appropriations for subchapter a activities .

in addition , congress has not yet appropriated funding for ispg activities .

the principal role of the icawg is to provide access to other federal programs when a ctaa designated community undertakes grant activities .

the ctaa program's legislation and its rules encourage coordination with other economic development programs , directing eda to identify possible grant assistance that might be available from other federal agencies , but does not guarantee trade adjustment assistance communities preference or priority in the awarding of such assistance .

in addition , in an effort to enhance effectiveness and avoid duplication , the law anticipates a high degree of coordination between eda and the department of labor's employment and training administration ( eta ) , which is responsible for the administration of the community college - based training program grants and sector partnership grants authorized under subchapters b and c of the act .

for instance , the statute requires an educational institution submitting a grant proposal to eta for ccct grant assistance to include a detailed description of the extent to which the proposed grant activity would fit within the strategic plan developed by a community eligible for ctaa assistance , and to explain how the ccct grant proposal relates to any project funded by a sector partnership grant .

in addition , the statute requires an entity seeking a sector or industry partnership grant to include in its grant application a discussion of whether the community impacted by trade has sought or received ctaa implementation grant funds , whether an eligible education institution had sought or received ccct grant funds , and how the eligible sector partnership entity will use grant assistance in coordination with ctaa , ccct , and funds from other grant sources .

congress may elect to amend the statue to more precisely define terms .

for example , the legislation directs eda to give priority to small and medium size communities when awarding implementation grants , but fails to establish or define what constitutes a small or medium size community .

the definition of what constitutes a small or medium size community was not established in program regulations published in the federal register .

this omission could lead to controversy if eda does not target funds to appropriate sized communities consistent with congressional intent .

eda has since addressed this issue with the january 11 , 2010 , federal register publication of a notice soliciting applications for ctaa grants .

the notice defined small and medium size communities as those whose population do not exceed 100,000 persons .

critics of the legislation may argue that the ctaa program duplicates the activities of other federal programs .

this includes eda's economic adjustment assistance ( eaa ) program , which awards federal grant assistance to economically distressed communities regardless of the cause .

eaa program assistance may be used to fund both the development of strategic plans ( comprehensive economic development strategies — ceds ) and implementation grants intended to fund one or more the activities identified in the ceds .

proponents may argue that trade adjustment assistance to communities is warranted because it is targeted to communities whose economic dislocation and distress can be traced to unfair trade competition .

the statute attempts to address an issue raised in previous reports and studies concerning the need to promote an integrated approach to addressing the impact of economic dislocation .

a 2001 report by the general accounting office ( gao ) found that local officials believe that dislocated worker training programs are more effective and job placement much higher when strong links exist between training and local business needs .

 .

the ctaa grant program requires trade - impacted communities to seek the advice and involvement of a wide range of community partners when developing their strategic plans , including education institutions , labor organizations , firms , and workforce investment boards .

these partners are not only essential in developing the strategic plan , but may also participate in its execution .

for instance , the act also supports activities intended to identify and address deficiencies in existing education and career training opportunities available to eligible taa workers through the use of community colleges .

it also encourages the creation of public - private partnerships focusing on skills and employment assessments , and training activities by funding sector partnership grants .

both grant programs ( ccct and sector partnerships ) require that the recipient of funds identify the link between the proposed grant and the community's strategic plan developed with ctaa funding .

