a variety of interrelated statutes and agency regulations govern leasing and permitting for energy exploration and production on federal lands .

generally , these projects can be divided into two categories , each of which is governed by its own set of statutes and regulations .

the first category is the exploration for and production of fossil fuels , including oil , natural gas , and coal .

oil , natural gas , and coal exploration and production on federal lands are generally governed by the mineral lands leasing act of 1920 ( mla ) as amended .

the bureau of land management ( blm ) , an agency that is part of the u.s. department of the interior ( doi ) , administers the mla .

generally , the lessee is authorized to explore for and ultimately produce oil , natural gas , or coal on federal lands in exchange for lease payments and royalties paid to the u.s. government on the production .

blm authorizes exploration activities and production activities for lessees only upon lessees' request for permission to engage in these activities on the leased land .

the second category pertains to renewable energy projects .

under the federal land policy and management act of 1976 ( flpma ) , solar and wind projects are often undertaken pursuant to a right - of - way or similar property interest .

however , geothermal energy projects are considered mineral projects and thus are leased under a separate set of laws and regulations in a manner similar to oil and natural gas project leasing .

in recent years , concern over the impact of emissions from fossil fuel - fired power plants has resulted in increased interest in renewable energy sources .

because the federal government controls land in areas with topography that is considered suitable for renewable energy projects , blm has issued leases or rights - of - way for a number of renewable energy projects .

this section discusses the relevant statutes and regulations applicable to such projects .

the generally applicable requirements and restrictions for lands managed by blm discussed previously in this report also apply to this discussion of renewable energy projects on federal lands .

renewable energy uses can be considered during the formulation of resource management plans ( rmps ) for federal lands .

because the energy source does not expire and because the requisite gathering facilities often leave a relatively small footprint , renewable energy can often be an attractive option when applying the "multiple use" and "sustained yield" principles during the rmp process as described supra in the section of this report titled " development of resource management plans . .

geothermal energy is energy that is produced from heat stored under the surface of the earth .

geothermal energy is produced by releasing cold water under the surface into a "hot" area in order to generate steam to fuel the generation of power .

blm has the delegated authority to lease 247 million acres of lands in the western united states and alaska ( including 104 million acres of lands managed by the forest service ) with geothermal potential .

blm currently manages 530 geothermal energy leases , with 58 leases producing 1,275 megawatts of electricity , about half of the total amount of u.s. geothermal energy production capacity .

geothermal energy projects administered by blm differ from most other renewable energy projects on federal lands in that they are operated pursuant to a lease , rather than a more limited authorization like a right - of - way .

the governing law for steam leasing is the geothermal steam act of 1970 .

the act sets forth detailed provisions governing the issuance and administration of geothermal steam leases .

the laws and regulations governing geothermal steam leasing and administration are similar to the principles and processes for oil and natural gas leasing on federal lands described in detail earlier in this report .

the geothermal steam act , like the mla , authorizes both competitive and noncompetitive leasing processes .

the competitive process begins when blm receives nominations for parcels to be auctioned from a qualified company or individual .

nominated areas may not exceed 5,120 acres unless the lease area includes an irregular subdivision .

qualified companies or individuals may request that nominated parcels be offered as a block for competitive leasing .

the secretary must provide 45 days notice by posting in the applicable blm office before offering federal lands for geothermal leasing .

blm must hold competitive bidding for geothermal leases at least once every two years .

once the public notice requirements have been satisfied , the federal lands are offered for competitive leasing through an auction at the time , date , and place specified in the public notice .

bidders must make a minimum acceptable bid of $2 per acre for the first year , $3 per acre for years 2-10 , and $5 per acre for every year after year 10 of the lease .

a competitive bid constitutes a legally binding commitment and cannot be withdrawn .

blm will accept the highest bid from a qualified bidder .

the winning bidder must pay 20% of the bid amount , the total amount of the first year's rental , and a processing fee to blm by the close of business on the day following the day of the lease sale .

the remainder of the bid amount must be submitted to blm within 15 calendar days of the day of the sale .

lands offered at a competitive lease sale that receive no bids are made available for noncompetitive leasing for a two - year period beginning the first business day following the date of the lease sale .

for the first 30 days following the lease sale , leases are available only for parcels as configured for the lease sale ; after 30 days , blm accepts applications for any available lands covered by the lease sale .

holders of mining claims on federal lands may apply for noncompetitive geothermal leases within the lands on which they hold claims .

geothermal steam project leases can also be obtained though "direct use" leasing .

direct use of geothermal energy involves the use of geothermal hot water directly for its intended end use , rather than for transfer into electricity that is then transmitted to the end user .

applicants can obtain direct use leases if ( 1 ) the lands in question are open for geothermal leasing ; ( 2 ) blm determines that the lands are appropriate for direct use operations without sale for purposes other than commercial generation of electricity ; ( 3 ) blm has published notice of the proposal to use the land for direct use leasing ; ( 4 ) during the 90-day period following the publication of such notice , blm does not receive any nomination to include the land in question in the next competitive lease sale ; and ( 5 ) blm determines there is not competitive interest in the resource .

geothermal leases generally have an initial primary term of 10 years , with a number of extensions that can extend the term at the discretion of blm .

the first five - year extension is granted if the lessee has expended a minimum of $40 per acre in development activities that provide additional geologic or reservoir information .

subsequent extensions may be granted upon showings of continued annual expenditures and progress in the development of geothermal resources .

lessees are required to make annual rental payments to blm .

for leases acquired in a competitive lease sale and issued on or after august 8 , 2005 , the annual rent is $2 per acre for the 1 st year and $3 per acre for the 2 nd through the 10 th year .

for leases acquired non - competitively , the annual rent is $1 per acre for the first 10 years of the lease .

for both types of leases , the annual rent is $5 per acre each year after the 10 th year .

lessees must also make royalty payments on electricity produced from geothermal steam on federal lands .

for leases issued on or after august 8 , 2005 , the royalty rate is 1.75% of gross sales for the first 10 years of production , and 3.5% thereafter .

if the lessee sells the geothermal resources to a third party who then uses those resources to produce electricity , the royalty rate on the sale is 10% .

direct use lessees do not have to pay royalties unless they sell the geothermal steam resources to a third party ; instead , they must pay a direct use fee in accordance with a published fee schedule .

geothermal leases can be suspended or canceled at the discretion of the secretary of the interior .

the secretary may suspend leases in the interest of conservation of resources , and may terminate leases for any violation of the blm regulations or the lease terms .

the secretary is also authorized to waive , suspend , or reduce the rental or royalty rates for any lease in the interest of conservation .

the lessee may also suspend the lease on their own motion in the interest of conservation .

as with oil and natural gas leasing , a geothermal lease alone does not entitle the lessee to commence drilling and production .

in order to conduct exploration for geothermal resources , the lessee must submit to blm a notice of intent to conduct geothermal resource exploration operations .

exploration operations must be conducted in a manner that ( 1 ) protects the quality of surface and subsurface waters , air , and other natural resources ; ( 2 ) protects the quality of cultural , scenic , and recreational resources ; ( 3 ) accommodates other land uses ; and ( 4 ) minimizes noise .

data collected during exploration operations must be shared with blm .

lessees must also submit a geothermal drilling program and obtain a drilling permit before commencing drilling operations for geothermal resources on leased land .

similar to exploration operations , drilling operations must be conducted in a matter that ( 1 ) protects the quality of surface and subsurface waters , air , and other natural resources ; ( 2 ) protects the quality of cultural , scenic , and recreational resources ; ( 3 ) accommodates other land uses ; ( 4 ) minimizes noise ; and ( 5 ) prevents property damage and unnecessary or undue degradation of the lands .

lessees must also meet blm's geothermal well abandonment requirements upon completion of operations .

while oil , gas , and geothermal projects are permitted by blm under leasing processes , those interested in producing wind or solar energy on federal lands do not seek leases .

instead , they seek more limited authorizations for development of their energy projects pursuant to title v of the federal land policy and management act ( flpma ) .

federal lands also have significant capacity for both wind and solar energy production .

blm manages 20.6 million acres of federal lands with wind potential in 11 western states .

blm has amended 52 different land use plans to allow for development of wind energy projects .

the southwestern united states has some of the highest solar radiation levels in the world , a characteristic that makes it a possible candidate for solar energy development .

because of these characteristics , blm has been active in consideration and promotion of wind and solar energy projects on the lands that it manages .

as with oil , gas , and geothermal leasing , not all federal lands are available for wind and solar renewable energy project rights - of - way .

lands designated as wilderness areas and wilderness study areas , national monuments , national conservation areas ( with the notable exception of the california desert conservation area ) , national wild and scenic rivers , and national historic and scenic trails are categories of land not open to solar and wind energy development .

in addition , some special management areas , such as areas of critical environmental concern , may not be suitable for development .

title v of flpma authorizes blm and the secretary of agriculture ( managing forest service lands ) to "grant , issue or renew rights - of - way over , upon , under or through" their administered lands for "systems for generation , transmission and distribution of electric energy. .

neither title v of flpma nor the accompanying regulations address wind or solar energy projects specifically .

however , because wind and solar projects on federal lands are conducted via rights - of - way , many of the provisions of flpma and the accompanying regulations are relevant .

the agencies may exercise their discretion to grant rights - of - way on any lands under their jurisdiction , unless ( 1 ) prohibited by a statute , regulation or order that specifically excludes rights - of - way ; ( 2 ) the lands are specifically segregated or withdrawn from the use contemplated by the right - of - way ; or ( 3 ) the agency has identified the area in land use plans as inappropriate for right - of - way uses .

parties applying for blm rights - of - way for development of wind or solar energy projects must satisfy a number of requirements in their application , as set forth by the secretary of the interior .

these include disclosures regarding information related to the use of the right - of - way , information regarding the identification of business partners and other affiliated entities , and information regarding plans for use of the right - of - way .

applications for rights - of - way on blm lands must be accompanied by a processing fee as set forth in blm regulations .

rights - of - way granted by blm function differently from leases in several respects .

perhaps the most significant difference between leases and rights - of - way are the substantial rights to use of the land in question retained by the lessor , the united states .

blm retains the right to 1. access the lands covered by the right - of - way , including any facilities constructed on the right - of - way ; 2. require common use of the land ( including subsurface and air space ) and to authorize others to use the right - of - way for compatible uses ; 3. retain ownership of the resources of the land ; 4. determine whether or not the grant is renewable ; and 5. change the terms and conditions of the right - of - way as a result of changes in legislation or regulation or as otherwise necessary to protect public health or safety or the environment .

blm may also include in a right - of - way grant any terms , conditions , or stipulations that it determines to be in the public interest , including modifications of proposed routes or changes to the location of certain facilities .

rights - of - way may also completely prohibit use of the land until blm has approved a plan of development for the land and issued a notice to proceed to the right - of - way holder .

the terms of rights - of - way vary , but those with terms longer than 20 years must include periodic reviews at the end of the 20 th year and at 10-year intervals thereafter .

holders of blm rights - of - way are also required to make rent payments as set forth by blm .

rent is payable on a monthly basis , and waivers or reductions can be obtained .

blm regulations provide that rent for non - linear rights - of - way for purposes other than communications uses will be determined through a process based on comparable commercial practices , appraisals , competitive bidding , or other reasonable methods .

in an effort to make the development of renewable energy projects on federal lands more efficient and to ensure fair market value , doi is seeking public comment on establishing a competitive leasing system for wind and solar projects on federal lands .

doi issued an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking accepting comments through february 27 , 2012 .

related legislative action — the public lands renewable energy development act of 2011 — would place an emphasis on conducting a two - year pilot leasing program for solar and wind energy projects on public lands and for providing a leasing framework for development should the secretaries of agriculture and interior recommend that a leasing program be established .

the forest service also does not have regulations that specifically address wind and solar energy rights - of - way , so the agency would look to generally applicable laws and regulations as guidance for the authorization of wind or solar projects .

the forest service does not currently authorize any such projects on its lands .

applicants seeking to make use of forest service lands for such a project would apply for "special use authorization" under the generally applicable regulations for such authorizations .

all uses of national forest system lands other than road usage , grazing and livestock use , sale and disposal of timber and other forest products , and mineral usage are designated as "special uses. .

before conducting a special use on these lands , individuals or entities must submit a proposal to a forest service - authorized officer and must obtain "special use authorization" from that authorized officer , unless that requirement is waived under regulations that are likely not applicable to energy projects .

among the permitted authorizations are "permits , leases and easements ... for rights - of - way for ... systems and related facilities for generation , transmission and distribution of electric energy," which would authorize wind or solar generation facilities .

applicants for special use authorizations must contact the forest service office ( s ) responsible for management of the affected land as early as possible in advance of the proposed use .

upon receipt , the authorized officer screens the application in two phases to ensure that the proposed use is consistent with the laws , regulations , orders , and policies establishing or governing national forest system lands ; that the proposed use is consistent with the standards and guidelines in the applicable forest land and rmp ; that the proposed use will not create an exclusive or perpetual right of use or occupancy ; and that other forest service initial screening concerns are satisfied .

after this second - level screening , a formal application is submitted and processed , and federal , state , and local agencies and the public are afforded the opportunity to comment on the application .

after review and a decision to approve , the authorized officer may issue a special use authorization .

special use authorizations are subject to a number of limitations .

all rights not expressly granted are reserved to the united states , including 1. continuing rights of access to all forest system lands ; 2. a continuing right of physical entry to any part of the authorized facilities ; and 3. the right to require common use of the land or to authorize the use by others in any way not inconsistent with a holder's existing rights and privileges after consultation .

a number of other mandatory terms and conditions apply to the forest service - issued special use authorizations , as set forth in the regulations .

special use authorization holders also must pay an annual rental fee for the authorization , as determined by the authorized officer based on the fair market value of the rights and privileges authorized , as determined by appraisal or other sound business management principles .

the forest service also may collect processing fees from applicants and holders to recover its costs .

the forest service may suspend , revoke , or terminate a special use authorization under any of the grounds articulated in its regulations .

the regulations do not provide specific guidance on duration and renewability of special use authorizations , providing simply that "[i]f appropriate , each special use authorization will specify its duration and renewability .

the duration shall be no longer than the authorized officer determines is necessary to accomplish the purpose of the authorization and to be reasonable in light of all circumstances concerning the use. .

where renewal is provided for , the authorized officer will renew the authorization if the project or facility is still being used for the purpose ( s ) previously authorized and is being operated and maintained in accordance with all the provisions of the authorization .

where no such renewal provision is in place , the authorization can be renewed at the authorized officer's discretion upon request of the holder .

