on december 16 , 2009 , president obama signed the fy2010 department of transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies appropriation act into law ( divison a of the consolidated appropriations act , 2010 , p.l .

111-117 ) , after congress had passed the conference version of the bill on december 10 , 2006 .

the enacted bill provided a total of $122.1 billion , $15.1 billion ( 14.1% ) more than the equivalent figure provided in fy2009 and $1.1 billion less than the amount requested by the administration .

the president's net fy2010 request for the programs covered by this appropriations bill was $123.2 billion ( after scorekeeping adjustments ) .

this was $16.2 billion ( 15.1% ) more than the amount enacted in the fy2009 thud appropriations act .

dot and hud received additional funding in fy2009 through the arra emergency stimulus act ( see appendix for more information ) .

the request for dot was $72.4 billion , $1.0 billion ( 1.4% ) more than the $71.5 billion of total new funding provided in the fy2009 thud appropriations act .

the request reflected slight increases over fy2009 funding for most dot programs .

the hud request was $45.5 billion , $4.0 billion ( 7.7% ) more than the comparable amount of new funding provided in the regular annual appropriation for fy2009 .

the house - passed bill provided $47.1 billion , while the senate committee on appropriations recommended $45.8 billion .

the president requested $5.3 billion for other related agencies in the thud bill , compared to the $303 million provided in fy2009 .

the difference was due to the president's request for $5 billion for a new independent federal agency , a national infrastructure bank .

appropriators considered this request as part of the request for dot funding .

the president also requested the termination of five programs that received a total of $212 million in funding in the fy2009 thud appropriations act .

this was part of a budget - wide effort that requested 121 terminations , reductions , and savings in the fy2010 budget , totaling $$17 billion , from "programs that do not accomplish the goals set for them , do not do so efficiently , or do a job already done by another initiative. .

congress did not fund two of the five programs in the fy2010 thud act ; the remaining three received increased funding , totaling $346 million ( see table 1 ) .

leaders of the house and senate committees on appropriation declared their desire to pass all 12 fy2010 appropriations bills separately , and thus avoid having to bundle two or more of the bills into a consolidated or omnibus appropriations act , as has happened in each of the past several years .

this goal was made more challenging by the fact that 2009 was the first year of a new administration .

president obama did not take office until january 20 , 2009 ; his administration was not prepared to submit a regular budget request for fy2010 during the first week in february , the usual date .

congress did not pass the last of the fy2009 appropriations acts until march 10 , 2009 .

the administration's detailed budget request for fy2010 was submitted to congress on may 7 , 2009 .

also , congress was dealing with several major initiatives during 2009 , including energy and health care reform , in addition to dealing with the effects of the recession .

table 2 notes the status of the fy2010 thud appropriations bill , and table 3 lists the total funding provided for each of the titles in the bill for fy2009 and the amount requested for that title for fy2010 .

since 2003 , the house and senate committees on appropriations have reorganized their subcommittee structure three times .

in 2003 , a new subcommittee ( homeland security ) was added ; in order to maintain the existing number of subcommittees at 13 , the transportation appropriations subcommittees were combined with the treasury , postal service , and general government appropriations subcommittees , becoming the subcommittees on transportation , treasury , and independent agencies .

in early 2005 , the house and senate committees on appropriations again reorganized their subcommittee structures .

the house committee on appropriations reduced its number of subcommittees from 13 to 10 .

this change included combining the transportation , treasury , and independent agencies subcommittee with the district of columbia subcommittee ; to the resulting subcommittee , in addition , jurisdiction over appropriations for the department of housing and urban development and the judiciary , as well as several additional independent agencies , was added .

the subcommittee was then known as the subcommittee on transportation , treasury , housing and urban development , the judiciary , district of columbia , and independent agencies ( or tthud ) .

the senate committee on appropriations reduced its number of subcommittees to 12 .

the senate also added jurisdiction over appropriations for the departments of housing and urban development and the judiciary to the transportation , treasury , and independent agencies subcommittee .

the senate retained a separate district of columbia appropriations subcommittee .

as a result , the areas of coverage of the house and senate subcommittees with jurisdiction over this appropriations bill were almost , but not quite , identical ; the major difference being that in the senate the appropriations for the district of columbia originate in a separate bill .

at the beginning of the 110 th congress in 2007 , the house and senate committees on appropriations again reorganized their subcommittee structures .

the house and senate committees divided the responsibilities of the tthud subcommittees between two subcommittees: transportation , housing and urban development , and related agencies ( thud ) ; and financial services and general government , whose jurisdiction included the treasury department , the judiciary , the executive office of the president , the district of columbia , and many of the independent agencies formerly under the jurisdiction of the tthud subcommittees .

these changes make year - to - year comparisons of transportation and housing and urban development appropriation bills complex , as their appropriations appear in different bills in combination with various other agencies .

other factors , such as supplemental appropriations for response to disasters ( such as the damage caused by the gulf coast hurricanes in the fall of 2005 ) and changes in the makeup of the department of transportation ( portions of which were transferred to the department of homeland security in 2004 ) , also complicate comparisons of year - to - year funding .

table 4 shows funding trends for dot and hud over the period fy2004-fy2009 , omitting emergency funding and other supplemental funding , and the amounts requested for fy2010 .

the purpose of table 4 is to indicate trends in the funding for these agencies .

emergency supplemental appropriations are not included in the figures .

 table 5 presents funding provided for dot in the emergency supplemental funding act passed in february 2009 ( the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ) ; the funding provided in the fy2009 thud appropriations act passed as division i of the omnibus appropriations act of 2009 in march of 2009 , and the amounts requested for fy2010 by the administration and reported by the house and the senate committee on appropriations .

 table 6 presents president obama's fy2010 budget request for hud , compared to the prior year's enacted budget authority .

four totals are given at the bottom of table 6 : "budget authority provided" and "available budget authority," with and without emergency appropriations .

total budget authority provided includes current year appropriations , plus advance appropriations provided in the current fiscal year for use in the next fiscal year ; total available budget authority includes current year appropriations , plus advance appropriations provided in the prior fiscal year for use in the current fiscal year .

congress is scored by cbo for the amount of available budget authority in an appropriations bill ; however , the appropriations committees' documents often discuss the amount of budget authority provided .

president obama's first hud budget requested a 7.7% increase in regular annual appropriations for hud programs .

however , that increase would require a 9.5% increase in net new budget authority because of a decline in the amount requested for rescission .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3288 would provide more than an 11% increase in regular annual appropriations for hud programs , 3% more than the president's request .

that increase would require more than a 13% increase in net new budget authority , also attributable to a decline in rescissions .

the senate committee - reported version of h.r .

3288 would provide less than the house - passed bill , but more than the president's request .

it would result in an 8.5% increase in regular annual appropriations for hud programs , which would require more than a 10% increase in net new budget authority .

after a series continuing resolutions , final fy2010 funding levels for hud were set by the consolidated appropriations act ( p.l .

111-117 ) .

the act provided more for hud than the senate recommended and the president requested , but less than the house recommended .

the 9% increase in total hud funding over fy2009 levels required an 11% increase in net new budget authority .

the difference is largely attributable to a decline in the amount of funding rescinded .

this section of the report summarizes select hud budget issues in fy2010 .

for an expanded discussion , see crs report r40727 , the department of housing and urban development: fy2010 appropriations , coordinated by [author name scrubbed] .

the fy2010 budget is the first of the obama administration .

while it was completed on a short time - frame , it contains several initiatives that are new and reflect the obama administration's priorities .

specifically , as stated in the budget documents , the budget reflects five goals: 1. address the nation's housing and economic crisis ; 2. restore federal leadership on promoting affordable rental housing ; 3. invest strategically in rural and metropolitan communities ; 4. drive energy efficient housing and inclusive , sustainable growth ; and 5. transform the way that hud does business .

while these goals are reflected throughout the budget , several new initiatives are proposed , and are summarized below .

president obama's transformation initiative requested the authority to transfer up to 1% of funding provided for most hud accounts to fund activities related to the development of research , evaluation , and performance metrics ; program demonstrations ; technical assistance and capacity building ; and next - generation information technology .

hud estimates that , at the requested funding level , the transfer authority would make $433.5 million available to the transformation initiative in fy2010 .

in addition , the budget requested $20 million in new appropriations to fund specific activities designed to address mortgage fraud , including fraud in the federal housing administration ( fha ) mortgage insurance programs .

both the house and senate versions of h.r .

3288 , as well as p.l .

111-117 , supported the president's transformation initiative by including the $20 million requested for combating mortgage fraud and some transfer authority , although it is a more limited form of transfer authority than requested by the president .

the energy innovation fund is an obama administration proposal to "catalyze private sector investment in the energy efficiency of the nation's housing stock. .

according to hud's congressional budget justifications , the $100 million fund would provide up to $50 million for a "local initiatives fund. .

this fund would provide "a mix of incentive grants , demand - side subsidies , and supply - side leveraging to support the expansion or start - up" of 10 or more local energy retrofit funds .

another $25 million would be available to develop a new pilot energy efficient mortgage program in fha's single family mortgage insurance program .

the final $25 million would be available to develop a multifamily energy pilot to fund energy efficiency improvements in certain hud - insured multifamily rehabilitation projects .

the house - passed bill included $50 million for the president's energy innovation fund , half the amount requested .

the bill did not include funding for the "local initiatives fund," but did include funding for the multifamily energy pilot and the energy efficient mortgage program at the requested levels .

the senate committee - passed version of h.r .

3288 included funding for all three components of the president's energy innovation fund , but at a lower funding level than requested .

specifically , the bill included $20 million each for the energy efficient mortgage and multifamily energy pilot program and $35 million for the local initiatives fund .

p.l .

111-117 provided $50 million for the energy innovation fund , and , like the house bill , allocated half for the single - family energy efficient mortgage program and half for the multifamily energy pilot .

it did not fund the local initiatives fund .

the choice neighborhood initiative is an obama administration initiative that would provide competitive grants to revitalize severely distressed neighborhoods .

the initiative would be modeled after the hope vi program , which provides competitive grants to public housing authorities ( phas ) to revitalize severely distressed public housing .

the president's fy2010 budget proposed no new funding for hope vi , but requested $250 million for the new choice neighborhoods initiative .

in addition to phas , local governments , nonprofits , and for - profit developers would be eligible to compete for funds primarily aimed at the transformation , rehabilitation , and replacement of hud public and assisted housing that cannot be funded through current annual formula or contract payments .

according to hud's congressional budget justifications , in addition to addressing hud - assisted housing , the program would be aimed at "supporting affordable housing and community development activities in surrounding communities and improving the lives of area residents by creating job opportunities , improving schools and providing work and rent incentives that promote family self - sufficiency. .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3288 and the senate committee - passed version of h.r .

3288 took different positions on the choice neighborhoods initiative and hope vi .

the house bill would continue to fund hope vi , whereas the senate committee bill would fund the new initiative , but with a set - aside of more than half of the funding for pha - led projects .

the final fy2010 funding bill , p.l .

111-117 , funded both , by providing $200 million for hope vi , with a set - aside of $65 million for a choice neighborhoods initiative demonstration .

the housing and economic recovery act of 2008 ( p.l .

110-289 ) established a housing trust fund that would provide a permanent , dedicated source of funding for affordable housing activities outside of the annual appropriations process .

p.l .

110-289 identified contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac as the dedicated funding source .

however , fannie mae's and freddie mac's contributions to the housing trust fund were indefinitely suspended in november 2008 by their conservator , the federal housing finance agency , due to fannie's and freddie's financial difficulties .

the suspension of fannie's and freddie's contributions left the housing trust fund without a source of funding .

while p.l .

110-289 authorized funding other than the contributions from fannie mae and freddie mac to be appropriated or transferred to the housing trust fund , no funding has yet been directed to the housing trust fund .

the president's budget proposed $1 billion in mandatory funding for the housing trust fund , but a funding source has not been identified for this sum .

neither the house nor the senate bills , or the final fy2010 funding bill , mentioned the housing trust fund .

the section 8 tenant - based rental assistance account funds the section 8 voucher program and is the largest account in the hud budget .

the section 8 voucher program provides portable rental subsidies that low - income families use to reduce their housing costs in the private market .

hud currently funds more than two million section 8 vouchers , which are administered at the local level by public housing authorities ( phas ) .

this account — the largest in hud's budget — primarily funds the cost of renewing those vouchers each year , as well as the cost of administering the program .

the fy2009 appropriations law provided just over $11 billion in new appropriations for renewals of section 8 vouchers in calendar year ( cy ) 2009 ; in addition , an advance appropriation provided $4 billion for use in cy2009 .

however , because the fy2009 appropriations law also enacted a rescission of $750 million , a total of $14.284 billion was available to renew section 8 vouchers in cy2009 .

as directed by congress , hud based the cy2009 allocations on the voucher utilization and cost data submitted by phas for fy2008 .

hud used this same data to estimate phas' unspent reserves ( net restricted assets , or nra ) .

in some cases , hud's estimates of costs ( plus inflation ) , utilization , and nra did not accurately represent phas' cy2009 costs , utilization , and nra balances .

in some cases , the inaccurate estimates resulted from inaccurately reported data ; in some cases , the differences resulted from significant changes in the cost and leasing conditions of agencies between fy2008 and the start of cy2009 .

regardless of the reason , some phas have found that their cy2009 funding is insufficient to cover the costs of all the vouchers they are currently using to serve families .

hud has estimated that as many as 15% of phas administering the voucher programs face such shortfalls .

the department is working with agencies to determine which ones are facing these shortfalls , and which ones can be assisted with the fy2009 $100 million renewal set - aside and $30 million administrative fee set - aside , and it is advising agencies as to how they can cut costs to stay within their budgets .

if a pha does not have sufficient funding to renew all of its vouchers , the pha may have to stop issuing vouchers , and , at the extreme , some families may lose assistance .

hud has asked agencies that are facing shortfalls to contact the department before terminating assistance .

in response to concerns about the implications of these funding shortfalls , the second continuing resolution ( p.l .

111-88 ) permitted hud to use $200 million of the advance appropriation provided in fy2009 for use in fy2010 to adjust phas' cy2009 budgets .

for fy2010 , the president requested $16.189 billion for voucher renewals , with no proposed rescissions .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3288 included about $200 million above the president's requested level for renewals .

the senate committee - passed version of h.r .

3288 included $150 million more for renewals than the president's request , but $50 million less than the house bill .

p.l .

111-117 funded renewals at the senate - requested level .

incremental vouchers is the term used to describe new vouchers .

as noted earlier , most funding in the voucher program is devoted to renewing existing vouchers .

however , the demand for vouchers far exceeds the supply of roughly two million vouchers , so low - income housing advocates regularly lobby for incremental vouchers to help serve additional families .

in his fy2010 budget , the president did not request funding for new incremental vouchers .

the fy2010 congressional budget justifications note that the department is focused on "fully implementing the fy2008 and fy2009 appropriations. .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3288 included $75 million for new incremental vouchers for homeless veterans through the hud - va supported housing ( hud - vash ) program .

the senate committee - passed version of h.r .

3288 included $75 million for hud - vash vouchers and $20 million for family unification program vouchers — these vouchers are used by families who have been involved in the child welfare system .

p.l .

111-117 included funding for both vash vouchers and fup vouchers .

the public housing program provides publicly owned and subsidized rental units for very low - income families .

although no new public housing developments have been built for many years , congress continues to provide funds to the more than 3,100 public housing authorities ( phas ) that own and maintain the existing stock of more than 1.2 million units .

through the public housing operating fund , hud provides funds to phas to help fill the gap between tenants' contributions toward rent and the cost of ongoing maintenance , utilities , and administration of public housing .

through the public housing capital fund , hud provides funding to phas for large capital projects and modernization needs .

in fy2009 , congress provided $4.455 billion for the operating fund , which was sufficient to fund an estimated 90% of pha budget eligibility .

in fy2010 , president obama requested just under $4.600 billion , which hud's congressional budget justifications estimate would fully fund phas' budget needs .

several of the pha industry groups have contended that hud's estimates are incorrect and that to fully fund pha budgets , the operating fund would need $5.050 billion in fy2010 .

both the house - passed and senate committee - passed bills would increase funding above the president's requested level ( to $4.800 billion and $4.750 billion respectively ) , but not to the level requested by advocates .

p.l .

111-117 provided $4.775 billion for the operating fund .

president obama's fy2010 budget requested $2.244 billion for the capital fund .

of that amount , $2.199 billion would be available for formula grants .

the amount requested is roughly equal to the estimated $2 billion in new capital needs that accrue every year in public housing .

in addition to new needs , there is an estimated backlog of roughly $20 billion in unmet capital needs .

both the house - passed and senate committee - passed versions of h.r .

3288 would fund the capital fund at $2.5 billion , which is more than both the president's request and the fy2009 level .

p.l .

111-117 adopted the house and senate funding level , $2.5 billion .

the community development block grant ( cdbg ) program is the largest source of federal financial assistance in support of state and local neighborhood revitalization , housing rehabilitation , and economic development activities .

cdbg is part of the community development fund ( cdf ) account , which has also funded other community development - related programs in past years , including the economic development initiatives ( edi ) and neighborhood initiative ( ni ) programs .

for fy2010 , the administration's budget request proposed a $550 million increase in total cdf appropriations , including a request to "fully fund" the cdbg program .

in addition , the budget request included $150 million to fund the administration's proposed sustainable communities initiatives , and $50 million to support activities previously funded under other hud accounts — specifically , the rural innovation fund ( currently known as the rural housing and economic development program ) , and the university communities fund , previously funded under a different account .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3288 included $4.599 billion for cdf activities , including $4.167 billion for formula - based cdbg funds to state and local governments .

the bill recommended $149 million more in cdf appropriations and $18 million less in cdbg formula - based funding than requested by the administration .

the difference in the amount requested by the administration and that recommended by the house would be used to fund congressionally designated special projects ( earmarks ) under both the edi ( $151 million ) and ni ( $16 million ) subaccounts .

the senate committee - passed version of h.r .

3288 would take a similar tack , recommending an amount for cdbg formula - based funding that is $193 million less than requested by the administration in order to fund the edi and ni subaccounts .

in addition , both the house - passed version of h.r .

3288 and the senate committee - passed version support the administration's multi - pronged sustainable communities initiative by recommending $150 million in new appropriations to fund the initiative , which would promote the regional integration of housing , transportation , energy , and environmental plans and strategies .

p.l .

111-117 provided the same level of funding for the cdf as requested by the president and proposed by the senate .

of that amount , $3.99 billion is designated for cdbg grants , $173 million is designated for edi , $22 million is designated for ni , and $150 million is designated for the sustainable communities initiative .

the brownfield economic development initiative ( bedi ) program is a competitive grant program that provides funds to assist communities with the redevelopment of abandoned , idled , and underused industrial and commercial facilities where expansion and redevelopment are burdened by real or potential environmental contamination .

the section 108 loan guarantee program allows states and entitlement communities to borrow against their annual cdbg allocation in order to help finance brownfield redevelopment activities .

although the previous administration requested no new funding for bedi and the section 108 loan guarantee programs during previous budget cycles , arguing they were duplicative of other programs , congress continued to fund the programs .

the obama administration's fy2010 budget proposed to revamp the section 108 loan guarantee program by eliminating the credit subsidy and instead charging a fee - based assessment to borrowers accessing the program .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3288 would maintain the program's present structure , while the version reported by the senate appropriations committee supports the administration's proposal .

p.l .

111-117 adopted the house proposal , funding section 108 at $6 million , utilizing the previous structure .

president obama's fy2010 budget also proposed eliminating the separate appropriation for the bedi program for fy2010 , but noted that program activities could continue to be funded under the larger cdbg program .

h.r .

3288 , as reported by the senate appropriations committee , included no funding for the program .

however , the house - passed version of the bill would appropriate $25 million for bedi activities , returning the program to its pre - fy2007 funding level .

p.l .

111-117 provided $18 million for bedi .

hud's housing counseling program provides competitive grants to hud - approved housing counseling agencies .

housing counseling agencies provide a wide range of counseling services to prospective home buyers , current homeowners , and other groups with specific housing concerns .

recently , congress has also provided separate funding to the neighborhood reinvestment corporation , commonly known as neighborworks america , specifically for foreclosure mitigation counseling .

neighborworks distributes these funds to eligible housing counseling organizations through the national foreclosure mitigation counseling program ( nfmcp ) .

 ( note that the funding for the nfmcp is not provided within hud's budget ; the neighborhood reinvestment corporation receives a separate appropriation in title iii of the transportation , hud , and related agencies funding bill ) .

the president's budget proposed $100 million in funding for hud housing counseling in fy2010 , a $35 million increase over the $65 million appropriated in fy2009 .

the president's budget also included $33.8 million in funding for the nfmcp .

the house - passed version of h.r .

3288 included the same total amount of funding for housing counseling as the president's budget , but proposed to distribute the funding differently .

the house bill would provide $75 million in funding for hud's housing counseling program , which represents a $10 million increase over the fy2009 appropriation but is $25 million less than the president's budget request .

the house bill would also provide $63.8 million for the nfmcp , a $30 million increase over the president's budget request .

the senate committee - passed bill would provide a higher total amount of funding for housing counseling than either the house - passed bill or the president's budget request .

specifically , the senate committee - passed bill would provide $100 million for hud housing counseling and $65 million for the nfmcp .

p.l .

111-117 included $87.5 million for hud housing counseling and $65 million for the nfmcp .

the federal housing administration ( fha ) insures mortgage loans made by private lenders to eligible borrowers .

the fha home loan insurance programs are administered through two program accounts: the mutual mortgage insurance / cooperative management housing insurance fund account ( mmi / cmhi ) and the general insurance / special risk insurance fund account ( gi / sri ) .

the mmi / cmhi fund provides insurance for home mortgages .

the gi / sri fund provides insurance for more risky home mortgages , for multifamily rental housing , and for an assortment of special - purpose loans such as hospitals and nursing homes .

in recent years , the cost of fha in the annual appropriations acts has been negative , meaning that the account has , on net , brought in more than it costs , with the surplus used to offset the cost of the hud budget .

however , the president's fy2010 budget request , as estimated by the congressional budget office ( cbo ) , would require positive appropriations for the fha account .

this is in part due to the home equity conversion mortgage ( hecm ) program , which , because of the present housing market , has experienced lower - than - expected appreciation rates for homes .

under the president's budget request , hecms would require $798 million in positive appropriations in fy2010 .

both the house - passed and senate committee - passed versions of h.r .

3288 would require hud to make changes to the hecm program to minimize the amount of positive credit subsidy required in the mmi fund .

for example , both versions of h.r .

3288 would require an adjustment of the factors used to calculate the principal limit for hecms .

h.r .

3288 , as passed by the house , estimated that the fha funds would not need the positive appropriations for hecms assumed by the president's budget .

under the senate committee - passed version of h.r .

3288 , the positive subsidy requirement for hecms would be $288 million , compared to $798 million under the president's budget .

p.l .

111-117 included the house proposal to require the secretary of hud to administer the hecm program without a credit subsidy .

the government national mortgage association ( ginnie mae ) is the agency of hud that guarantees the timely payment of principal and interest on securities that back mortgages insured by fha and other government agencies .

increases in fha activity results in an increase in ginnie mae activity , since ginnie mae backs nearly 97% of fha - insured mortgages .

the president's budget estimated that ginnie mae would provide $720 million in offsets that could be used to reduce the cost of the hud budget , compared to only $193 million in fy2009 .

the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 ( arra ; h.r .

1 / p.l .

111-5 ) on february 17 , 2009 , the president signed this measure ( commonly referred to as "the economic stimulus act" ) into law .

it included 461.8 billion for thud agencies: $48.1 billion for dot programs and $13.7 billion for hud programs .

the legislation included deadlines to encourage the expenditure of the money as quickly as feasible ; while much of the funding was expended during fy2009 , some will not be expended until fy2010 or even later the department of defense appropriations act , fy2010 ( p.l .

111-118 ) division b of this act , which was signed into law on december 19 , 2009 , included a provision extending the authorization of the surface transportation programs to february 28 , 2010 ( section 1008 ) .

the authorization , which was originally scheduled to expire on september 30 , 2010 , had previously been extended by the continuing appropriations resolution , fy2010 ( division b of p.l .

111-68 , sections 157-162 ) .

the jobs for main street act of 2009 ( h.r .

2847 ) on december 16 , 2009 , the house of representatives passed a substitute amendment to h.r .

2847 .

division a , the jobs for main street act of 2009 , would provide $150 billion in supplemental emergency funding to stimulate the economy , and includes funding for both transportation and housing programs .

it would provide $37.3 billion for dot , with virtually all of that funding going to highway and transit grants , and would extend the authorization for dot surface transportation programs to september 30 , 2010 .

it would provide over $1 billion to hud to capitalize the national affordable housing trust fund .

 ( for more information , see crs report r40781 , the housing trust fund: background and issues , by [author name scrubbed]. ) .

it would also provide hud with $1 billion for competitive grants through the public housing capital fund .

the senate has not yet taken action on the jobs for main street act of 2009 .

