h.r .

3200 , america's affordable health choices act of 2009 , as introduced on july 14 , 2009 , was referred to the house committees on energy and commerce , ways and means , education and labor , oversight and government reform , and the budget , for a period to be subsequently determined by the speaker , in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned .

the committees on education and labor and on ways and means each ordered reported , as amended , their versions of h.r .

3200 on july 17 , 2009 .

the committee on energy and commerce ordered reported , as amended its version on july 31 , 2009 .

the committees on oversight and government reform and the budget have not taken up the legislation for consideration .

h.r .

3200 proposes sweeping reforms of the u.s. health insurance and health care system .

h.r .

3200 contains three major divisions , 18 titles , 51 subtitles and 284 sections , including 34 medicaid sections .

these 356 different organizational components often are interlinked and interdependent so that provisions in one division or section are likely to affect provisions in another or several other sections .

the three major components of h.r .

3200 are designated divisions a , b , and c. division a , "affordable health care choices," focuses on reducing the number of uninsured , restructuring the private health insurance market , setting minimum standards for health benefits , and providing financial assistance to certain individuals and , in some cases , small employers .

division b , "medicare and medicaid improvements," proposes modifications to the largest two health insurance programs to make them consistent with the changes proposed in division a and to amend other provisions in existing federal statute .

division b also introduces a number of technical changes intended to improve quality of care , reduce federal and state expenditures , and address coverage gaps for both medicare and medicaid .

for medicaid , among other major proposals , division b would expand medicaid eligibility for traditional and non - traditional ( mostly childless adults ) beneficiary categories up to 133⅓% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) .

division c , "public health and workforce development," would amend and expand existing health professions and nursing workforce programs .

this report provides a discussion of the medicaid provisions contained in h.r .

3200 .

the discussion incorporates amendments that were adopted by the house committee on energy and commerce .

the report is divided into seven major categories: eligibility .

benefits .

financing .

waste , fraud , and abuse .

payments to territories .

demonstrations and pilot programs .

miscellaneous .

each topic contains a brief summary of existing medicaid law and related background to provide context for the discussion of changes proposed by h.r .

3200 .

medicaid is a means - tested entitlement program operated by states within broad federal guidelines .

to qualify , an individual must meet both categorical ( i.e. , must be a member of a covered group such as children , pregnant women , families with dependent children , the elderly , or the disabled ) and financial eligibility requirements .

medicaid's financial requirements place limits on the maximum amount of assets and income individuals may possess to participate in medicaid .

additional guidelines specify how states should calculate these amounts .

the specific asset and income limitations that apply to each eligibility group are set through a combination of federal parameters and state definitions .

consequently , these standards vary across states , and different standards apply to different population groups within states .

of the approximately 50 different eligibility "pathways" into medicaid , some are mandatory while others may be covered at state option .

examples of groups that states must provide medicaid to include pregnant women and children under age six with family income below 133% of the federal poverty level ( fpl ) , and poor individuals with disabilities or poor individuals over age 64 who qualify for cash assistance under the ssi program .

examples of groups that states may choose to cover under medicaid include pregnant women and infants with family income exceeding 133% fpl up to 185% fpl , and "medically needy" individuals who meet categorical requirements with income up to 133% of the maximum payment amount applicable under states' former aid to families with dependent children ( afdc ) programs based on family size .

"childless adults" ( nonelderly adults who are not disabled , not pregnant and not parents of dependent children ) , for example , are generally not eligible for medicaid , regardless of their income .

h.r .

3200 makes several changes to medicaid eligibility .

among the provisions that would impact eligibility , the bill would add two new mandatory eligibility groups , and add two new optional eligibility groups .

in addition , it would make several modifications to existing eligibility groups , and add provisions to facilitate outreach and enrollment in medicaid , chip , and the health insurance exchange .

medicaid benefits are identified in federal statute and regulations and include a wide range of medical care and services .

some benefits are specific items , such as eyeglasses and prosthetic devices .

other benefits are defined in terms of specific types of providers ( eg , physicians , hospitals ) .

still other benefits define specific types of services ( eg , family planning services and supplies , pregnancy - related services ) that may be delivered by any qualified medical provider that participates in medicaid .

finally , additional benefits include premium payments for coverage provided through managed care arrangements and medicare premium and cost - sharing support for persons dually eligible for both medicare and medicaid .

medicaid's basic benefit rules require all states to provide certain "mandatory" services ( eg , inpatient hospital care , physician services , lab / x - ray services ) .

the statute lists additional services that are considered optional ( eg , other licensed practitioners , rehabilitative services , nursing facility services for individuals under age 21 ) - that is , federal matching payments are available for optional services if states choose to include them in their medicaid plans .

states define the specific features of each mandatory and optional service to be provided under that plan within broad federal guidelines .

h.r .

3200 would make a number of changes to benefits under the medicaid program .

for example , this bill would add a new mandatory benefit for coverage of certain preventive services .

the bill would also add some optional medicaid benefits ( eg , nurse home visitation services ) and clarify the availability of certain existing optional services under current law ( eg , therapeutic foster care services , adult day health care ) .

h.r .

3200 also makes coverage of services provided by podiatrists and optometrists mandatory , rather than optional as under current law .

these and other proposed benefit changes are described below .

medicaid financing is shared by the federal government and the states .

the federal share for most medicaid expenses for benefits is determined by the federal medical assistance percentage ( fmap ) .

fmap is based on a formula that provides higher reimbursement to states with lower per capita income relative to the national average ( and vice versa ) .

fmaps have a statutory minimum of 50% and maximum of 83% , although some medicaid services receive a higher federal match rate .

fy2009 fmaps ranged from a high of 75.8% in mississippi to a low of 50.0% in 13 other states .

in february of this year , with passage of arra , states received temporary enhanced fmap rates for nine quarters beginning with the first quarter of fy2009 and running through the first quarter of fy2011 .

state expenditures to administer their medicaid programs are matched by federal funding at the 50% matching funding rate .

federal matching rates for administrative expenditures are the same for all states , although some activities are matched at higher rates .

within broad federal guidelines , states generally control medicaid spending levels by tailoring eligibility , covered services , cost - sharing and premiums paid by beneficiaries , provider reimbursement rates , and other program components to achieve their budget and policy goals .

to receive payment for the federal share of medicaid expenditures , states submit quarterly expenditure reports to the centers for medicare and medicaid services ( cms ) .

the medicaid financing provisions in h.r .

3200 generally can be considered technical changes or refinements that would reduce federal and state health care expenditures .

the proposed changes would affect medicaid purchases of prescription drugs , disproportionate share hospital ( dsh ) payments , and graduate medical education ( gme ) payments .

some of the medicaid financing provisions in h.r .

3200 , discussed in this section , appear in two subtitles .

division b , title vii — medicaid and chip , subtitle a — medicaid and health reform contains a dsh financing provision , and subtitle e — financing , contains provisions on prescription drugs and gme .

states are required to create a state plan for their medicaid programs that is subject to approval by cms .

this comprehensive document describes nearly all aspects of each state's medicaid program including administrative activities , eligibility , enrollment , covered benefits , provider credentialing , provider reimbursement , quality assurance , beneficiary cost sharing , and many more program elements .

in creating their medicaid plans , states must conform to federal rules and guidance .

whenever states make changes to their medicaid program , they must update their state plans by submitting a state plan amendment , which is also subject to review and approval by cms .

as part of the medicaid plan , states establish participation requirements and reimbursement rules for different providers and suppliers that deliver services to medicaid beneficiaries , subject to federal rules .

these requirements include reporting and monitoring waste , fraud , and abuse .

in general , initiatives designed to combat fraud , waste , and abuse are considered program integrity activities .

this includes processes directed at reducing improper payments , as well as activities to prevent , detect , investigate , and ultimately prosecute health care fraud and abuse .

more specifically , program integrity ensures that correct payments are paid to legitimate providers for appropriate and reasonable services for eligible beneficiaries .

medicaid and chip program integrity are often limited to issues of fraud and abuse by providers ( as well as beneficiaries ) and efforts to curtail these problems .

the federal government pays a share of every state's spending on medicaid services and program administration , including expenditures for the reduction of waste , fraud , and abuse .

the federal share for most medicaid service costs is determined by a state's fmap .

the federal match for administrative expenditures does not vary by state and is generally 50% , but certain administrative functions have a higher federal match , including two program integrity expenditures: operation of required medicaid management information systems ( mmis ) and operation of state medicaid fraud control units ( mfcu ) .

operation of mfcus and mmis activities are matched at 75% , although the federal match is 90% for certain startup expenses .

thus , the federal government provides the majority of medicaid spending to combat fraud and abuse .

congress provided new dedicated medicaid program integrity funding in dra when it established a medicaid integrity program ( mip ) with an appropriation reaching $75 million annually for audits , identification of overpayments , education with respect to payment integrity and quality of care , and other purposes .

congress also provided in dra an additional $25 million annually for five years beginning in fy2006 for medicaid activities of the hhs office of inspector general ( oig ) , and an annual appropriation reaching $60 million to expand the medicare - medicaid data match project ( referred to as medi - medi ) that analyzes claims from both programs together in order to detect aberrant billing patterns .

improper payments are one measure of fraud and abuse activities under medicaid .

under the improper payments information act of 2002 ( ipia , p.l .

107-300 ) , federal agencies were required to identify programs that are susceptible to significant improper payments , estimate the amount of overpayments , and report annually to congress on those figures and on the steps being taken to reduce such payments .

in compliance with ipia provisions , the department of health and human services estimated fy2008 medicaid composite error rates at 10.5 percent , or $32.7 billion in improper payments of which the federal share was $18.6 billion , and , for chip , the rate was 14.7 percent , or $1.2 billion , with a federal share of $0.8 billion .

measures of improper payment measures focus on payments made in error , not the cause of those improper payments .

thus , improper payment measures provide no measure of fraud , which most often is undetected .

improper payment measures provide estimates of program losses in general .

the national health care anti - fraud association estimates that the losses to health insurers , including medicaid , attributable to health care fraud are in the range of 3% to 10% of paid claims .

in the 50 states and the district of columbia ( hereafter referred to as the states ) , medicaid is an individual entitlement .

there are no limits on federal payments for medicaid provided that the state contributes its share of the matching funds .

by contrast , medicaid programs in the five territories ( american samoa , guam , the northern mariana islands , puerto rico , and the virgin islands ) are subject to annual federal spending caps .

all five territories typically exhaust their caps prior to the end of the fiscal year .

once the cap is reached , the territories assume the full costs of medicaid services , or in some instances may suspend services or cease payments to providers until the next fiscal year .

the federal share for most medicaid service costs is determined by the fmap , which is based on a formula that provides higher reimbursement to states with lower per capita incomes relative to the national average ( and vice versa ) .

fmaps have a statutory minimum of 50% and maximum of 83% .

in the territories , the fmap is typically set at 50% .

most recently , arra allows each territory to choose between an fmap increase of 6.2 percentage points along with a 15% increase in its spending cap , or its regular fmap along with a 30% increase in its spending cap for the period between the first quarter of fy2009 through the first quarter of fy2011 .

all five territories made the one time choice for the 30% increase in its spending cap .

the medicaid programs in american samoa and the northern mariana islands have operated under a section 1902 ( j ) waiver since 1983 and 1989 , respectively .

section 1902 ( j ) refers to the section of the social security act under which authority is granted to waive certain medicaid program rules .

under a section 1902 ( j ) waiver , the only medicaid requirements that may not be waived are: ( 1 ) the 50% fmap , ( 2 ) the capped medicaid allotments for guam , and ( 3 ) the requirement that payment may not be made for services that are not described in section 1905 ( a ) of the social security act .

under h.r .

3200 , for fy2011 through fy2019 , the provision would increase the spending caps in the territories that are otherwise determined under current law by the following amounts ( in $ millions ) : the provision would require that the secretary submit a report not later than october 1 , 2013 , that details a transition plan to modify the existing medicaid programs and outline actions the secretary and the governments of each territory must take to achieve full parity in financing with the medicaid programs with the states by fy2020 .

the report would be required to include fmap rates for each territory if the formula applicable to the states were applied .

the report would also be required to include any recommendations that the secretary may have as to whether the mandatory ceiling amounts for each territory provided for in section 1108 of the social security act should be increased any time before fy2020 due to any factors that the secretary deems relevant .

the secretary would also be required to include information about per capita income data that could be used to calculate fmap percentages for each territory , and on how such data might differ from the per capita income data used to promulgate fmaps for the states , as well as recommendations on how the fmap would be calculated for the territories beginning in fy2020 to ensure parity with the states .

the secretary would be required to submit subsequent reports to congress in 2015 , 2017 , and 2019 detailing the progress that the secretary and the governments of each territory have made in fulfilling the actions outlined to achieve medicaid parity in financing transition plan for the territories ( described above ) .

for fiscal years 2011 through 2019 , fmap rates for puerto rico , the virgin islands , guam , the northern mariana islands , and american samoa would be set at the highest fmap applicable to any of the states for the fiscal year involved , taking into account the application of relevant provisions of arra to such states for calendar quarters during such fiscal years for which such subsections apply .

finally , the provision would extend the waiver authority provided under section 1902 ( j ) to all of the territories beginning with fy2011 .

in addition , the secretary would be required to provide technical assistance to the territories in upgrading their existing computer systems in order to anticipate meeting reporting requirements necessary to implement the financing parity provisions ( described above ) , and the provision of such technical assistance would not be counted against any limitation on payment to the territories specified under section 1108 of the social security act .

federal assistance is provided to certain low - income persons to help them meet medicare part d premium and cost - sharing charges .

to qualify for the part d low - income subsidy ( lis ) , medicare beneficiaries must have resources ( assets ) no greater than the income and resource limits established by the medicare prescription drug , improvement , and modernization act of 2003 ( mma , p.l .

108-173 ) .

individuals may qualify for the full subsidy in two ways: ( 1 ) if they are eligible for medicaid or one of the medicare savings programs ( msp ; qualified medicare beneficiary ( qmb ) , specified low income medicare beneficiary ( slmb ) , or qualifying individual ( qi ) ) , or are recipients of supplemental security income benefits , they are deemed automatically eligible ; or ( 2 ) if they apply for the benefit through their state medicaid agency or through the social security administration ( ssa ) and are determined to have an annual income below 135% of the federal poverty level and to have resources below a certain limit .

the commissioner of social security is required to conduct outreach efforts to identify persons potentially eligible for assistance under the msp and the lis programs and to notify such persons of the availability of assistance .

outreach efforts are to be coordinated with the states .

mippa extended the outreach requirements for the commissioner of social security .

beginning january 1 , 2010 , the commissioner is required , with the applicants' consent , to transmit data from the lis application to the appropriate state medicaid agency .

the transmittal initiates an application of the individual for msp benefits .

states are required to accept data transmitted under this provision and to act on the data in the same manner and in accordance with the same deadlines as if the data constituted an initiation of an msp application submitted directly by the individual .

the date of the individual's application for lis from which the summary data was derived constitutes the application date for msp .

under medicaid rules , states are required to process medicaid applications , including msp applications , with reasonable promptness .

h.r .

3200 would clarify that for the purpose of a state's obligation to furnish medical assistance ( medicaid - financed coverage ) with reasonable promptness and for the purpose of determining when medical assistance is to be made available , the date of the electronic transmission of low - income subsidy program data to the state medicaid agency would constitute the date of filing for benefits under the msp .

in addition , for the purpose of determining when medical assistance will be made available , the state would be required to consider the date of the individual's application for the lis to constitute the date of filing for benefits under the msp .

chipra restated prior law that federal funding for individuals who are not legal residents is not allowed , and that the law provides for the disallowance of federal funding of erroneous expenditures under medicaid and chip .

h.r .

3200 would make a technical correction to one sentence in chipra by replacing the reference to "legal residents" with the phrase "lawfully residing in the united states. .

thus , the new wording would be "nothing in this act allows federal payment for individuals who are not lawfully residing in the united states. .

approved section 1115 waivers are deemed to be part of a state's medicaid ( or chip ) state plan for purposes of federal reimbursement .

the provision would clarify that medicaid coverage offered under the special terms and conditions ( stcs ) of a section 1115 demonstration waiver approved by the secretary ( eg , benefit coverage , cost sharing rules , special financing arrangements , eligible populations , etc. ) .

would be considered part of the medicaid state plan .

medicaid program rules not explicitly listed in the waiver stcs would still apply .

chipra , the reauthorization of chip , included several provisions designed to improve the quality of care for children under medicaid and chip .

the law directed to secretary to develop ( 1 ) child health quality measures , ( 2 ) a standardized format for reporting information , and ( 3 ) procedures to encourage states to voluntarily report on the quality of pediatric care in these two programs .

examples of these initiatives included grants and contracts to develop , test , update and disseminate evidence - based measures , and demonstrations to evaluate promising ideas for improving the quality of children's health care under medicaid and chip .

h.r .

3200 would require the secretary to develop and publish measures on the quality of maternity care under medicaid and chip .

the secretary would also be required to publish a standardized reporting format for these measures , to be used by participating managed care entities , providers and practitioners in reporting such measures to the secretary .

the bill would also require the secretary to develop quality measures for services provided to adult medicaid beneficiaries ages of 21 and 64 ( that are not part of the set of quality measures for the delivery of health care services in the u.s. established under a separate provision in this bill ) .

these measures would also be published , along with a standardized reporting format for use by participating providers .

in developing these quality measures , the secretary would be required to consult with certain academic institutions with related health quality measurement expertise , and to obtain input from stakeholders .

the development of these measures must be coordinated with the development of the child health quality measures established in chipra .

starting in 2013 , and annually thereafter , the secretary would be required to submit a report to congress on the availability of reliable data relating to the quality of maternity care and services provided to adults ages 21 to 64 under medicaid and chip , and recommendations for improving such quality of care under both programs .

a total of $40 million would be appropriated for these activities for the five year period beginning with fy2010 , to remain available until expended .

