the health care reform debate raises many complex issues including those of coverage , accessibility , cost , accountability , and quality of health care .

underlying these policy considerations are issues regarding the status of health or health care as a moral , legal , or constitutional right .

it may be useful to distinguish between a right to health and a right to health care .

an often cited definition of "health" from the world health organization describes health as "a state of complete physical , mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity. .

"health care" connotes the means for the achievement of health , as in the "care , services or supplies related to the health of an individual. .

for purposes of this report , discussion will be limited to constitutional and legal issues pertaining to a right to health care .

numerous questions arise concerning the parameters of a "right to health care. .

if each individual has a right to health care , how much care does a person have a right to and from whom ? .

would equality of access be a component of such a right ? .

do federal or state governments have a duty to provide health care services to the large numbers of medically uninsured persons ? .

what kind of health care system would fulfill a duty to provide health care ? .

how should this duty be enforced ? .

the debate on these and other questions may be informed by a summary of the scope of the right to health care , particularly the right to access health care paid for by the government , under the u.s. constitution , and under interpretations of the u.s. supreme court .

while the united states constitution and supreme court interpretations do not identify a constitutional right to health care at the government's expense , congress has enacted numerous statutes which establish and define statutory rights of individuals to receive medical services from the government .

in addition , other statutes , such as title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 which prohibits discrimination under federally funded programs , affect the manner of delivery of services under federal grants .

congress' authority to enact health care legislation derives from the enumerated powers set forth in article i , section 8 of the constitution .

congress' power to tax and spend for the general welfare and its power to regulate interstate commerce have been the primary sources of constitutional authority for most health care legislation .

on the state level , governmental obligations to provide health care services either generally or for particular groups of persons may be found in a number of state constitutions .

thirteen state constitutions contain provisions which specifically refer to health .

the constitutions of the states of alaska , hawaii , michigan , north carolina , new york , and wyoming have provisions which require the state to promote and protect the public health .

for example , alaska's constitution provides that "[t]he legislature shall provide for the promotion and protection of public health. .

and wyoming's constitution states , "as the health and morality of the people are essential to their well - being , … it shall be the duty of the legislature to protect and promote these vital interests. .

other state constitutional provisions permit , and sometimes require , legislative action to fund health care services for specific activities or for certain groups , such as indigent persons .

mississippi has a constitutional provision that authorizes laws for the care of the indigent sick in state hospitals .

arkansas's constitution has a provision requiring the legislature to provide for the treatment of the insane .

by and large , however , state constitutional provisions authorize , but do not require , the provision of health care services .

some state courts have liberally construed state constitutional provisions mandating care of the poor to include the provision of health care services .

for example , in graham v. reserve life ins .

co . , a provision in the north carolina constitution mandating "beneficent provision for the poor" was held to require state provision of free medical treatment to indigent sick persons .

and the constitutionality of alabama's health care responsibility act , which imposed financial responsibility for the medical care of county indigents on counties , was upheld in part on the basis of alabama's constitutional provision requiring counties "to make adequate provisions for the maintenance of the poor. .

as a general matter , state constitutional rights may be more expansive than those found under the federal bill of rights , since federal rights set the minimum standards for the states .

states are always free to provide for greater protections for their citizens than are provided on the national level .

the provision of health care services under a state health care program may be subject to limitations under equal protection provisions in a state constitution .

in 2009 , massachusetts denied state subsidies for the purchase of health insurance to a category of noncitizen immigrants lawfully residing in massachusetts , specifically those who would be ineligible for certain federal benefits ( those in the united states for less than five years , and certain others ) .

prior to that time , all lawful immigrants in massachusetts were eligible for coverage under massachusetts' commonwealth care program , with subsidies provided for those individuals with incomes below 300% of the federal poverty level .

the supreme judicial court of massachusetts , in finch v. commonwealth health insurance connector authority , used a strict scrutiny standard of review to determine that the state did not demonstrate a compelling interest that would justify excluding certain classes of lawful resident aliens from the state's subsidized health insurance program .

the court noted that the state was undergoing a financial crisis at the time the commonwealth care program was amended , and that the motivation for the provision appeared to be fiscal , which could not constitute a compelling justification for the exclusion of certain classes of legal aliens from the subsidized insurance program .

"the discrimination against legal immigrants that [the statute's] limiting language embodies violates their rights to equal protection under the massachusetts constitution. .

