child abuse and neglect is a significant social concern .

children who experience abuse or neglect are more likely to have developmental delays and impaired language or cognitive skills ; be identified as "problem" children ( with attention difficulties or challenging behaviors ) ; be arrested for delinquency , adult criminality , and violent criminal behavior ; experience depression , anxiety , or other mental health problems as adults ; engage in more health - risk behaviors as adults ; and have poorer health outcomes as adults .

between 1963 and 1967 , every state and the district of columbia enacted some form of child abuse and neglect reporting law to permit individuals to refer cases of suspected child abuse or neglect to a public agency .

the rapid adoption of these laws was aided by a model reporting law disseminated by the children's bureau , which is housed within the administration for children and families ( acf ) at the u.s. department of health and human services ( hhs ) .

in 1974 , congress passed the child abuse prevention and treatment act ( capta , p.l .

93-247 ) and state reporting laws were modified to conform to the standards it established .

in creating capta , congress sought to increase understanding of child abuse and neglect and improve the response to its occurrence by establishing a single federal focal point on the issue .

since its enactment 35 years ago , the law has been reauthorized and amended numerous times , most recently by the keeping children and families safe act of 2003 ( p.l .

108-36 ) .

currently , capta authorizes: state grants : formula grants to states and territories to help improve their child protective service ( cps ) systems , in exchange for which states must comply with various requirements related to the reporting , investigation , and treatment of child maltreatment cases .

the fy2009 appropriation was $26.5 million .

discretionary activities : federal data collection , dissemination , and technical assistance efforts related to child abuse prevention and treatment , as well as competitive grants to a range of eligible entities for research and demonstration projects or other activities related to the identification , prevention , and treatment of child abuse or neglect .

the fy2009 appropriation was $41.8 million ( including a $13.5 million set - aside for the acf home visitation initiative , $500,000 for a feasibility study related to a national child abuse and neglect offender registry , and $2.4 million for other congressional projects designated in the explanatory statement accompanying the fy2009 appropriations bill ) .

community - based grants: formula grants to each state and territory for support of community - based activities and services to prevent child abuse and neglect .

the fy2009 appropriation was $41.7 million .

children's justice act grants: formula grants to states and territories to improve investigation , prosecution , and handling of child maltreatment cases , particularly those cases related to child sexual abuse or exploitation .

for fy2009 , $20 million was provided out of the federal crime victims fund , including a $3 million set - aside for tribes .

funding authorization for most grants or activities authorized under capta expired with fy2008 .

however , as shown above , the omnibus appropriations act , 2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) provided roughly $110 million out of the general treasury for capta grants and activities in fy2009 .

in addition , as required by the victims of crime act ( p.l .

93-247 , as amended ) , $20 million was set aside from the crime victims fund for grants to improve the investigation , prosecution , and handling of child abuse and neglect cases ( commonly referred to as "children's justice act grants" ) .

fy2010 appropriations legislation ( h.r .

3293 ) pending in congress would provide roughly the same capta funding for fy2010 and , again , an additional $20 million is expected to be available from the crime victims fund .

children depend on adults to meet their physical needs , foster their social and emotional development , and , in so doing , nurture their growth into adulthood .

for most children , their parents are both capable and committed to providing this necessary care and support .

for some , however , this is not true .

any person who knows or suspects that a child is being abused or neglected may contact child protective services ( cps ) with this information .

local cps agencies are called on to screen these referrals , investigate or assess the allegations as warranted , and identify children in need of additional services .

in carrying out this job , cps workers must discern the difference between children whose home situations are safe , those whose homes may be made safe if additional supports and services are provided , and those for whom removal — even if temporary — is necessary for the children's protection .

this first part of this report includes a discussion of definitions of child abuse and neglect and a description of how cps agencies receive and respond to allegations of child abuse and neglect .

tasks done by cps workers are described , including the manner in which children are ultimately counted as "victims" or "non - victims" of child abuse or neglect .

it continues with a look at certain demographic characteristics of children found to be victims and a brief description of services provided to children and their families following a child abuse or neglect investigation .

finally , this part of the report concludes with a short review of some risk factors for poor child outcomes that are seen disproportionately in children whose families are investigated for abuse or neglect , and lists some circumstances prevalent among the families or caregivers of these children that may also put these children at risk for poor outcomes .

cps agencies are sometimes referred to as the "front - end" of the child welfare services continuum .

the number of children and families who come to the attention of cps each year is far greater than the number of children found to be victims of child abuse or neglect and the even smaller number of children who are placed in foster care .

figure 1 shows the scope of children and families who come in contact with the cps / child welfare agency .

the well - being of children is the subject of a range of federal programs that are collectively referred to as "child welfare" programs .

the primary goals of federal child welfare programs are to ensure the safety of children ; to enable them to be part of strong , permanent families ; and , in doing this , to foster the well - being of children and their families .

capta is the only federal child welfare program focused solely on preventing child abuse or neglect as well as responding to allegations of abuse or neglect .

as such , it is a critical piece of federal child welfare policy related to ensuring children's safety .

in addition , efforts to prevent child abuse or neglect or to ensure that children may safely remain in a home where child abuse or neglect has been alleged are critical to the goal of permanence .

the remainder of this report discusses activities authorized and required under capta and funds provided .

table 1 provides a snapshot of the programs or activities authorized under capta , including use of funds , requirements , and funding .

the final section of this report discusses funding authorized by capta and includes a table showing a history of funding appropriated under that authority ( beginning with fy1992 ) .

capta does not include funding authority for the state grants for programs relating to the investigation and prosecution of child abuse and neglect cases .

as noted above , these grants , commonly referred to as children's justice act grants , are authorized in section 107 of capta .

however , they are funded under an annual set - aside ( maximum of $20 million ) from the crime victims fund .

this section of the report does not include further discussion of those grants or their funding .

instead , the funding authorization levels and appropriations described below relate only to the grants and other activities for which funding authority is provided in capta and for which funds must be appropriated out of the general treasury .

capta contains two separate funding authorizations , one for grants and activities under title i ( i.e. , state grants and discretionary activities ) and another for grants under title ii ( community - based grants ) .

traditionally , congress appropriates funding under these two funding authorizations in three separate accounts .

as shown in table 5 , actual appropriations typically fall below the authorized funding level .

section 112 of capta provides a "general" title i funding authorization level , which was set at $120 million for fy2004 and at "such sums as may be necessary" for each of fy2005-fy2008 .

this funding authority is currently expired but congress appropriated $68.3 million in funds to meet title i capta purposes for fy2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , and legislation pending in congress ( h.r .

3293 ) would appropriate a similar amount for fy2010 .

section 112 further adds that out of the total funding provided for title i ( under the general authorization of funding ) , hhs must make 30% available for "discretionary activities" provided for in title i of capta .

in practice , however , congress regularly overrides this statutory language by appropriating capta title i funds in two separate accounts , one for "child abuse state grants" and a separate one for "child abuse discretionary activities. .

the latter supports research , technical assistance , and other activities required or authorized under title i of capta , along with ( in most years ) some projects that are consistent with capta purposes and are specified during that appropriations process .

funding provided for "discretionary activities" has ranged from roughly 40% to 60% of overall title i funding .

for fy2009 , funds appropriated for capta's "discretionary activities" account totaled 61% of the overall title i funding .

section 210 of capta authorizes funding for title ii community - based grants to prevent child abuse and neglect .

the funding authorization level for these grants was set at $80 million for fy2004 and at such sums as may be necessary for fy2005-fy2008 .

this funding authority is currently expired but congress nonetheless appropriated $41.7 million for fy2009 ( p.l .

111-8 ) , and fy2010 appropriations legislation pending in congress ( h.r .

3293 ) would appropriate that same amount for fy2010 .

appendix a .

scope of state child protective services work data in table a - 1 are provided to suggest the scope of activity by state protective services that is related to the capta directive that states have procedures to receive and respond to allegations of child abuse and neglect .

the population data shown are the census bureau estimate of the number of children ( individuals under age 18 ) living in each state on july 1 , 2007 .

the fy2007 program data include the number of allegations of child abuse or neglect ( referrals ) received by cps , the number of those referrals that were investigated ( reports ) , and the number and rate of children found to be victims of abuse or neglect .

the victim rate refers to the number of children who were reported to be victims of child maltreatment for every 1,000 children in the population .

referrals and investigations typically involve more than one child .

for example , on a national basis , states received 3.2 million referrals during fy2007 that alleged abuse or neglect related to an estimated 5.8 million children .

cps workers responded with an investigation , or some other assessment of the family , for 1.9 million of the referrals , and the estimated number of children involved in those investigations ( or assessments ) was approximately 3.5 million .

finally , the table shows the number and rate of children found to be victims in each state .

appendix b .

child , family , and caregiver risk factors among children in families investigated for child abuse or neglect the national survey of child and adolescent well - being ( nscaw ) , required by congress under section 429 of the social security act , included a nationally representative sample of children in families investigated for abuse or neglect .

table b - 1 shows selected developmental and other risk factors among those children compared to children in the general population .

findings refer to children in families investigated for child abuse or neglect , as a whole , and without regard to whether an abuse or neglect finding was substantiated by the cps investigator .

table b - 2 presents nscaw findings concerning family and caregiver risk factors among the families of all children investigated for abuse and neglect , as well as by the level of services received following the investigation .

these findings are based on the initial wave of data collection in the survey which was fielded in 1999-2000 .

appendix c. trends in reported child abuse and neglect victims and types of abuse or neglect experienced table c - 1 shows national estimates of children subject to an investigation for child abuse or neglect and those found to be victims of child abuse or neglect .

although these data were all reported under the national child abuse and neglect data systems ( ncands ) , the quality and kind of data reported varies significantly by year .

in the earlier years , national estimates may necessarily have been derived based on information reported by a limited number of states .

in more recent years , the quality of the data reported has improved and nearly all states reported these data .

therefore , estimates for more recent years may be more accurate than those for earlier years .

table c - 2 shows trends in the share of child maltreatment victims experiencing certain types of maltreatment .

in every year before fy2007 , children that experienced more than one type of maltreatment were included in each type of maltreatment .

however , data for fy2007 are not comparable to data provided for earlier years because of a change in how this information was reported by hhs .

for example , before fy2007 , if a child experienced both sexual abuse and physical abuse , he or she would be represented in both maltreatment categories .

beginning with fy2007 , hhs reported a category for children experiencing "multiple maltreatments" ( two or more types of abuse or neglect ) and every other category includes children that were reported as experiencing that type of maltreatment only .

appendix d. children who receive post - investigation services table d - 1 uses state reported data to estimate the number of children who received services following an investigation or assessment .

not all states reported these data ; the estimates should therefore be treated as rough .

