the widely reported increase in federal contract dollars awarded to alaska native corporations ( ancs ) and their subsidiaries in recent years has generated congressional and public interest in the legal authorities governing contracting with these entities .

of particular interest are the authorities creating the alleged "special procurement advantages" that anc subsidiaries enjoy in contracting under the small business administration's minority small business and capital ownership development program ( commonly known as the 8 ( a ) program ) .

according to some reports , federal contract dollars awarded to ancs and their subsidiaries increased by 916% between fy2000 and fy2008 , going from $508.4 million to $5.2 billion .

the dollars awarded to anc - owned firms through the 8 ( a ) program , in particular , reportedly tripled between fy2004 ( $1.1 billion ) and fy2008 ( $3.9 billion ) .

critics are concerned about the impact of these increases on other minority - owned businesses participating in the 8 ( a ) program , as well as the potential for fraud , waste , and abuse when agencies make sole - source awards to ancs or their subsidiaries .

however , supporters of contracting programs for ancs point out that , even with the recent increases , contracting with ancs and their subsidiaries represents a small percentage of federal contract dollars .

they also note that profits from federal contracts are vital to improving the economic well - being of alaska natives .

members of the 112 th congress have introduced legislation ( h.r .

598 , s. 236 ) that would generally subject anc - owned firms participating in the 8 ( a ) program to the same treatment as individually owned firms .

among other things , this legislation would preclude anc - owned firms from receiving sole - source awards valued in excess of $4 million ( $6.5 million for manufacturing contracts ) under the authority of section 8 ( a ) of the small business act .

also , in 2011 , sba promulgated regulations that seek to address alleged issues regarding ancs' participation in the 8 ( a ) program ( eg , requiring annual reporting on ancs' benefits to alaska natives ) .

various authorities presently govern contracting between federal agencies and ancs or anc - owned firms .

these include ( 1 ) the general contracting authorities , ( 2 ) the general small business authorities , ( 3 ) section 8 ( a ) of the small business act , ( 4 ) authorities pertaining to native americans , and ( 5 ) various appropriations riders .

these authorities address the award of contracts , as well as related issues .

members of the 112 th congress have introduced legislation ( h.r .

598 , s. 236 ) that would remove all the "special rules" for contracting with anc - owned 8 ( a ) firms described in table 1 and subject anc - owned firms to eligibility and other requirements like those to which individually owned 8 ( a ) firms are subject .

the proposed legislation would accomplish this , in part , by amending the alaska native claims settlement act ( ancsa ) so that ancs are no longer deemed to be socially or economically disadvantaged for purposes of sections 7 ( j ) and 8 ( a ) of the small business act .

it would also amend the definition of "indian tribe" contained in section 8 ( a ) ( 13 ) of the small business act so that ancs no longer constitute "indian tribes" for purposes of the 8 ( a ) program .

by doing so , h.r .

598 and s. 236 would preclude ancs from receiving sole source awards in excess of $4 million ( $6.5 million for manufacturing contracts ) under the authority of the business opportunity development reform act ( bodra ) of 1988 .

section 602 ( a ) of bodra currently provides that the "competitive thresholds" contained in section 8 ( a ) of the small business act do not apply to entities defined as "indian tribes" in section 8 ( a ) .

excluding ancs from section 8 ( a ) 's definition of "indian tribe" would , thus , subject them to the competitive thresholds , as well as require that all affiliations of anc - owned firms count when the firms' size is determined and that an anc may participate in the 8 ( a ) program only one time .

the proposed legislation would also amend section 8 ( a ) to ( 1 ) prevent anc - owned firms from receiving additional sole - source awards when the total amount of competitive and sole - source awards they have received in any year exceeds the total amount of competitive and sole - source awards that individually owned firms may receive ( currently , $100 million ) ; ( 2 ) prohibit the sba from exempting anc - owned firms from any time limitations on participation in the 8 ( a ) program to which individually owned 8 ( a ) firms are subject ; and ( 3 ) require ancs to report annually to the sba on their total revenue , the amount of this revenue attributable to the 8 ( a ) program , and the "total amount of benefits paid to shareholders. .

h.r .

598 and s. 236 would also require the sba to amend the regulations for the 8 ( a ) program so as to preclude sba from waiving the requirement that the management and daily business operations of anc - owned firms be controlled by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals ; prohibit ancs from conferring eligibility to participate in the 8 ( a ) program on more than one firm at a time ; and preclude anc - owned 8 ( a ) firms from acquiring ownership interests in other 8 ( a ) firms that exceed the ownership interests that individually owned 8 ( a ) firms may acquire .

on february 11 , 2011 , sba amended its rules to change certain eligibility and other requirements pertaining to the 8 ( a ) program .

several of these changes apply specifically to anc - owned firms .

under the new rules , anc - owned 8 ( a ) firms ( 1 ) may not receive a sole - source 8 ( a ) contract that is a follow - on contract to an 8 ( a ) contract that was performed immediately previously by a firm owned by the same anc ; ( 2 ) must report annually to the sba on the benefits provided to alaska natives from the anc's participation in the 8 ( a ) program ; and ( 3 ) may be found to have potential for success if the anc pledges to use its resources to support the firm and to not allow the firm to cease operations .

the rule also generally prohibits non - 8 ( a ) firms that form joint ventures with 8 ( a ) firms to perform sole - source contracts in excess of $4 million ( $6.5 million for manufacturing contracts ) from serving as subcontractors ( at any tier ) on the contract .

in addition , the rule indicates that it is the sba's policy to have anc - owned firms' applications for the 8 ( a ) program processed at the san francisco division of program certification and eligibility whenever possible .

these applications had previously been processed in the anchorage district office .

these changes generally took effect on march 14 , 2011 , although the sba has delayed implementation of the requirement that ancs report on the benefits provided to alaska natives through their participation in the 8 ( a ) program .

